altogether in purvey of victual , whereof there be such scarcity , by reason that the Indian forsake their house , have not this half year plant any of their ground , so that the Spaniard be enforce to seek their bread far off , and content themselves to live with little . in sail up the river , we pass by Toparimacko the port of his port , which in one place be very shoalde , the channel Toparimacko . lie close aboard the shore . we return therefore another way by the main river on the south side : this branch we find large , deep , and without danger . when we be come near Carapana his the port of port , he send five or six several canoas , promise carofana - this day and the next , that he will come and speak with we . thus we linger six or seven day , but he come not . in the end he send one of his age follower , to certify we , that he be sick , old , and weak : that the way near his dwelling be not easy : and that therefore he desire we to hold he excuse for not come . this old man dilate unto we , that Carapana in hope of our return , have ever since your lordship be in that country , keep the mountain , where the Spaniard can hardly any way [ three . 680 . ] enforce he ; that they have take from he and his people many of their wife , because they refuse to furnish they weekly with a certain proportion of bread and victual : that don Juan otherwise call Eparacano have the commandment of all his subject , except only a choice guard of man sufficient to keep the place he now dwell in . that it repent he of his ambition , ever to have seek by the Spaniard mean , to have enlarge his country and 471 people . for true it be that from the beginning he be a lord of no other then ordinary power among they , until he have enter into friendship with Berreo : for than the Indian on all side leave some their habitation , and many their commander to become his subject , that they may have the privilege to trade with the Spaniard for hatchet and knife , which be jewel of great price among they : that he now see no other choice , but that the Indian must , if they will do well , without far dissemble of their necessity , either entertain we their friend , or else give place to the Spaniard their enemy . for the plenty of gold that be in this country , be now know and discover , there be no possibility for they to keep it : on the one side they can feel no great misery , nor fear more extremity , than they be sure to find , if the Spaniard prevail , who perforce do take all thing from they , use they as their slave , to run , to row , to be their guide , to carry their burden , and that which be worst of all , to be content , for safety of their life , to leave their woman , if a Spaniard chance but to set his eye on any of they to fancy she : on the otherside they can hope for , nor desire no better state and usage , than her majesty gracious government , and princely virtue do promise , and assure unto they . for , say he , the other year , when we flee into the mountain , and measure your do by the Spaniard in like case , we make no other account » but that your commander be able , as he be , will doubtless have persecute we to the uttermost , as the only maintainer and supporter of your enemy , and will at the least , if he can not reach we , take our town , and make we ransom our wife and child : we find it far otherwise , and that none of your well govern company dare offer any of we wrong or violence , no not by stealth , when unknown they may have do it . we then believe it to be 472 true , that your grand captain report of his princess , take this for a good proof of her royal commandment and wisdom , that have frame her subject to such obedience , and of your happiness , that enjoy the benefit thereof : that Carapana weigh the good and Carapana a friendly course of our proceed , do humble crave p ™ * of her Maj estie for himself and his people , that with upon the rest of the Indian , which whole depend on she crave her princely regard towards they , he also may enjoy majesty she favourable protection : that he do this , not fntectiim - as a man leave unto himself and forsake by the Spaniard , but as one that know their injustice , hate their cruelty , and take it for his best choice , utter to disclaim their friendship . it may be pertinent ( as sure it be a thing worth the note ) to consider how this precedent of your moderation and good order , which to we seem a matter but of small and ordinary respect , have both alienate their heart altogether from the Spaniard , and stir up in they true love and admiration thereof . for as government be the only bond of common society : so to man lawless , that each one to another be , omnes hoc jure molesti , quo fort : to man , i say , that live in daily tumult , fear , doubt , suspicion , barbarous cruelty , never sleep secure , but always either drink , or practise one another death : to such man as these bee , who want discipline , justice and good order to confirm they in a quiet and peaceable course of live , know not where to find it : the sense and sweetness thereof be as the dew of Hermon : it be as the harmony of a well tune instrument : to be brief , it carry in it self not only a due and worthy commendation ; but be available without stroke strike to gain a kingdom . for the Indian in all part within and near Guiana , do offer their service , and promise to provide victuali , and what else their country yield , desire only that some force of man may remain with they , to deliver they from oppression 473 and tyrannic . and now by generail consent ( though hatchet and knife be the only thing of request and useful unto they ) they have agree by no mean to trade with the Spaniard for any thing . Farther this old man show i , whence most of their gold come , which be form in so many fashion : whence their spleen - stone , and other of all sort be to be have in plenty : where gold be to be gather in the sand of their river : from what part the Spaniard , both by trade , and otherwise , have return much gold . this he utter with Carapana his consent ( i doubt not ) hope thereby to induce we to return again . for contrary to their law of secrecy , which in this case they do all general observe , sharp punish the breaker thereof , as enemy unto their native country : i find this man no whit scrupulous , but very free and liberali of speech in all thing . and because we may know , that we shall not want hand or help , in this or any other our enterprise , if perhaps we shall find cause to pass up to the head of this river : he declare that the Spaniard have no Indian to trust unto but some of the Arwaccas , which since they be not many , can be but of small force : that the charibe of Guanipa , the ciawanna among the Tivitivas , the shebaios , laos , Amaipagotos , Cassipagotos , Purpagotos , Samipagotos , Serowos , etai - guinams , Cassamari , with the rest of the nation far and near , be all ready , on what side soever the Spaniard shall stir , to fight against they : that the Pariagotos , through who country they must first pass , be alone sufficient to encounter they , such be the strength of their country , and the valour of the man . the Indian hold opinion , that they be notable sorcerer , and invulnerable . in the mountain where they dwell , white stone be find of such hardness , that by no art or mean they can be pierce ; they imagine that these Pariagotos become invulnerable , by 474 eat these stone . the fable omit , happy they may prove good diamond . than he show how the Iwarewakeri have nou_r_ - ish grass in all place , where passage be , these three year , and that it be at this present so high , as some of the tree ; which they mean to burn , so soon as the Spaniard shall be within danger thereof . last , he show i that Wariarimagoto the emperor chief captain for those part , have gather together many thousand of the Epuremei , to keep the border of the empire ; and that he lie now on the south side of the mountain , some one day journey or little moor from the Spaniard . to be short , he certify i , that they all be resolve not to seek upon they ( for indeed they fear their shot ) but to defend their own , and to expect our come . in the mean time they take opportunity , when they find any of they straggle or divide from their strength , by little and little to lessen their number . wariaritna - goto one of the emperor of Guiana his chief cap -• taines up in arm against the Spaniard . the place where we be at anchor be but one day journey from Carapana : i therefore make motion to this captain to stay with two or three of his company aboard the ship , and to cause his man to bring i with my interpreter to Carapana his dwell : he answer i that it be not good so to do , lest perhaps some spy may inform the Spaniard thereof , whereby danger will grow to Carapana . for they have many time use many mean to reconcile he unto they : but he from time to time have daly with they , neither profess himself their enemy , nor in aught show they any friendship . now ( say he ) if the Spaniard shall by any mean come to knowledge , that you have confer together , they will take this occasion to persecute he with all extremity , as their open enemy , who they now neglect , or at the least fear not , as be a harmless old man . and for this cause only have Carapana forbear to come unto you . 47S by this i perceive , that to stay long for he ( though glad i can have be content to spend one sevennight more to speak with he ) will be purposeless . wherefore have assure so many of the Indian as at any time come unto we , of our speedy return , promise they plenty of knife , bead , and hatchet , if they will reserve their Cassavi , and provide store of their piece of gold for we : i desire this captain to be a mean that our friend of Trinidad may understand of our be in the river and that we mean to relieve they so soon , as convenient may be . he promise in Carapana his behalf , that this shall not be forget . one of the captain of the cyawanna , who do now dwell in the river Arawawo , near Trinidad , undertake also without fail to ascertain they thereof . i be the more careful herein , because so many , ship be here , i doubt lest they will take order that no Indian shall speak with we . for so indeed it fall out . this captain of the cyawanna come likewise to join with we , and have provide fifteen canoas for that purpose . their dwell be late in Macureo , where the Spaniard one night steal on they , kill twenty of their man , and burn their house , because they refuse to trade with they for certain image of gold make with many head which they have get out of Guiana . i send a present of iron to Carapana , and then set sail . in turn down the river we spend eight day . in many place where the channel lie we find twenty fathom depth : where it be shall , we have two fathom and a half , and that but in one or two place . of the worthiness of this river , because i can say enough , i will speak nothing . we have presume to call it by the name of Raleana , because your self be the first of our nation that ever enter the same , and i think it nothing inferior to Amazones , which be best know by the name of Orellana , the first discoverer thereof . by turn only , without help of oar to pass so long 476 away in so short a time , against the wind , may sufficient prove , that the channel be very large , good , and the chanel likely to second our hope in all that we can desire . ( > f ^- aleana ^ or without the mouth of this river , our pinnace , the this - very ° i ™ ge y coverer , who we lose near the coast of England , good . they come unto we . Shee fall with this land somewhat to meet with the southward of cape Cecyl , and have spend three pinnace . week and odd day in range alongst the coast , when she meet with we . William down the master inform i that they enter , and search these four river . in Wiapoco they sail so far , until the rock stop their passage . in Caiane they go up one day journey . in Cunanama they find many inhabitant . Curitini be the last river they have be in . whence , have no other mean to find Raleana , they be enforce to borrow a pilot against his will : who afterward i will have return with reward to his contentment ; but he will not . Oure english that to steal the first blessing of a untraded