be execute forthwith : 359 1595 - Juan Martinez the first that ever see Manoa . Fran . Lopez hist . gen . de las Ind . cap . 87 - diego de Ordas go forth with 600 soldier 1531 . Martinez be much favour by the soldier , have all the mean possible procure for his life ; but it can not be obtain in other sort then this : that he shall be set into a canoa alone without any victuali , only with his arm , and so turn loose into the great river : but it please God that the canoa be carry down the stream , and that certain of the guianians meet it the same evening : and have not at any time see any christian , nor any man of that colour , they carry Martinez into the land to be wonder at , and so from the great city town to town , until he come to the great city of of Manoa or Manoa ? the seat and residence of Inga the emperor . ° ra ° ' the emperor after he have behold he , know he to be a christian ( for it be not long before that his brethren Guascar and Atabalipa be vanquish by the Spaniard in Peru ) and cause he to be lodge in his palace , and well entertain . he live seven month in Manoa , but be not suffer to wander into the country any where . he be also bring thither all the way blindfold , lead by the Indian , until he come to the entrance of Manoa it self , and be fourteen or fifteen day in the passage . he avow at his death that he enter the city at noon , and then they uncover his face , and that he travel all that day till night through the city , and the next day from sun rise to sun set year he come to the palace of Inga . after that Martinez have live seven month in Manoa , and begin to understand the language of the country , Inga ask he whether he desire to return into his own country , or will willing abide with he . but Martinez not desirous to stay , obtain the favour of Inga to depart : with who he send diverse guianians to conduct he to the river of Orenoque , all load with as much gold as they can carry , which he give to Martinez at his departure : but when he be [ three . 636 . ] arrive near the river side , the borderer which be call Orenoqueponi rob he and his Guianians of all the treasure ( the borderer be at that time at war , which Inga have not conquer ) save only of two 360 great bottle of gourd , which be fill with bead of gold curious wrought , which those Orenoqueponi thought have be no other thing than his drink or meat , or grain for food , with which Martinez have liberty to pass : and so in canoas he fall down from the river of Orenoque to Trinidad , and from thence to Margarita , and also to saint Juan de puerto rico , where remain a long time for passage into Spain , he die . in the time of his extreme sickness , and when he be without hope of life , receive the sacrament at the hand of his confessor , he deliver these thing , with the relation of his travel , and also call for his calabaza or gourd of the gold bead which he give to the church and friar to be pray for . This Martinez be he that christen the city of Manoa by the name of el Dorado , and as Berreo inform i , upon this occasion : those Guianians , and also the borderer , and all other in that tract which i have see , be marvellous great drunkard ; in which vice , i think no nation can compare with they : and at the time of their solemn feast , when the emperor carowse with his captain , tributary , and governor , the manner be thus : all those that pledge he be first strip naked , and their body anoint all over with a kind of white balsamum ( by they call curca ) of which there be great plenty , and yet very dear among they , and it be of all other the most precious , whereof we have have good experience : when they be anoint all over , certain servant of the emperor , have prepare gold make into fine powder , blow it through hollow cane upon their naked body , until they be all shine from the foot to the head : and in this sort they sit drink by twenty , and hundred , and continue in drunkenness sometime six or seven day together . the same be also confirm by a letter write into Spain , which be intercept , which m . Robert Duddeley tell i he have see . upon this sight , and for the abundance of gold which he see in the city , the image of gold in their temple , the plate , armour , and shield of gold 361 the author of the name of el Dorado . the substance of this report be in the end of the navigation of the great river of Marannon , write by Gonzalo Fernando de Oviedo to cardinali bembo . Ramusio . fol . ^ . fol . 416 . sir Robert Duddeley . which they use in the war , he call it el Dorado . after the death of Ordas and Martinez , and after Orellana , who be employ by Gonzalo Pizarro , one Pedro de Osua a knight of Navarre attempt Guiana , take his way from Peru , and build his brigandine upon a river call Oia , which rise to the southward of Quito , and be very great . this river fall into Amazones , by which Osua with his company descend , and come out of that province which be call Mutylonez : and it seem to i that this empire be reserve for her majesty and the english nation , by reason of the hard success which all these and other Spaniard find in attempt the same , whereof i will speak brief , though impertinent in some read sort to my purpose . This Pedro de Osua have among ^ An ^ ta h * s troop a Biscain , call Agiri , a man mean bear , ' who bear no other office than a sergeant or alferez : but after certain month , when the soldier be grieve with travel , and consume with famine , and that no entrance can be find by the branch or body of Amazones , this Agiri raise a mutiny , of which he make himself the head , and so prevail , as he put Osua to the sword , and all his follower , take on he the whole charge and commandment , with a purpose not only to make himself emperor of Guiana , but also of Peru , and of all that side of the west Indies : he have of his party seven hundred soldier , and of those many promise to draw in other captain and company , to deliver up town and fort in Peru : but neither find by you say river any passage into Guiana , nor any possibility to return towards Peru by the same Amazon , by reason that you descent of the river make so great a current , he be enforce to disemboque at the mouth of the say Amazones , which can not be less than a thousand league from the place where they embark : from thence he coast the land till he arrive at Margarita to the north of Mompatar , which be at this day call Puerto de Tyranno , for that he there slay don Juan de villa Andreda , governor of Margarita , who be father to don 362 Juan Sarmiento , governor of Margarita when sir John Burgh land there , and attempt the island . Agiri put to the sword all other in the island that refuse to be of his party , and take with he certain Simerones , and other desperate companion . from thence he go to Cumana , and there slay the governor , and deal in all as at Margarita : he spoil all the coast of Caracas , and the province of Venezuela , and of Rio de la hacha ; and as i remember , it be the same year that sir John Hawkins sail to saint Juan de ullua in the Jesus of Lubeck : for himself tell i that he meet with such a one upon the coast that rebel , and have sail down all the river of Amazones . Agiri from thence land about sancta Marta , and sack it also , put to death so many as refuse to be his follower , purpose to invade Nuevo reyno de Granada , and to sack Pamplon , Merida , Lagrita , Tunxa , and the rest of the city of Nuevo reyno , and from thence again to enter Peru : but in a fight in the say Nuevo reyno he be overthrow , and find no way to escape , he first put to the sword his own child , foretell they that they shall not live to be defame or upbraid by the Spaniard after his death , who will have term they the child of a traitor or tyrant ; and that sithence he can not make they prince , he will yet deliver they from shame and reproach . Theise be the end and tragedy of Ordas , Martinez , Orellana ; Ozua , and Agiri . also soon after Ordas follow Jeronimo Ortal de Saragossa with 130 soldier , who fail his entrance by sea , be cast with the current on the coast of Paria , and people about saint Miguel de Neveri . it be then attempt by don Pedro de Silva , a portague of the family of Ruigomes de Silva , and by the favour which ruigome have with the king , he be set out , but he also shoot wide of the mark ; for be depart from Spain with his fleet , he enter by Marannon and Amazones , where by the nation of the river , and by the Amazon he be utter overthrow , and himself and all his 363 A . D . 1595 - the voyage of sirlohnDurgh to the west Indies . [ HL 637 . ] 1534 - gomar . cap . 84 . in 86 . don Pedro de Silva . don Gonzales Xlmenes de Casada . army defeat , only seven escape , and of those but two return . after he come Pedro Hernandez de Serpa , and land at Cumana in the west Indies , take his journey by land towards Orenoque , which may be some 120 league : but year he come to the border of the say river , he be set upon by a nation of the Indian call Wikiri , and overthrow in such sort , that of 300 soldier , horseman , many Indian , and negro , there return but 18 . other affirm , that he be defeat in the very entrance of Guiana , at the first civil town of the empire call Macureguarai . captain Preston in take saint Iago de Leon ( which be by he and his company very resolute perform , be a great town , and far within the land ) hold a gentleman prisoner , who die in his ship , that be one of the company of Hernandez de Serpa , and save among those that escape , who witness what opinion be hold among the Spaniard thereabouts of the great riches of Guiana , and el Dorado the city of Inga . another Spaniard be bring aboard i by captain Preston , who tell i in the hear of himself and diverse other gentleman , that he meet with berreos campmaster at Caracas , when he come from the border of Guiana , and that he see with he forty of most pure plate of gold curious wrought , and sword of Guiana deck and inlay with gold , feather garnish with gold , and diverse rarity which he carry to the spanish king . after Hernandez de Serpa , it be undertake by the adolantado , don Gonzales Ximenes de Casada , who be one of the chief in the conquest of Nuevo reino , who daughter and heir don Antonio de Berreo marry . Gonzales seek the passage also by the river call Papamene , which rise by Quito in Peru , and run southeast 100 league , and then fall into Amazones , but he also fail the entrance , return with the loss of much labour and cost . i take one captain George a Spaniard that follow Gonzales in this enterprise . 364 1595 - Gonzales give his daughter to Berreo , take his oath Antonio and honour to follow the enterprise to the last of his berreo - substance and life , who since , as he have swear to i , have spend 300000 ducat in the same , and yet never can enter so far into the land as my self with that poor troop or rather a handful of man , be in all about 100 gentleman , soldier , rower , boat - keeper , boy , and of all sort : neither can any of the forepass undertaker , nor Berreo himself , discover the country , till now late by conference with a ancient king call Carapana , he