it the discovery of Guiana . n Thursday the 6 . of February in the year 1595 . we depart England , and the Sunday follow have sight of the north cape of Spain , the wind for the most part continue prosperous : we pass in sight of the burling , and the rock , and so onward for the canary , and fall with Fuerte ventura the 17 of the same month , where we spend two or three day , and relieve our com - 348 pany with some fresh meat . from thence we coast by the grand Canaria , and so to tenerif , and stay there for the lion whelp your lordship ship , and for captain Amy as Preston and the rest . but when after 7 . or 8 . day we find they not , we depart and direct our course for Trinidad with my own ship , and a small theyleof bark of captain cross only ( for we have before lose Trinitia , i - sight of a small Galego on the coast of Spain , which come with we from Plymouth : ) we arrive at Trinidad the 22 . of march , cast anchor at point Curiapan , which the Spaniard call punta de Gallo , which be situate in 8 . degree or there about : we abide there 4 . or 5 . day , and in all that time we come not to the speech of any Indian or Spaniard : on the coast we see a fire , as we sail from the point Caroa towards Curiapan , but for fear of the Cunapan . Spaniards none dare come to speak with we . i my self coast it in my barge close aboard the shore and land in every cove , the better to know the island , while the ship keep the channel . from Curiapan after a few day we turn up Northeast to recover that place which the Spaniard call Puerto de los espannole , and the inhabitant Conquerabia , and as before ( revictual my barge ) i leave the ship and keep by the shore , the better to come to speech with some of the inhabitant , and also to understand the river , water place , and port of the island , which ( as it be rude do ) my purpose be to send your lordship after a few day . from Curiapan i come to a port and seat of Indian call Parico , where we Parico . find a fresh water river , but see no people . from thence i row to another port , call by the natural Piche , and by the Spaniard Tierra de Brea : in the way Tierra de between both be diverse little brook of fresh water and one salt river that have store of oyster upon the branch of the tree , and be very salt and well taste . all their oyster grow upon those bough and spray , and not on the ground : the like be common see in other place of the west Indies , and else where . this tree be describe by Andrew Thevet in his french 349 antarctic , and the form figure in the book as a plant very strange , and by Pliny in his 12 . book of he natural history . but in this island , as also in Guiana there be very many of they . at this point call Tierra de Brea or Piche there be that abundance of stone pitch , that all the ship of the world may be therewith load from thence , and we make trial of it in trim our ship to be most excellent good , and melt not with the sun as the pitch of Norway , and therefore for ship trade the south part [ three . 632 . ] very profitable . from thence we go to the mountain foot call anniperima , and so pass the river Carone on which the spanish city be seat , we meet with our ship at Puerto de los Espannolles or Conquerabia . this island of Trinidad have the form of a sheephook , and be but narrow , the north part be very mountainous , the soil be very excellent and will bear sugar , ginger , or any other commodi tie that the Indies yield . it have store of dear , wild pork , fruit , fish and foul : it have also for bread sufficient maiz , cassavi , and of those root and fruit which be common every where in the west Indies . it have diverse beast which the Indies have not : the Spaniard confess that they find grain of gold in some of the river , but they have a purpose to enter Guiana ( the magazin of all rich metal ) care not to spend time in the search thereof any further . this island be call by the people thereof cairi , jand in it be diverse nation : those about Parico be call laio , those at Punta de Carao be of the Arwacas , and between Carao and Curiapan they be call Salvajos , between Carao and Punta de galera be the Nepojos , and those about the spanish city term themselves carinepagote : of the rest of the nation , and of other port and river i leave to speak here , be impertinent to my purpose , and mean to describe they as they be situate in the particular plot and description of the island , three part whereof i coast with my barge , that i may the better describe it . 35 ° meet with the ship at Puerta de los espannole , we find at the land place a company of Spaniards who keep a guard at the descent , and they offer a sign of peace , i send captain Whiddon to speak with they , who afterward to my great grief i leave bury in the say island after my return from Guiana , the death of be a man most honest and valiant . the Spaniard seem to be desirous to trade with we , and to enter into term of peace , more for doubt of their own strength then for aught else , and in the end upon pledge , some of they come aboard : the same evening there stale also aboard we in a small Canoa two Indian , the one of they be a cacique or lord of the people call Cantyman , who have the year before bene with captain Whiddon , and be of his acquaintance . by this Cantyman we understand what strength the Spaniard have , how far it be to their city , and of don Antonio de Berreo the governor , who be say to be slay in his second attempt of Guiana , but be not . while we remain at Puerto de los espannole some Spaniards come aboard we to buy linen of the company , and such other thing as they want , and also to view our ship and company , all which i entertain kind and feast after our manner : by mean whereof i learn of one and another as much of the estate of Guiana as i can , or as they know , for those poor soldier have be many year without wine , a few draught make they merry , in which mood they vaunt of Guiana and of the riches thereof , and all what they know of the way and passage , my self seem to purpose nothing less than the entrance or discovery thereof , but breed in they a opinion that i be bind only for the relief of those English which i have plant in Virginia , whereof the bruit be come among they ; which i have perform in my return , if extremity of weather have not force i from the say coast . 351 8 Englishman betray by Antony Berreo . the english voyage i find occasion of stay in this place for two cause : the one be to be revenge of Berreo , who the year before 1594 . have betray eight of captain Whiddons man , and take they while he depart from they to seek the Edward Bonaventure , which arrive at Trinidad the day before from the east Indies : in who absence Berreo send a Canoa aboard the pinnace only with Indian and dog invite the company to go with they into the wood to kill a dear , who like wise man in the absence of their captain follow the Indian , but be no soon one harquebus shoot from the shore , but berreos soldier lie in ambush have they all , notwithstanding that he have give his word to captain Whiddon that they shall take water and wood safe : the other cause of my stay be , for that by discourse with the Spaniard i daily learn more and more of Guiana , of the river and passage , and of the enterprise of Berreo , by what mean or fault he fail , and how he mean to prosecute the same . while we thus spend the time i be assure by another cacique of the north side of the island , that Berreo have send to Margarita and Cumana for soldier , mean to have give i a cassado at part , if it have be possible . for although he have give order through all the island that no Indian shall come aboard to trade with i upon pain of hang and quarter , ( have execute two of they for the same , which i afterward find ) yet every night there come some with most lamentable complaint of his cruelty , how he have divide the island and give to every soldier a part , that he make the ancient cacique which be lord of the country to be their slave , that he keep they in chain , and drop their naked body with burn bacon , and such other torment , which i find afterward to be true : for in the city after i enter the same there be 5 . of you lord or little king ( which they call cacique in the west Indies ) in one chain 352 1595 - almost dead of famine , and waste with torment : these [ he . 633 . ] be call in their own language Acarewana , and now of late since english , french and spanish be come among they , they call themselves captain , because they perceive that the chief of every ship be call by that name . those five captain in the chain be call wannawanare , Carroaori , maquarima , tarroo - panama , and aterima . so as both to be revenge of the former wrong , as also consider that to enter Guiana by small boat , to depart 400 . or 500 mile from my ship , and to leave a garrison in my back interest in the same enterprise , who also daily expect supply out of Spain , i shall have savour very much of the ass : and therefore take a time of most advantage i set upon the corpse du guard in the evening , and have put they to the sword , send captain calfield onward with 60 . soldier , and my self follow with 40 . more and so take their new city which they call S . Joseph by break of day : they abide the city of not any fight after a few shot , and all be dismiss \' a ^ e ^ ntm but only Berreo and his companion , i bring they Berreo with i aboard , and at the instance of the Indian , i prisoner . set their new city of saint Joseph on fire . the same day arrive captain George Gifford with your lordship ship , and captain Keymis who i lose on the coast of Spain , with the Galego , and in they diverse gentleman and other , which to our little army be a great comfort and supply . we then haste away towards our purpose discovery , and first i call all the captain of the island together that be enemy to the Spaniard ; for there be some which Berreo have bring out of other country , and plant there to eat out and waste those that be natural of the place , and by my Indian interpreter , which i carry out of England , i make they understand that i be the servant of a queen , who be the great cacique of the north , and a virgin , and have more cacique under she then there be tree in ten 353 z sir W . Ralegh pass 400 . mile towards Guiana . the english voyage that island : that she be a enemy to the Castellani in respect of their tyrannic and oppression , and that she deliver all such nation about she , as be by they oppress , and have free all the coast of the northern world from their servitude , have send i to free they also , and withal to defend the country of Guiana from their invasion and conquest . i show they her majesty picture which they so admire and honour , as it have be easy to have bring they idolatrous thereof . the like and a more large discourse i make to the rest of the nation both in my pass to Guiana , and to those of the border , so as in that part of the world her majesty be very famous and admirable , who they now call Ezrabeta Cassipuna Aquerewana , which be as much as Elizabeth , the great princess or great commander . this do we leave Puerto de los