place by the name of port Howard . the road under Triangle island , which be the westermost from the rest and stand in five degree , which have also store of fish , foul , dear and Iwanas , be good , but not comparable with this other , where in all wind and weather , ship , though they be many , may all ride secure . the hill and high land be limit to this bay on each side : for to the eastward beyond it appear none at all , and to the westward of mount Hobbeigh very few . where the mountain fail , there Brasill wood be no far to be seek for : but in all part cotton , pepper , silk and balsamum tree do grow in abundance . the root of the herb wia - passa be here most plentiful : i find they in taste nothing different from good ginger , and in operation very medicinable against the flix and headache . Theise river , as also other near Raleana , do all fall out of the plain of this empire over rock , as the river 458 Caroli do into Raleana : and in most place within the utmost hedge of wood , the land within be plain , void of tree , and bear short grass like arromaiaries country . next adjoin unto these , be the river Cunanamma , uracco , Mawara , Mawarparo , amonna , marawini , Oncowi , wiawiami , Aramatappo , Camaiwini , Shurinama , Shurama , Cupanamma , Inana , Guritini , Winitwara , berbice , Wapari , Maicaiwini , Mahawaica , Wappari , lemdrare , Dessekebe , caopui , pawrooma , moruga , waini , barima , amacur , aratoori , Raleana . from cape Cecyl to Raleana , the from cape coast trend two hundred league next hand west - 200 northwest . in this variety of goodly river , amonna among the rest pour himself into the sea in a large and deep channel : his swiftness suffer no bar , nor refuse any ship of what burden soever they be : within his mouth for good and hopeful respect be port Burley place . the inhabitant that dwell eastward , do never pass low than berbice to trade . above Curitini in the wood they gather great quantity of honey . Farther to the eastward then Dessekebe , no Spaniard ever travel . in which respect , and that no sea - card that i have see at any time , do in any sort near a truth , describe this coast : i think the liberty of impose English name to certain place of note , of right to belong unto our labour ; the rather because occasion thereby offer it self grateful to acknowledge the honour due unto they that have be , and i hope will still continue favourer of this enterprise . the Indian to show the worthiness of Dessekebe ( for Dessekebe it be very large and full of island in the mouth ) doe calle ^ the call it the brother of Orenoque . it lie southerly into the land , and from the mouth of it unto the head , they pass in twenty day : then take their provision they carry it on their shoulder one day journey ; afterward they return for their canoas , and bear they likewise to the side of a lake , which the laos call Roponowini , the charibe , Parime : which be of such 459 the great lake whereon Manoa or el Dorado stand . in September . This Spaniard understand the guianian language , and be repute a very sufficient man . the english voyage bigness , that they know no difference between it and the main sea . there be infinite number of canoas in this lake , and ( as i suppose ) it be no other then that , whereon Manoa stand : in this river , which we now call Devoritia , the Spaniard do intend to build they a town . in Moruga it be , that they hunt Wareo and his people , about half a year since . arromaiarie , who win so great credit by overthrow the Tivitivas of Amana , and make free the passage of that river ( but now again live in disgrace , by reason that the charibe of Guanipa have kill most of his follower , and burn his town ) be present with they , and take away many of the woman of that place . Arracurri , another Indian of the nation of the Arwaccas inhabit in Barima , be likewise present , and conduct the Spaniard to all the Indian dwelling . they be not of Anthony de Berreo his company , that follow this chase , but be the Spaniard of Margarita , and the Caraccas , with who * Santiago forsake his governor Berreo join himself . for which fact he now lie in fetter at Trinidad , every day expect sentence of death . the occasion hereof grow as follow . when Berreo , have lose his man , be leave with Fasshardo at Cumana all alone , as forlese , and never likely to compass his intend conquest of Guiana : the governor of the Caraccas and Margarita consult together , send with all speed into Spain , to advertise their king , that Berreo be utter able to follow this enterprise , that he have give it over , and do now sojorne in his old day at Fasshardo his house , mind nothing else but his solace , and recreation . they far declare , of how great importance this matter be : and that a english gentleman of such reckon , as they name your lordship to be , have be in Guiana , and understand so much of the state thereof , and the nation thereunto adjoin , as topiawarie , be both old and wise , can inform you of , who also in confirmation of friendship , have give you his only son , to who 460 the inheritance of the country do belong after he : there be no other likelihood , but that you , who adventure so far , and in such sort as you do , only to see , and know a certainty , will leave nothing unattempted to possess so rich a country , and without all doubt will return present . that mean time , you have leave this age sire alive , to be a block in their way , to who after his decease , this enterprise by patent do belong , and to be a weak adversary against your [ three . 676 . ] self , who at all time you know easy how to distress : and that therefore it may be behooveful for his majesty to revoke Berreo his grant , and to use their service , who be ready and willing without any delay to undertake the charge . Theise news be at large amplify and deliver to the king : Domingo de vera , Berreo his campmaster , who be send into Spain , five month before your arrival at Trinidad , with a sufficient quantity of gold get out of Guiana , to levy and furnish 500 man , have get knowledge of this practice , so solicit this cause in Berreo his behalf , that present order be give for the victual and man of ten ship to be send to Berreo : and far , this gold bear such weight , that the king command other 18 . of his ship to stop at Trinidad , and not to follow their other direction , before they see that place secure from enemy . Berreo suppose that these governor in send with such speed into Spain , mean he no good ; to approve his care and constancy , and that he never will yield under the burden of his adverse fortune ; give no time or breath to his adversary nor himself : return forthwith to Carapana his port , only with fifteen man , be the scatter remnant of those who you late dispossess of Trinidad . Theise governor follow he , and assure themselves of present employment from their king , preoccupate the time of their directions * to be return from Spain , enter Guiana with their man , with full determination to murder Berreo , and to dispatch all his company . they indeed 461 the english voyage kill two or three , but Berreo flee towards Caroli , where he stay hope for succour from his son Antony de Ximenes , to come down the river from Nuevo Reyno de Granada . the margaritane with their accomplice busy themselves , some in search the country , other in purvey of victual out of the river that do lie eastward , of which number these be , that enter into Moruga with twenty canoas . Santiago pass up into topiawaries country , and there take Francis sparrow sir George Gifford his man prisoner , who with plenty of gold ransom his life , and be now abide in Cumana . this do , they all return to Trinidad , and begin to build their town there , when unhappy to their small comfort the eight and twenty sail arrive , and take Santiago prisoner . the other actor in this interlude vanish , and in canoas recover Margarita and Cumana again . eighteen of the say ship leave all thing in good order , depart from Trinidad to follow their other direction : ten doe yet remain fortify at Conquerabia , and expect our come . this particular relation i have from a Indian , servant to Berreo , that can speak Spanish , who i take in the river . he be of the nation of the laos , and from a child breed up with Berreo . i give he trade to buy he a Canoa to return into his country , and so leave he glad , that he have meet with we . now the Indian of Moruga be chase from their dwelling , do seek by all mean possible to accord all the nation in one , so to invade the Arwaccas who be guide to the Spaniard , in show their town , and betray they . for they be full persuade , that by drive these Arwaccas , who serve the Spaniard ( for a great part of this nation do also hate , or not know they ) out of their territory , and Trinidad , the Spaniard for want of bread , will be enforce to seek habitation far off , or at the least in time consume and be waste . 462 the 6 . day of April we come to a anchor within the 2 % mouth of the river Raleana , have spend twenty and or three day in discovery upon this coast . the channel Qreno ^ of this river have six or seven fathom depth , nine or ten mile off at sea , the bar lie far out , and at low water have not full two fathom . it high not above five foot , except at a spring tide . we anchor in ten fathom the first night : the next morning twelve canoas come unto we , furnish and provide of victual after their manner for the war . their captain name be Anwara , and Aparwa . Theise cacique , when the Spaniard make the last inroad in those part , be in the inland among the iwarawakeri their neighbour , by which occasion have lose some of their wife ( for not - spanish withstand their profession of Christianity , some of these Spaniard keep ten or twelve woman , think themselves well and sure bless , howsoever they live , if their town and house be religious cross ) they keep together 30 . canoas , hope at our come , which they have now long expect to recover this loss upon they and the Arwaccas , who in their absence have do this wrong . they show i this their purpose , and require to be join in league of friendship with we against our enemy . when of they i have learn so much of the present estate of the country , as they do know : they demand whether we have bring no more force with we , but only one ship ? i answer they as before i do the other , that we now come only to trade , not know until this present that any Spaniards be in Guiana ; that upon our return our whole fleet will hasten to set forward , and that in the mean time , we will now visit [ three . 677 . ] our friend , and help they so far as we can in any thing that we shall find needful present to be do . after long discourse ( for their chief man stay with i all night ) when he have cause i to spit in my right hand , with many other ceremony which they use in confirm friendship , he go to the shore , and one of his canoas he send to bring forwards the 463 Muchikeri the name of the province where macu - rigueray the frst town of Guiana be situate . Parime a inland sea of salt water . the english voyage other twenty : one other he cause to go up the river before we , to bring intelligence . then call together the chief of his company , they make small fire , and sit in their Hamacas , or Indian bed , each one sort himself with his companion , recount among themselves the worthy deed , and death of their ancestor , execrate their enemy most despiteful , and magnify their friend with all title of praise and honour , that may be devise ; thus they sit talk , and take tobacco some two hour , and until their pipe be all spend ( for by they they measure the time of this their solemn conference ) no man must interrupt , or disturb they in any sort : for this be their religion , and prayer , which they now celebrate , keep a precise fast one whole day , in honour of the great prince of the north , their patroness and defender . their canoas be make ready , they accompany we , and in their way show we , where the shoalde of the river do lie . by this captain i learn , that Muchikeri be the name of the country where Macureguerai the first town of the empire of Guiana , that lie towards Raleana , be seat in a fair and exceed large plain , below the high mountain , that bear northwesterly from it , that it be but three day journey distant from Carapana his porte , and that Manoa be but six day far . that they themselves do pass in three day into the country of the iwarewakeri by the river amacur , which though it be not the direct , yet it be the ready way to Macureguarai