my return ; it be that cacique to who those nepoio go , which come with we from the town of Toparimaca : and so the five day we reach as high up as the province of Aromaia the country of morequito who Berreo execute , and anchor to the west of a island call Murrecotima , ten mile long and five broad : and that night the cacique Aramiary , ( to who town we make our long and hungry voyage out of the river of Amana ) pass by we . the next day we arrive at the port of morequito , and ancker there , send away one of our pilot to seek the king of Aromaia , uncle to morequito slay by Berreo as aforesaid . the next day follow before noon he come to we on foot from his house , which be fourteen English mile ( himself be a hundred and ten year old ) and return on foot 398 the same day , and with he many of the borderer , with many woman and child , that come to wonder at our nation , and to bring we down victuali , which they do in great plenty , as venison , pork , hen , chicken , foul , fish , with diverse sort of excellent fruit and root , and great abundance of pina , the prince of fruit , that grow under the sun , especial those of Guiana . they bring we also store of bread , and of their wine , and a sort of paraquito , no big than wrennes , and of all other sort both small and great ; one of they give i a beast call by the Spaniard Armadilla , which they call Cassacam , which seem to be all bar over with small plate somewhat like to a rinoceros , with a white horn grow in his hinder part , as big as a great hunt horn , which they use to wind in stead of a trumpet . Monardus write that a little of the powder of that horn put into the ear , cure deafness . after this old king have rest a while in a little tent , that i cause to be set up , i begin by my interpreter to discourse with he of the death of morequito his predecessor , and afterward of the Spaniard , and ere i go any far i make he know the cause of my come thither , who servant i be , and that the queen pleasure be , i shall undertake the voyage for their defence , and to deliver they from the tyrannic of the Spaniard , dilate at large ( as i have do before to those of Trinidad ) her majesty greatness , her justice , her charity to all oppress nation , with as many of the rest of her beauty and virtue , as either i can express , or they conceive : all which be with great admiration attentive hear , and marvelously admire , i begin to sound the old man as touch Guiana , and the state thereof , what sort of common wealth it be , how govern , of what strength and policy , how far it extend , and what nation be friend or enemy adjoin , and final of the distance and way to enter the same : he tell i that 399 Orejones be the gentleman of Peru . Lop . de Gomar . Hist . gen . cap . 119 . the english voyage himself and his people with all those down the river towards the sea , as far as Emeria , the province of Carapana , be of Guiana , but that they call themselves Orenoqueponi , and that all the nation between the river and those mountain in sight call wacarima , be of the same cast and appellation : and that on the other side of those mountain of Wacarima there be a large plain ( which after i discover in my return ) call the valley of Amariocapana , in all that valley the people be also of the ancient guianians . i ask what nation those be which inhabit on the far side of those mountain , beyond the valley of Amariocapana : he answer with a great sigh ( as a man which have inward feel of the loss of his country and liberty , especial for that his elder son be slay in a battle on that side of the mountain , who he most entire love ) that he remembered in his father life time when he be very old , and himself a young man , that there come down into that large valley of Guiana , a nation from so far off as the sun sleep , ( for such be his own word ) with so great a multitude as they can not be numbered nor resist , and that they wear large coat , and hat of crimson colour , which colour he express , by show a piece of red wood , wherewith my tent be support , and that they be call Orejones , and Epuremei , those that have slay and root out so many of the ancient people , as there be leaf in the wood upon all the tree , and have now make themselves lord of all , even to that mountain foot call Curaa , save only of two nation , the one call awarawaqueri , and the other Cassipagotos , and that in the last battle fight between the Epuremei , and the iwarawaqueri , his elder son be choose to carry to the aid of the iwarawaqueri , a great troop of the Orenoqueponi , and be there slay with all his people and friend , and that he have now remain but one son : and far tell i that those Epuremei have build a great town 400 call Macureguarai at the say mountain foot , at the begin of the great plain of Guiana , which have no end : and that their house have many room , one over the other , and that therein the great king of the Orejones and Epuremei keep three thousand man to defend the border against they , and withal daily to invade and slay they : but that of late year since the christian offer to invade his territory , and those frontier , they be all at peace , and trade one with another , save only the iwarawaqueri , and those other nation upon the head of the river of Caroli , call Cassipagotos , which we afterward discover , each one hold the Spaniard for a common enemy . after he have answer thus far , he desire leave to depart , say that he have far to go , that he be old , and weak , and be every day call for by death , which be also his own phrase : i desire he to rest with we that night , but i can not entreat he , but he tell i that at my return from the country above , he will again come to we , and in the mean time provide for we the best he can , of all that his country yield ; the same night he return to oroco - tona his own town , so as he go that day eight and twenty mile , the weather be very hot , the country be situate between four and five degree of the equinoctial . This Topiawari be hold for the proud , and wise of all the Orenoqueponi , and so he behave himself towards i in all his answer at my return , as i marveil to finde1 a man of that gravity and judgement , and of so good discourse , that have no help of learning nor breed . the next morning we also leave the port , and sail westward up to the river , to view the famous river call Caroli , as well because it be marvelous of it self , as also for that i understand it lead to the strong nation of all the frontier , that be enemy to the Epuremei , which be subject to Inga , emperor of ten 401 2 c A . D . * 595 - [ three . 651 . ] the town of Macureguarai . Orotona between 4 . and 5 . degree of northerly latitude . Guiana , and Manoa , and that night our ancker at the isle of another island call Caiama , of some five or six mile ^ ama - jn length } anj the next day arrive at the mouth of atth ^ mouth Caroli . when we be short of it as low or further of the river down as the port of morequito we hear the great roar Caroli . and fall of the river , but when we come to enter with our barge and whirry think to have go up some fburtie mile to the nation of the Cassipagotos , we be not able with a barge of eight oar to row one stone cast in a hour , and yet the river be as broad as the Thames at Wolwich , and we try both side , and the middle , and every part of the river , so as we encamp upon the bank adjoin , and send off our orenoque - pone ( which come with we from morequito ) to give knowledge to the nation upon the river of our be there , and that we desire to see the lord of Canuria , which dwell within the province upon that river , make they know that we be enemy to the Spaniard , ( for it be on this river side that morequito slay the friar , and those nine Spaniard which come from Manoa , the city of Inga , and take from they fourty thousand pezo of gold ) so as the next day there come down a Wanuretona . lord or cacique call Wanuretona with many people with he , and bring all store of provision to entertain we , as the rest have do . and as i have before make my come know to Topiawari , so do i acquaint this cacique therewith , and how i be send by her majesty for the purpose aforesaid , and gather also what i can of he touch the estate of Guiana , and i find that those also of Caroli be not only enemy to the Spaniard , but most of all to the Epuremei , which abound in gold , and by this Wanuretona , i have and Arana - knowledge that on the head of this river be three goto three mighty nation , which be seat on a great lake , from mighty nation whence this river descend , and be call Cassipagotos , lake ^ the EP ^ ragotos , and Arawagotos , and that all those either head of they against the Spaniard , or the Epuremei will join with river Caroli , we , and that if we enter the land over the mountain 402 of Curaa , we shall satisfy our self with gold and all other good thing : he tell we far of a nation call iwarawaqueri before speak off , that hold daily war with the Epuremei that inhabit Macureguarai the first civil town of Guiana , of the subject of Inga the emperor . upon this river one captain George , that i take with Berreo tell i there be a great silver i , and that a great silver it be near the bank of the say river . but by this time as well Orenoque , Caroli , as all the rest of the river be rise four or five foot in height , so as it be not possible by the strength of any man , or with any boat whatsoever to row into the river against the stream . i therefore send captain thy , captain green vile , my nephew John Gylbert , my cousin butshead Gorges , captain Clarke , and some thirty shot more to coast the river by land , and to go to a town some twenty mile over the valley call Amnatapoi , and they Amnatapol , a find guide there , to go far towards the mountain iowne - foote to another great town call Capurepana , belong to a cacique call Haharacoa ( that be a nephew to old Topiawari king of Arromaia our chief friend ) because this town and province of Capurepana adjoin to Macureguarai , which be a frontier town of the [ three . 652 . ] empire : and the mean while my self with captain Gifford , captain Calfield , Edward Hancocke , and some half a dozen shot march over land to view the strange overfal of the river of Caroli which roar so far off , and also to see the plain adjoin , and the rest of the province of Canuri : i send also captain Whiddon , William connocke , and some eight shot with they , to see if they can find any minerail stone alongst the river side . when we be come to the top of the first the strange hill of the plain adjoin to the river , we behold werfal ‘ ° f that wonderful breach of water , which run down Canl1 " Caroli : and may from that mountain see the river how it run in three part , above twenty mile off , and there appear some ten or twelve overfal in sight , 403 every one as high over the other as a church - tower , which fall with that fury , that the rebound of water make it seem , as if it have be all cover over with a great shower of