get the true light thereof : for Berreo come about 1500 mile year he understand aught , or can find any passage or entrance into any part thereof , yet he have experience of all these forename , and diverse other , and be persuade of their error and mistake . Berreo seek it by the river Cassamar , which fall into a great river call Pato : Pato fall into Meta , and Meta into Baraquan , which be also call Orenoque . he take his journey from Nuevo reyno de Granada where he dwell , have the inheritance of Gonzales Ximenes in those part : he be follow with 700 horse , he drive with he 1000 head of cattle , he have also many woman , Indian , and slave . how all these river cross and encounter , how the country lie and be border , the passage of Ximines and Berreo , my own discovery , and the way that i enter , with all the rest of the nation and river , your lordship shall receive in a large chart or map , which i have not yet finish , and which i shall most humble pray your lordship to secret , and not to suffer it to pass your own hand ; for by a draught thereof all may be prevent by other nation : for i know it be this very year seek by the french , although by the way that they now take , i fear it not much . it be also tell i year i depart England , that Villiers a new wrick the admiral be in preparation for the plant of Amazones , to which river the french have make diverse ^ v ^ ofAm voyage , and return much gold , and other rarity . i m “ 0 365 ’ speak with a captain of a french ship that come from thence , his ship ride in Falmouth the same year that my ship come first from Virginia . there be another this year in Helford that also come from thence , and have be fourteen month at a anchor in Amazones , which be both very rich . [ Iii . 638 . ] although , as i be persuade , Guiana can be enter that way , yet no doubt the trade of gold from thence pass by branch of river into the river of Amazones , and so it do on every hand far from the country it self ; for those Indian of Trinidad have plate of gold from Guiana , and those cannibal of Dominica which dwell in the island by which our ship pass yearly to the west Indies , also the Indian of Paria , those Indian call Tuearis , Chochi , apotomio , Cumanagotos , and all those other nation inhabit near about the mountain that run from Paria through the province of Venesuela , and in Maracapana , and the cannibal of Guanipa , the Indian call Assawai , Coaca , aiai , and the rest ( all which shall be describe in my description as they be situate ) have plate of gold of Guiana . and upon the river of Amazones , Thevet write that the people wear croissant of gold , for of that form the guianians most common make they : so as from Dominica to Amazones , which be above 250 league , all the chief Indian in all part wear of those plate of Guiana . undoubted those that trade Amazones return much gold , which ( as be aforesaid ) come by trade from Guiana , by some branch of a river that fall from the country into Amazones , and either it be by the river which pass by the nation call tisnado , or by Carepuna . i make inquiry among the most ancient and best travel of the Orenoqueponi , and i have knowledge of all the river between Orenoque and Amazones , and be very desirous to understand the truth of those warlike woman , because of some it be believe , of other not . and though i digress from my purpose , yet i will set down that which have be 366 deliver i for truth of those woman , and i speak with a cacique or lord of people , that tell i he have be in the river , and beyond it also . the nation of the seat of the these woman be on the south side of the river in - Amazon , the province of Topago , and their chief strength and retract be in the island situate on the south side of the entrance some 60 league within the mouth of the say river . the memory of the like woman be very ancient aswell in Africa as in Asia : in Africa those that have Medusa for queen : other in Scythia near the river of Tanais and Thermodon : we find also that Lampedo and marthesia be queen of the Amazon : in many history they be verify to have be , and in diverse age and province : but they which be not far from Guiana do accompany with man but once in a year , and for the time of one month , which i gather by their relation , to be in April : and that time all king of the border assemble , and queen of the Amazon ; and after the queen have choose , the rest cast lot for their Valentines . this one month , they feast , dance , and drink of their wine in abundance ; and the moon be do , they all depart to their own province . if they conceive , and be deliver of a son , they return he to the father ; if of a daughter they nourish it , and retain it : and as many as have daughter send unto the begetter a present ; all be desirous to increase their own sex and kind : but that they cut off the right dug of the breast , i do not find to be true . it be far tell i , that if in these war they take any prisoner that they use to accompany with those also at what time soever , but in the end for certain they put they to death : for they be say to be very cruel and bloodthirsty , especial to such as offer to invade their territory . Theise Amazones have likewise great store of these plate of gold , which they recover by exchange chief for a kind of green stone , which the Spaniard call Piedras hijada , and we use for spleen 367 stone : and for the disease of the stone we also esteem they . of these i see diverse in Guiana : and common every king or cacique have one , which their wife for the most part wear ; and they esteem they as great jewel . but to return to the enterprise of Bereo , who ( as i have say ) depart from Nuevo reyno with 700 horse , beside the provision above rehearse , he descend by the river call Cassanar , which rise in Nuevo reyno out of the mountain by the city of Tuvia , from which mountain also spring Pato ; both which fall into the great river of Meta : and Meta rise from a mountain join to Pamplon in the same Nuevo reyno de Granada . Theise , as also [ he - 639 . i guaiare , which issue out of the mountain by Timana , fall all into Baraquan , and be but of his head ; for at their come together they lose their name ; and Baraquan far down be also rebaptize by the name of Orenoque . on the other side of the city and hill of Timana rise Rio grande , which fall in the sea by sancta Marta . by Cassonar first , and so into Meta , Berreo pass , keep his horseman on the bank , where the country serve they for to march , and where otherwise , he be drive to embark they in boat which he build for the purpose , and so come with the current down the river of Meta , and so into Baraquan . after he enter that great and mighty river , he begin daily to lose of his company both man and horse ; for it be in many place violent swift , and have forcible eddy , many sand , and diverse island sharp point with rock : but after one whole year , journey for the most part by river , and the rest by land , he grow daily to few number ; for both by sickness , and by encounter with the people of those region , through which he travel , his company be much waste , especial by diverse encounter with the amapaians : and in all this time he never can learn of any passage into 368 Guiana , nor any news or fame thereof , until he come to a further border of the say Amapaia , eight day journey from the river Caroli , which be the further river that he enter . among those of Amapaia , Guiana be famous , but few of these people accost Berreo , or will trade with he the first three month of the six , which he sojourn there . This Amapaia be also marvellous rich in gold ( as both Berreo confess and those of Guiana with who i have most conference ) and be situate upon Orenoque also . in this country Berreo lose 60 of his best soldier , and most of all his horse that remain in his former year travel : but in the end , after diverse encounter with those nation , they grow to peace ; and they present Berreo with ten image of fine gold among diverse other plate and croissant , which , as he swear to i and diverse other gentleman , be so curious wrought , as he have not see the like either in Italy , Spain , or the low - countreys : and he be resolve , that when they come to the hand of the spanish king , to who he have send they by his campmaster , they will appear very admirable , especial be wrought by such a nation as have no iron instrument at all nor any of those help which our goldsmith have to work withal . the particular name of the people in Amapaia which give he these piece , be call anebas , and the river of Orenoque at that place be above 12 english mile broad , which may be from his out fall into the sea 700 or 800 mile . this province of Amapaia be a very low and a mar - ish ground near the river ; and by reason of the red water which issue out in small branch through the fenny and boggy ground , there breed diverse poisonful worm and serpent ; and the Spaniard not suspect , nor in any sort foreknow the danger , be infect with a grievous kind of flux by drink thereof ; and even the very horse poison therewith : insomuch as at the end of the 6 month , that they abide there , ten 369 2 A A . D . ’ 595 - of all their troop , there be not leave above 120 soldier , and neither horse nor cattle : for Berreo hope to have find Guiana by 1000 mile near than it fall out to be in the end : by mean whereof they sustain much want and much hunger , oppress with grievous disease , and all the misery that can be imagine . i demand of those in Guiana that have travel Amapaia , how they live with that tawny or red water when they travel thither : and they tell i that after the sun be near the middle of the sky , they use to fill their pot and pitcher with that water , but either before that time , or towards the set of the sun it be dangerous to drink of , and in the night strong poison . i learn also of diverse other river of that nature among they , which be also ( while the sun be in the meridian ) very safe to drink , and in the morning , evening , and night wondered dangerous and infective . from this province Berreo haste away assoon as the spring and beginning of summer appear , and seek his entrance on the border of Orenoque on the south side ; but there run a ledge of so high and impassable mountain , as he be not able by any mean to march over they , continue from the east sea into which Orenoque fall , even to Quito in Peru : neither have he mean to carry victuali or munition over those craggy , high , and fast hill , be all woody , and those so thick and spiny , and so full of prickle , thorn , and brier , as it be impossible to creep through they : he have also neither friendship among the people , nor any interpreter to persuade or treat with they : and more , to his disadvantage , the cacique and king of Amapaia have give knowledge of his purpose to the guianians , and that he seek to sack and conquer the empire , for the hope of their so great abundance and quantity of gold : he pass by the mouth of many great river , which fall into Orenoque both from the north and south , which i forbear to name for tediousness , and 370 .. IS95 " because they be more please in describe then read . Berreo