espannole , and return to Curiapan , and have Berreo my prisoner i gather from he as much of Guiana as he know . This Berreo be a gentleman well descend , and have long serve the spanish king in Milan , Naples , the low country and elsewhere , very valiant and liberali , and a gentleman of great assuredness , and of a great heart : i use he accord to his estate and worth in all thing i can , accord to the small mean i have . i send captain Whiddon the year before to get what knowledge he can of Guiana , and the end of my journey at this time be to discover and enter the same , but my intelligence be far from truth , for the country be situate above 600 . English mile further from the sea , than i be make believe it have be , which afterward understand to be true by Berreo , i keep it from the knowledge of my company , who else will never have be bring to attempt the same : of which 600 . mile i pass 400 . leave my ship so far from i at anchor in the sea , which be more of desire to perform that discovery , then of reason , especial have 354 * 595 - such poor and weak vessel to transport our self in ; for in the bottom of a old Galego which i cause to be fashion like a galley , and in one barge , two whirry , and a shipboat of the lion whelp , we carry 100 person and their victual for a month in the same , be all drive to lie in the rain and weather , in the open air , in the burn sun , and upon the hard board , and to dress our meat , and to carry all manner of furniture in they , wherewith they be so pester and unsavoury , that what with victual be most fish , with wet clothes of so many man thrust together , and the heat of the sun , i will undertake there be never any prison in England , that can be find more unsavoury and loathsome , especial to my self , who have for many year before be diet and care for in a sort far more differ . if captain Preston have not be persuade that he shall have come too late to Trinidad to have find we there ( for the month be expire which i promise to tarry for he there ere he can recover the coast of Spain ) but that it have please God he may have join with we , and that we have enter the country but some ten day soon ere the river be overflow , we have adventure either to have go to the great city of Manoa , or at least take so many of the other city [ in . 634 . i and town near at hand , as will have make a royal return : but it please not God so much to favour i at this time : if it shall be my lot to prosecute the same , i shall willing spend my life therein , and if any else shall enable thereunto , and conquer the same , i assure he thus much , he shall perform more than ever be do in Mexico by Cortes , or in Peru by Pizarro , whereof the one conquer the empire of Mutezuma , the other of Guascar , and Atabalipa , and whatsoever prince shall possess it , that prince shall be lord of more gold , and of a more beautiful empire , and of more city and people , then either the king of Spain , or the great Turk . 3S5 but because there may arise many doubt , and how this empire of Guiana be become so populous , and adorn with so many great city , town , temple , and treasure , i think good to make it know , that the emperor now reign be descend from those magnificent prince of Peru , of who large territory , of who policy , conquest , edifice , and riches Pedro de Cieza , Francisco Lopez , and other have write large discourse : for when Francisco Pizarro , Diego Almagro and other conquer the say empire of Peru , and have put to death Atabalipa son to Guaynacapa , which Atabalipa have former cause his elder brother Guascar to be slay , one of the young son of Guaynacapa flee out of Peru , and take with he many thousand of those soldier of the empire call Orejones , and with those and many other which follow he , he vanquish all that tract and valley of America which be situate between the great river of Amazones , and Baraquan , otherwise call Orenoque and Marannon . the empire of Guiana be direct east from Peru towards the sea , and lie under the equinoctial line , and it have more abundance of gold then any part of Peru , and as many or more great city than ever Peru have when it flourish most : it be govern by the same law , and the emperor and people observe the same religion , and the same form and policy in government as be use in Peru , not differ in any part : and i have be the stateliness assure by such of the Spaniard as have see Manoa the of Manoa . Imperial city of Guiana , which the Spaniard call el Dorado , that for the greatness , for the riches , and for the excellent seat , it far exceed any of the world , at least of so much of the world as be know to the spanish nation : it be found upon a lake of salt water of 200 . league long like unto mare Caspium . and if we compare Fran . Lopez , it to that of Peru , and but read the report of Francisco LoPez and othersj iter will seem more than credible : and 120 * ’ ? because we may judge of the one by the other , i think good to insert part of the 120 . chapter of 356 Lopez in his generail history of the Indies , wherein he describe the court and magnificence of Guaynacapa , ancestor to the emperor of Guiana , who very word be these . todo el servicio de sum casa , mesa , y cozina , era de oro , y de piata , y quando menos de plata , y cobre por mass rezio . Tenia en sum recamara estatuas huecas de oro , que parecian gigantes , y las figuras all propio , you tamanno the quanto animales , ave , arbole , y yerva produze la tierra , y de quanto piece cria la mar y aguas de sus reynos . Tenia assi mesmo sogas , costale , cestas , y trox de oro y plata , rimeros de palos de oro , que pareciessen lenna raiada para quemar . en fin no avia cosa en sum tierra , que no la tuviesse de oro contrahecha : in an dizen , que tenian los Ingas un vergel en una Isla cerca de la Puna , donde se yuan a holgar , quando querian mar , que tenia la ortaliza , las flores , y arbole de oro y plata , invention y grandeza hasta entonce nunca vista . Allende de todo esto tenia infinitissima cantitad de plata , y oro por labrar en el Cuzco , que se perdio por la muerte de Guascar , ca los indios lo escondieron , viendo que los espannole se lo tomavan , y embiavan a espanna . that be , all the vessel of his house , table and kitchen be of gold and silver , and the mean of silver and copper for strength and hardness of metal . he have in his wardrobe hollow statue of gold which seem giant , and the figure in proportion and bigness of all the beast , bird , tree , and herb , that the earth bring forth : and of all the fish that the sea or water of his kingdom breed . he have also rope , budget , chest and trough of gold and silver , heap of billet of gold , that seem wood mark out to burn . final , there be nothing in his country , whereof he have not the counterfeit in gold : yea and they say , the Ingas have a garden of pleasure in a island near Puna , where they go to recreate themselves , when they will take the air of the sea , which have all kind of garden - herb , flower and tree of gold and silver , a invention , and magnificence till then never see . beside all this , he have a infinite quantity 357 of silver and gold unwrought in Cuzco which be lose by the death of Guascar , for the Indian hide it , see that the Spaniard take it , and send it into Spain . and in the 117 . chapter Francisco Pizarro cause the gold and silver of Atabalipa to be weigh after he have take it , which Lopez set down in these word follow . hallaron cinquenta y do will marcos de bvena plata , y un millon y trezientos y veinte y sey will , y quinientos pesos de oro , which be : they find fifty and [ three . 635 . ] two thousand mark of good silver , and one million , and three hundred twenty and six thousand and five hundred pezo of gold . now although these report may seem strange , yet if we consider the many million which be daily bring out of Peru into Spain , we may easy believe the same : for we find that by the abundant treasure of that country the spanish king vex all the prince of Europe , and be become , in a few year , from a poor king of Castille , the great monarch of this part of the world , and likely every day to increase , if other prince forslow the good occasion offer , and suffer he to add this empire to the rest , which by far exceed all the rest : if his gold now endanger we , he will then be unresistable . such of the Spaniard as afterward endeavour the conquest thereof ( whereof there have be many , as shall be declare hereafter ) think that this Inga ( of who this emperor now live be descend ) take his way by the river of Amazones , by that branch which be call papamene : for by that way follow Orellana ( by the commandment of Gonzalo Pizarro , in the year 1542 ) who name the river also bear this day , which be also by other call Marannon , although Andrew Thevet do affirm that between Marannon and Amazones there be 120 league : but sure it be that those river have one head and beginning , and the Marannon , which Thevet describe , be but a branch of Amazones or Orellana , of which i will speak more in another place . it be attempt by Ordas ; but it be now little less than 70 358 year since that Diego Ordas , a knight of the order of saint Iago attempt the same : and it be in the year 1542 that Orellana discover the river of Amazones ; but the first that ever see Manoa be Juan Martinez master of the munition to Ordas . at a port call morequito in Guiana there lie at this day a great anchor of Ordas his ship ; and this port be some 300 mile within the land , upon the great river of Orenoque . i rest at this port four day : twenty day after i leave the ship at Curiapan . the relation of this Martinez ( who be the first that discover Manoa ) his success and end be to be see in the chancery of saint Juan de Puerto rico , whereof Berreo have a copy , which appear to be the great encouragement aswell to Berreo as to other that former attempt the discovery and conquest . Orellana after he fail of the discovery of Guiana by the say river of Amazones , pass into Spain , and there obtain a patent of the king for the invasion and conquest , but die by sea about the island , and his fleet sever by tempest , the action for that time proceed not . Diego Ordas follow the enterprise , and depart Spain with 600 soldier , and 30 horse , who arrive on the coast of Guiana , be slay in a mutiny , with the most part of such as favour he , as also of the rebellious part , insomuch as his ship perish , and few or none return , neither be it certain know what become of the say Orgas , until Berreo find the anchor of his ship in the river of Orenoque ; but it be suppose , and so it be write by Lopez , that he perish on the sea , and of other writer diverse conceive and report . and hereof it come that Martin enter so far within the land , and arrive at that city of Inga the emperor ; for it chance that while Ordas with his army rest at the port of morequito ( who be either the first or second that attempt Guiana ) by some negligence , the whole store of powder provide for the service be set on fire ; and Martinez have the chief charge , be condemn by the general Ordas to