way to the port of Toparimaca , by which we enter first . all the night it be stormy and dark , and full of thunder and great shower , so as we be drive to keep close by the bank in our small boat , be all hearty afraid both of the billow and terrible curent of the river . by the next morning we recover the mouth of the river of Cumaca , where we leave captain Eynos and Edward porter to attend the come of captain Keymis over land : but when we enter the same , they have hear no news of his arrival , which breed in we a great doubt what may become of he : i row up a league or two far into the river , shoot off piece all the way , that he may know of our be there . 420 1595 - and the next morning we hear they answer we also with a piece : we take they aboard we , and take our leave of Putima their guide , who of all other most lament our departure , and offer to send his son with we into England , if we can have stay till he have send back to his town : but our heart be cold to behold the great rage and increase of Orenoque , and therefore depart , and turn towards the west , till we have recover the part of the three branch aforesaid , that we may put down the stream after the galley . the next day we land on the island of Assapano ( which divide the river from that branch by which we send down to Emeria ) and there feast our self with that beast which be call Armadilla present unto we before at Winicapora , and the day follow we recover the galley at anchor at the port of Topari - the port of maca , and the same evening depart with very foul Toparimaca . weather and terrible thunder , and shower , for the winter be come on very far : the best be , we go no less than 100 mile a day , down the river ; but by the way we enter , it be impossible to return , for that the river of Amana , be in the bottom of the bay of Guanipa , can be sail back by any mean , both the breeze and current of the sea be so forcible : and therefore we follow a branch of Orenoque call Capuri , which enter into the sea eastward of our ship , to the end we may bear with they before the wind , and it be not without need , for we have by that way as much to cross of the main sea after we come to the river mouth , as between Gravelyn and Dover , in such boat as your Hon . have hear . to speak of what pass homeward be tedious , either to describe or name any of the river , island , or village of the Tivitivas which dwell on tree : we will leave all those to the generail map : and to be short , [ three . 659 . ] when we be arrive at the sea side , then grow our great doubt , and the bitter of all our journey before - 421 pass , for i protest before God , that we be in a most desperate estate : for the same night which we ankor in the mouth of the river of Capun , where it fall into the sea , there arise a mighty storm , and the river mouth be at least a league broad , so as we run before night close under the land with our small boat , and bring the galley as near as we can , but she have as much a do to live as can be , and there want little of her sink , and all those in she ; for my own part i confess , i be very doubtful which way to take , either to go over in the pester galley , there be but six foot water over the sand , for two league together , and that also in the channel , and she draw five : or to adventure in so great a billow , and in so doubtful weather , to cross the sea in my barge . the long we tarry the worse it be , and therefore i take captain Gifford , captain Calfield , and my cousin greenevile into my barge ; and after it clear up , about midnight we put our self to god keep , and thrust out into the sea , leave the galley at anchor , who dare not adventure but by daylight : and so be all very sober , and melancholy , one faint cheat another to show courage , it please God that the next day about nine of the clock , we descry the island of Trinidad , and steer for the near part of it , we keep the shore till we come to Curiapan , where we find our ship at anchor , than which there be never to we a more joyful sight . now that it have please God to send we safe to our ship , it be time to leave Guiana to the sun , who they worship , and steer away towards the north : i will therefore in a few word finish the discovery a rehearsal thereof . of the several nation which we find upon y description this discovery i will once again make repetition , and timsandiivers ^° ye be affect - at our first entrance into Amana , find in this which be one of the outlet of Orenoque , we leave on the discovery . right hand of we in the bottom of the bay , lie direct against Trinidad , a nation of inhuman cannibal , which 422 inhabit the river of Guanipa and Berbeese ; in the same bay there be also a three river which be call Areo , which rise on Paria side towards Cumana , and that river be inhabit with the wikiri , who chief town upon the say river be Sayma ; in this bay there be no more river , but these three before rehearse , and the four branch of Amana , all which in the winter thrust so great abundance of water into the sea , as the same be take up fresh , two or three league from the land . in the passage towards Guiana ( that be , in all those land which the eight branch of Orenoque fashion into hand ) there be but one sort of people call Tivitivas , but of two cast as they term they , the one call Ciawani , the other waraweeti , and those war one with another . on the hithermost part of Orenoque , as at Toparimaca , and winicapora , those be of a nation call Nepoios , and be of the follower of Carapana , lord of Emeria . between Winicapora and the port of morequito which stand in Aromaia , and all those in the valley of Amariocapana be call Orenoqueponi , and do obey morequito , and be now follower of Topiawari . upon the river of Caroli , be the canuri , which be govern by a woman ( who be inheritrix of that province ) who come far off to see our nation , and ask i diverse question of her majesty , be much delight with the discourse of her majesty greatness , and wonder at such report as we true make of her highness many virtue : and upon the head of Caroli , and on the lake of Cassipa , be the three strong nation of the Cassipagotos . right south into the land be the capure - pani , and emparepani , and beyond those adjoin to Macureguarai ( the first city of Inga ) be the iwarawakeri : all these be profess enemy to the Spaniard , and to the rich Epuremei also . to the west of Caroli be diverse nation of cannibal , and of those Ewaipanoma without head . direct west be the amapaias and Anebas , which be also marvelous rich in gold . the rest towards Peru we will omit . on the north of 423 the english voyage Orenoque , between it and the west Indies be the wikiri , Saymi , and the rest before speak of , all mortali enemy to the Spaniard . on the south side of the main mouth of Orenoque , be the Arwacas ; and beyond they the cannibal and to the south of they the Amazones . to make mention of the several beast , bird , fish , fruit , flower , gum , sweet wood , and of their several religion and custom , will for the first require as many volume as those of Gesnerus , and for the rest another bundle of Decades . the religion of the Epuremei be the same which the Ingas , emperor of Peru use , which may be read in Cieza , and other spanish story , how they believe the immortality of the soul , worship the sun , and bury with they alive their best belove wife and treasure , as they likewise do in Pegu in the east Indies , and other place . the Orenoqueponi bury not their wife with they , but their jewel , hope to enjoy they again . the Arwacas dry the bone of their lord , and their wife and friend drink they in powder . in the grave of the peruvians the Spaniard find their great abundance of treasure : the like also be to be find among these people in every province . they have all many wife , and the lord fivefold to the common sort : their wife never eat with their husband , nor among the man , but serve their husband at meal , and afterwards feed by themselves . those that be past their young year , make all their bread and drink , and work their cotton bed , and do all else of service and labour , for the man do nothing but hunt , fish , play , and drink , when they be out of the war . i will enter no further into discourse of their manner , law and custom : and because i have not my self see the city of Inga , i can avow on my credit what i have hear , although it be very likely , that the emperor Inga have build and erect as magnificent palace in Guiana , as his ancestor do in Peru , which be for their 424 riches and rareness most marvellous and exceed all in Europe , and i think of the world , China except , which also the Spaniard ( which i have ) assure i to be true , as also the nation of the borderer , who be but savage to those of the inland , do cause much treasure to be bury with they : for i be inform of one of the cacique of the valley of Amariocapana which have bury with he a little before our arrival , a chair of gold most curious wrought , which be make either in macureguaray adjoin , or in Manoa : but if we shall have grieve they in their religion at the first , before they have be teach better , and have dig up their grave , we have lose they all : and therefore i hold my first resolution , that her majesty shall either accept or refuse the enterprise , ere any thing shall be do that might in any sort hinder the same . and if Peru have so many heap of gold , whereof those Ingas be prince , and that they delight so much therein ; no doubt but this which now live and reign in Manoa , have the same honour , and i be assure have more abundance of gold , within his territory , than all Peru and the west Indies . for the rest , which my self have see , i will promise these thing that follow , which i know to be true . those that be desirous to discover and to see many nation , may be satisfy within this river , which bring forth so many arm and branch lead to several country and province , above 2000 mile east and west , and 800 mile south and north , and of these , the most either rich in gold , or in other merchandize . the common soldier shall here fight for gold , and pay himself in steed of penny , with plate of half a foot broad , whereas he break his bone in other war for provant and penury . those commander and chieftain that shoot at honour and abundance , shall find there more rich and beautiful city , more temple adorn with golden image , more sepulchre fill with treasure , then either Cortes find in Mexico , 425 great riches . exceed commendation of the river of Orenoque . the holsome - nesse of the country . gold . Brasil wood . excellent die . the english voyage or Pizarro in Peru : and the shine glory of this conquest will eclipse all those so far extend beam of the spanish nation . there be no country which yield more pleasure to the inhabitant , either for those common delight of hunt , hawk , fish , fowl , or the rest , than Guiana do . it have so many plain , clear river , abundance of pheasant , partridge , quail , rail , crane , herons , and all other fowl