clock in the afternoon , eleven of we ( master Monax have the government of the action , by the captain appointment ) with Mawerirou , Henry , and William of Cawo , in the canoa which we buy , go into the river far to search it so far as we can , and that night get some five league from our ship . and between two village , awodwaier and Mapeributto , we take up our lodging in the wood . the three of April , betimes in the morning , we take our course still unto the river , and in the afternoon come to one house where we find many Indian , where we hire another canoa and four Indian , into the which i go , and one more of our man , and this night get twelve league far , and as before , lodge among the wild beast . on Monday the four of April , we come to the fall of this river about two in the afternoon : and have 8 shot up some of the rock , we go on shore upon a island , and there confer of our far proceed . And inquire of the Indian that we hire for our pilot of the last house , whether the fall be passable or not : their first answer be , that they have nothing to eat : but we be loath to loose so much labour , and the sight of that upper rich country , which we desire , tell they that they shall have victual of we ( though God know we have none for our self ) who see we so importunate , say far , that the rock will kill the canoas : which they say because indeed they have no victual : which by some be take for sufficient to proceed no far , and so we leave off , and only stay some two hour upon the island , and with the swiftness of the current , fall that night down io league again . though i for my own part offer in that small canoa that i be in , be so leak , that my self do nothing but lave out the water , to lead they the way , and if they see any danger to i , they may choose whether they will come into it or not themselves . for see the country above be rich as we be inform , that their bow be handle with gold , ( be man of a extraordinary stature for talnes ) we shall have take the more pain , and have fare the hard , until we have get up in the country which we see with our eye : for though we have not victual in any sort to carry we up , yet the wood do yield fruit and the palmito tree afford meat , whereby we may have make shift to live , until we have come to the inhabitant , by who we may both be refresh with victual , and also have reap that , which may have do we good as long as we have live . but to return to the rest of our voyage : the day after we go from the fall we come to our ship , which be the five of April 1597 . on Wednesday we fall with our pinnace to Quiparia again : where 9 A . D . * 597 - a rich country . Bowes handle with gold . we bring she on ground right before the town , and pitch to trim trim she with the pitch of the country : and until ship . we hac | do , keep a corpse du guard , night and day on shore , which be upon Saturday follow the nine of April . all the while we be there we have a house of the caribe , and be kind use of they , and have victual , and every thing we need of they . and so take our leave on Tuesday be then the river of twelve of April , we come to the mouth of cusse - cusse - winne . wonderful [ nnej where the Arwaccas of Marrac and of the river have provide and bring to we such infinite store of potato , and guiney - wheate , that the steward say we have no stowage for they ; and so they be turn back , and we by that mean come to short allowance home ward bind , then ( if there have be any good care ) we need to have do . on Friday the fifteeneth of April , we put forth marawime . of marawinne , which be some four league over , and within one league and a half for the most part broad ; full of island , and diverse small river run into it : and it be between forty and fifty league , from the mouth to the fall , and lie for the most part south Southwest up , alter some 3 point , be almost straight . And stand along to the westward , this night we try with our main coarse and bonnet . on Saturday night we Sewramo . come to a anchor , in three fathom against Sewramo . on Sunday morning we think to have go into cuppa - namo : but send off our boat and find uncertain sound , sometime 3 fathom and present 9 foot , Coritine we stand along to Coritine , and come into it upon the river . Monday be the 18 of April : and the next night we come to anchor against Warrawalle in 10 fathom . on Wednesday the Indian of the town have hunt a doe , she take soil and come near our ship , and put off with our boat we take she , be like unto our deer in England , not altogether so fat , but very good flesh and [ three . 696 . ] great body . in this river we meet a bark call the John of London captain leigh be in she . And be both fall down within some five league of the mouth of the river , upon intelligence that one Marracon , ( who we bring along with we ) give we , namely that the river Desekebe , in which he dwell ( and wherein there be some three hundred Spaniard , which for the most part now be destroy and dead ) do lead so far into the country , that it come within a day journey of the lake call perima , whereupon Manoa be suppose the great lake to stand ; and that this river of Coritine do meet with ? er ‘ ma - desekebe up in the land : by mean whereof we make account to go up into the country , and to have discover a passage unto that rich city . So have conclude both ship , we stand up into the river again , and come to Warawalle the 24 of April there our ship ride until we go up to Mawranamo to speak with Marracon , to know the truth of these thing : who when we have find , he verify all that before he have speak : master Monax be the man that of Leonard of Cawe take all the intelligence : who be bring up with Antony Berreo can speak some spanish and marracons language also . and beside we our self by sign , and draw the two river on the ground , and the meeting of they aloft , do perceive as much . now come down with our boat the six and twenty of April we go up with our ship to Mawranama , where we mor they , and take some twenty out of both , upon Thursday the eight and twenty in the afternoon with two shallop and two canoas , in one of which Henry the Indian be and some twenty Indian moor , we go up the river ; and by night get some three league far we lodge in the wood , and the next morning we with our boat and the two canoas went into a small river call they bring their ship up to the Mawranamo . tapuere , to a town call Macharibi , think to have have Casavi and other victual , which they be altogether unprovide of , by reason that they make no more ready than serve themselves from hand to mouth , live in this town for the most part by fish . by mean of go both into this river , though we row very hard it be noon before we overtake the big shallop wherein both the captain be . this night we come to a town call Vaperon , where we stay all Saturday and the night follow , for Casavi : whereof they bake good store for we being but a few leave in the town . for not a month before we come thither , the waccawa that dwell above the fall come down to the town , and slay some ten of they , and many of the rest flee away , so that we find most of the house empty . upon Sunday morning be may day , we go from this place , and by night get some twelve league beyond , and be past all town we lodge as before in the wood , and the next day come to the fall of the river ; up some of which fall we shoot with our boat , and go upon a rock there come some nine canoas up the river to we , and will have go up with we to kill the waccawayans , because they have kill some of they , as before be say . whereupon the captain and master Monax take advice : and because now they have learn , as they say , that five day journey far there be a fall not passable , and that by this mean they shall make the wacchawayans their enemy , which will turn to our great hurt , when sir Walter Ralegh shall come thither , have occasion to use this river , where we be inform be good store of gold , they resolve to return , though i yield diverse reason to the contrary . so upon Tuseday night , we come back to Vaperon , where we lodge . and upon Wednesday the four of May , we come to our ship : where it be report that the Spaniard be go ne out of Desekebe , which be not so : but as it seem in policy by they give out to make our man that we leave in our ship more careless , that they may the easy have surprise they in our absence . the next night we have news bring we to Mawranamo , where we yet ride , that there be ten canoas of Spaniard in the mouth of Coritine ; and fear lest they 12 have intend to come to we in the night , we fit all our gun and musket , and keep good watch to prevent they of their purpose ; who , as it be afterward tell we , go along the coast to buy bread and other victual for they in Orenoque , Marowgo , and Desekebe . upon Friday the six of May we weigh and make down the river , and upon Sunday the eight we get clear of it . this river be much like unto Marawynne in breadth , and about fifty league from the mouth to the first fall , full of island as the other : in which three river , Mano , tapuere , and tabvebbi , otherwise Tapuellibi : with six town , Warrawalle , Mawranamo , maapuere , maccha - ribi , Yohoron , and Vaperon . and so clere our self of this coast , we take our course to the island of the west Indies . now i think it not amiss to speak something of this country . and first touch the climate ; though it stand within the Tropic , and something near to the equinoctial , so that the sun be twice a year over their head and never far from they , yet be it temperate enough in those part . for beside that we lose not a man [ he - 697 . ] upon the coast , one that be sick before he come there , be nothing sick for be there , but come home safe , thank be to God . and for my own part , i be never better in body in all my life , and in like sort fare it with the rest of the company : for indeed it be not so extreme hot as many imagine . the people in all the low part of the country go naked , both man and woman , be of several language , very tractable , and ingenious , and very love and kind to Englishmen general ; as by experience we find , and upon our own knowledge do report . in the upper country they go apparel , be , as it seem , of a more civil disposition , have great store of gold , as we be certain inform by the great store low Indian , of who we have some gold , which they m bring and buy in the high country of Wiana , be able to buy no more , because they want the thing the english voyage which now we have leave among they . they keep no order of marriage ; but have as many wife as they can buy , or win by force of their enemy , which principal be the cause of all their war . for bread there be infinite store of casavi , which be as good bread as a man need to eat , and better than we can carry any thither . we spend not a bit of our own all the while we be upon the coast . it be make of a root so call ; which they take and scrape , and crush all the juice out , be poison ; and when it be dry it be as fine flower as our white meal make : which dry as it be , without any moisture , they strew upon a round stone , have a still fire under it , and so it congeal to a cake ; and when it come new off , it eat like to our new white bread . beside there be great store of guiny - wheat ( whereof they make pass good drink ) which after it be once sow , if you cut off the ear , on the same stalk grow another . for victual , we either do not , or at least need not to have spend any of our own : for there be great store of as good fish in the river , as any be in the world . great store of fowl , of diverse sort . tortoise - flesh plentiful , and tortoise egg innumerable . deer , swine , cony , hare , cock and hen , with potato more than we can spend . beside , all kind of fruit , at all time of the year : and the rare fruit of the world , the pine , the plantan , with infinite other variable and pleasant , grow to their hand , without plant or dress . for commodity , though we have but small time to search , because we spend so much time in search the river : yet we have bring example of some , which the country yield in great plenty : as a kind of long hemp like unto steel hemp , fine cotton wool , which the tree yield great store of ; and wherewith the woman make a fine thread , which will make excellent good fustian or stocking . great store of pitch , diverse sort of sweet gum , and west Indian pepper , balsamum , parrot and monkey . beside diverse other commodity , which in good time may be find out to the benefit of our 1597 - countrey , and profit of the adventurer , who as yet have venture much , have gain little . now leave the river of Cori tine , pass by saint Vincent , Santa Lucia , and Matalina , we come to Dominica upon the Friday follow , be the thirteenth of May , have lose the bark that come out with we the wednes - tty thy ty - day before . upon Sunday morning , the fifteen of tn may , we come to Guadalupe , where we water at ” ° the Souther part of the island , and have do by night , we set sail , and stand away to the northward , but be becalm all night , and until ten of the clock on Monday night : at which time have a fair gale at east , and after at southeast , we pass along in the sight of monserate , Antigua , and Barbuda . upon the nine of June , be Thursday , we make the island of Flores and Corvo : and the eight and twenty of June we make the lisart , and that night come all safe to Plymmouth , bless be God . between the isle of Barbuda in the west Indies and England we have three mighty storm , many calm , and some contrary wind . and upon the fourteen of June 1597 , there be diverse whale play about our pinnace , one of they cross our stem , and go under , rub she back against our keel : but by none of all these we sustain any loss . thank be to he that govern all thing . write by master Thomas Masham .