the three voyage set forth by sir Walter Ralegh to Guiana , with a pinnace call the Watte , in the year 1596 . write by m . Thomas Mash be a gentleman of the company . Pon Thursday the 14 . of October 1596 . we set sail from limehouse upon the river of Thames , and through much contrariety of wind and other accident , we make it the 27 . of December , before we can get out of Waimouth . the 25 . of Januarie in the morning we come to the north side of the island of grand Canaria , where we hope to have get a boat to serve we upon the coast of Guiana , but the wind be so great , that we can not launch our shalope : so we pass along by the road and the town , and at length see a boat lie on shore , which be too big for we , we rip up , and wooded our self with she . that day we descry a sail , which at length we find to be a flyboat of Dartmouth , of 200 . ton , bind to the island of Mayo for salt . we fall in consort with she , and that night stand for the southermost part of the island there to water , where we stay all the next day , and water at the southsouthwest part thereof . that night we weigh and stand away together southsoutheast , and south and by east , purpose by their persuasion to go for the river Doro . the 28 . of Januarie we make the furthermost part of Barbary ; and this morning we jor the u ^ outk meet with m . Benjamin wood with his fleet of 3 sail sea . xi i a bind for the straight of Magellan and China , to wit , the bear , the whelp , and the Benjamin : who tell we that there be no good to be do in the river Doro . Cape Blanco . whereupon we stand along with they for cape Blanco , unto which we come upon Sunday night next follow . and upon Monday morning the first of February , we see two ship in a sandy bay : so we stir in with they , which be Frenchman bind for the west Indies , and put all into the bay , where we refresh our self with fish , in which there be infinite store , and stay there until Thursday the 5 . at which time we stand up with the cape again , where ride the Frenchman and his pinnace , who put forth right afore we , and another Frenchman and his caravel well man : so all our 5 . English come to a anchor by they , where after kind greeting with many shot out of every ship both english and french , all our captains be invite to a feast aboard the french admiral : where after great cheer and kind entertainment , it be conclude on all hand to take the isle of Fogo , if God will give we leave . the same day we all weigh and stand along for the the island jsje of ga ^ unto which we come the 8 . of February , of and anchor altogether at a bay in the west part thereof : in which island we have good store of goat and fresh fish . there be no man dwell upon the island that we can see . we can find no fresh water upon it , but one stand puddle of bad water : it have four great mountain upon the 4 . corner of it . here the Frenchman ( as it seem being overcome with drink , have be aboard our general at a feast ) be on shore , one of the gentleman of their company be slay , and their chief captain sore wound : by reason whereof , and of the set together of a pinnace which they be about , the french admiral and the caravel stay behind . so we in the Watte , and the other 6 . ship weigh the 10 . of [ three . 693 . ] February , and stand away for the isle of Maio . this night the other two french ship that come from Sal with we ( as it seem of purpose , because their consort be not with they ) lose we . the next morning we see Maio . so we and the flyboat of Dartmouth compass the northermost part of the island , and master Benjamin wood in the china - fleete , the southermost , and come all to a anchor together at the southwest part thereof : where ride six sail of psalle of Fleming lade salt ; who have bring their horse and cart , and wheelbarrow , and plank for their m0j0r sa ’ barrow to run upon . here be abundance of salt in this island make by God hand without man labour . Theise tell we that there be thirty sail more , which fall to leeward of Fogo , who , as i hear since , beat it up with much ado , and come thither also for salt . this trade may be very beneficial to England , consider the dearness of salt . of goat on this island there be such store , as be incredible , but to those that have see they : and it be a wonder how they live one by the other , the ground be stony and barren . it be think that there be dwell in it some twenty mountainier , which get one of the Fleming man straggle , and God know what they do with he : for they see he no more . this island be somewhat low and round , have no great mountain upon it . here end our determination concern the invade of Fogo . and here we leave the flyboat of Dartmouth lade salt , and the china - fleete to refresh themselves with goat , who as i have hear since have at the village ( from whence the mountainier be flee into the further part of the island and rock ) great store of dry goat which they carry along with they : which be like to be a great help unto they in their long voyage . so upon Saturday the 12 of February at night we set sail and stand for the coast of Wiana , which we be bind for . upon Sunday the twenty of February we come into the main current that set from the cape of buena esperanza along the coast of Brasil , and so towards the west Indies , for the most part set away northwest . the Tuesday night follow , whereas before our course be westsouth west , we stand away west and by south : by reason whereof , and of the current that set we to the northward , we be the next day by noon twenty minute further to the northward then the day before . so that than we lay away Southwest , because we be loath to fall to the northward of our place intend : which if we shall be put to leeward of , there be small hope leave to recover it . by Thursday we be within one degree i of the equinoctial line : therefore this day we hail away west and by south , and west among . this night we sound , but have no ground at 90 fathom . the next day in the morning the colour of the water begin to change , and to be more white , so we make another sound and have ground at thirty fathom , but see no land , and in the afternoon we hail away westnorthwest , northwest , and northnorthwest . in the night we sound diverse time , and have twelve , ten , and nine fathom water . all Saturday we have a thick red water , and have seven and eight fathom both day and night , and upon Sunday morning by day be the seven and twenty of February , we make the land which appear low , and trend near as we fall with it , south and by east , north and by west about two degree towards the north . right on head of we be a cape or head land , so that have we be shoot a little further into the bay , the wind be more northerly , we shall hardly have double it off . for with much ado make many board , and stop every tide , it be the Tuesday follow before we clear our self of the bay , and recover the cape . now the land trend northwest and by north , and southeast and by south . and still we be fain to anchor every tide sometime in four fathom , and sometime in three , as far as we can the river of Wiapoucou almost in 4 degree north . Thomas Masham ad .. * 597 - see land . so about night we see cape Cecill : and cape Cecil in after some two hour come to a anchor . between these 3 degree and two cape the land lie low and even . a half - upon Wednesday morning , have the wind large at Eastnortheast , we lay it away upon a board into the bay of Wiapoucou and come to a anchor in the river mouth in two fathom : over the bar there be little water , as 6 and 7 foot , and less in many place . and this river of Wiapoucou stand almost in 4 degree to the northward of the line . the next morning we weigh , and stand in with our pinnace by night , we get some eight league up the river . this day sometime we have but 5 foot water and draw 7 foot , but be soft oaze we go clear : and a little before we come to anchor , we be on ground upon a rock , but with some trouble and labour we get off and have no hurt . upon Friday the 4 of march towards night we come to the fall . the next day m . Leonard Berrie our captain , the master , my self and some 5 more , go through the wood , and spend all the day in search the head of the fall , but can not find it : for though we pass by many , yet be there more still one above [ three . 694 . ] the other . so that find no Indian in this river to buy victual of , neither any kind of thing that may entice we to come to so short allowance , as we must have do , if we have spend any long time here , find it over hard to pass the fall , we fall down the river again , and by Friday the 11 of march we clear our self of the river and bay . this river from the mouth to the fall be some 16 league , in many place a mile over , but for the most part half a mile . there be many island in it : as be also in most of the river upon the coast . this night we anchor against Cawo in two fathom ; whereinto we Cam . think to have put with our pinnace : but find the water so shall , and the sea so grow , that neither with our ship nor shallope we dare go in . on Saturday by noon we come to anchor under one the 7 hand , of the 7 island : upon which go on shore we find neither man nor beast , but great store of yellow plumb which be good to eat . upon Sunday after dinner our master William Dowie and 6 moor go off with our boat to a town Aramatto a call Aramatto ; where they find many inhabitant , great tosvne . anj bring victual and some tobacco with they , and one Indian name caprima , who lie aboard all night , the next day be Monday the 14 of march go with TheCaribestf our captain into Wias , and there trade with the wiastractable caribe for such thing as they have . and afterward ' they of Aramatto come off with their canoas to we , and we go on shore to they : and from thence our captain send a canoa with seven man , which have every one of they a knife to go back to the river of Cawo , and to tell ritimo captain of that place , that because we can not come to he , we will Chiana a stay at Chiana for he , whither we entreat he to river and bay . come to we . so upon Thursday the 17 we stand in for Chiana , and come to a anchor without in the bay in 3 fathom that night : and have the caribe come continual to we with their canoas , which bring we great store of victual and some tobacco , show themselves very kind and love , and come all from their town , and dwell on shore by we until ritimo come : at who come they return all up to their town again , which be upon the Sunday follow . all this day we feast he and his train , and the next day we traffic with they for such thing as they bring , which be principal tobacco . after that they have make know their mind of the desire that they have to have the english come and kill the Spaniard , and to dwell in Orenoque and in the country , they depart with their 3 canoas the next day . and we with the help of the caribe of Chiana , have by their mean from the shore water , because the river mouth be salt , depart out of 6 the bay the Thursday follow , and pass by Macerea , couroura , and Manamanora , by reason of shoald , rock , and great wind , be a lee shore ; and for want of a good shalope , we come to a anchor the next day be good Friday in five fathom near the triangle Islands call the carere . and upon the Carenes . Saturday stand to the westward , we stop against the town of Maware , which be a little to the Maware . Westward of the town Comanamo : from whence and from the other town in that bay , which be some 6 or 7 , we have canoas come off to we as before with such thing as they have themselves in use , with parrot , monkey , and cotton - wool , and flax . from whence we depart upon Monday follow the 28 of march 1597 . And pass by the river of euracco and Amano , which open but a small river , and be shall off , we come to marawinne the next day : and find a marawinne channel of three , four , and five fathom , we stand a rtver ' into the river : and the same day come to a anchor some 2 league in against the mouth of cooshepwinne , which river go into Amana . into which , ( understand that there be arwaccawe dwell ) this night we send our boat and come to a town call Marrac one league in : and find the people some - Marrac , a thing pleasant , have drink much that day , be as towne - it seem a festival day with they , yet be they very fearful and ready to run away at the first sight of we , have seidome see any christian before . but assoon as Henry our Indian interpreter have tell they what we be , and our intent , they come to we and use we kind , and bring we victual and other thing . and the next day their captain Mawewiron come out into marawinne , with diverse canoas , and trade with we , and we go in again to they on shore , who make very much of we , and carry we from house to house , and make we eat and drink in every house which we come in . and the next day follow be the last of march , have the captain of Marrack with we , we weigh and stand into the river , and about two of the clock in the afternoon come to a anchor some eight league within the river , a little short of a Quiparia a town call Quiparia , the people whereof be caribe : tCmibffae W ^° ’ w ^ en see we come towards their town with ' our boat , begin all to run into the wood , until the captain of Marrac which be with we in the boat , leap overboard and swim on shore unto they , and tell they that we be Englishman , and come in friendship to trade with they . upon who report they come before night six or [ three . 695 . ] seven canoas aboard we , yet very fearful , because there be never either ship or Christian see in that river before . the first of April , we weigh Macirria a again , and stand in to the next town call Macirria : town . where come to anchor , there come a canoa from Amano to we , with great store of victual , which canoa we buy : and because we meet with some shold , we be loath to go any far with our pinnace : so there we more she , and the next day at three of the