a copy of the letter of the adventurer for Brasill send to John whithall dwell in Santos , by the minion of London . anno 1580 . the 24 . of October in London . Aster whithall , as unacquainted we commend we unto you , etc understand by your friend , m . John bird , m . Robert Walkaden , and your brother James whithall of certain letter that they have receive of you from Santos , which we have see and read , wherein from time to time you do require , and desire they to send a good ship to Santos , with such ware and commodity : as you do write for , whereby you do not only promise that they shall have good entertainment , but also shall sell the say commodity to make three of one outward at the least in every thing , and that for to relade their ship back , they shall have of the best , fine , and white dry sugar 32 . pound of our weight for a ducat at the most . the premise consider , with the great credit that they and we do give to your writing and promise , have cause we , who name be hereunder write , to join our self in company together , and to be at great charge purposely to send this good ship the minion of London , not only with such merchandize as you write for , but also with as many other thing as we think may any way pleasure you , or profit the country . and we crave of you , that we and our factor may have so much credit of you , as we have in you and of your letter , which be to believe we that we have take this voyage upon we , with no other mind or purpose , than to deal faithful and true in the trade by sea and land , so as you shall not only have cause to rejoice , and deserve thank for our come , but also you will procure the magistrate 31 there to be bind , as they use in Galicia , that we may be preserve and defend from all reprisal and imbargment of prince or subject for any cause or matter whatsoever , whereby we may be encourage by they , give we this security of good entertainment , to continue the trade yearly henceforth : and for our part we promise upon our credit and fidelity , to commit no outrage at the sea nor land , nor suffer any to be do in our company that we may let , but rather to defend and protect all other such peaceable merchant as we be , with their ship and good . [ Iii . 704 . ] and to the end that you and other shall know that we mean as we say , we have give order to our factor to give you good hostage for your assurance of our good fidelity : and further we have send a testimoniali of our own true meaning in write under the seal of this honourable city of London , which we will not discredit by our behaviour for all the treasure that you have : and so we have write to your magistrate of your port , and other in spanish , the copy whereof we send you herewith enclose in English . and if the time shall fall out so contrary to our expectation , that there shall not be fine white sugar sufficient to lade our say ship in due time at Santos , than we pray you direct our factor where they may go with the ship in safety to supply their want , and help they to a good sure pilot for that purpose , and write your letter to your friend where the best sugar be make in their favour , and help our factor to have a testimoniali from santos , that they and you trade together friendly , and so depart in good and perfect amity , and show they that the just cause of our coming be to trade as merchant peaceable , and not as pirate to commit any offence to one or other . also we pray you , if there be any store of wax , or saltpete , whereby the price there may yield we as 32 much profit as the white sugar at a ducat the rove , or any other commodity of like profile , than to procure that we may lade it without danger of law , be it oar of gold or silver or whatsoever else . A . D . 1580 . we have send you copper cauldron for your ingenios , with iron and all other necessary for your purpose , and artificer to set the same : and as we have at your request be at great charge in send these man , so we pray you let we have lawful favour in like courtesy to further all our cause . and if any of our mariner or passenger in any respect of displeasure against their company , or in hope of preferment of marriage or otherwise will procure to tarry and dwell there , and leave his charge and office , that than you will be a mean to the justice that such fugitive shall be send aboard the ship as prisoner : for as you know , without our man we can bring home our ship . we have give order to our factor to use your counsel and help in their affair , and to gratify you for the same as to your courtesy and faithful friendship shall appertain to your good like : and in the mean time for a token of our good will towards you , we have send you a field - bed of walnut tree , with the canopy , valens , curtain , and gild knop . and if there be any commodity else that may pleasure you or your friend , we have give order that they shall have the refuse of it before any other , give for it as it be worth . and thus to conclude , promise to perform all the foresay thing on our part in every condition , we commit you to God , who ever preserve you with all his blessing . your love friend Christopher Hodsdon . Anthony Garrard . Thomas bramlie . John bird . } { William Elkin . xi 33