a letter write to m . Richard staper by John whithal from Santos in Brasil , the 26 . of June 1578 . orshipfiill sir , and well - beloved friend m . staper , i have i most hearty commend unto you , wish your health even as i own . Theise few word may be to let you understand , that whereas i write unto you not many day pass by the way of Lisbon , how that i determine to be with you very short , it be in this country offer i to marry , and to take my choice of three or four : so that i be about three day ago consort with a this my friend and father in law italian gentleman to marry with his daughter within these four day . This my friend and father in law Signor loffo door be bear in the city of Genua in Italy : he kindred be well know among the italian in London : also he have but only this child which be his daughter , which he have think better bestow upon i then on any Portugal in all the country , and do give with she in marriage to i part of a ingenio which he have , that do make every year a thousand rove of sugar . This my manage will be worth to i two thousand ducat , little more or less . also Signor loffo door my father in law do intend to put into my hand the whole ingenio with sixty or seventie slave , and thereof to make i factor for we both . i give my live lord thank for place i in such honour and plentifulness of all thing . also certain day past i talk with the Provedor and the captain , and they have certify i , that they mine of gold have discover certain mine of silver and gold , and look every day for master to come to open the say " weredats . Mines : which when they be open will enrich this Vincent . country very much . this place be call saint Vincent , 26 and be distant from you two thousand league , and in 24 . degree of latitude on the south side of the equinoctial line , and almost under the Tropike of Capricorn . a country it be very healthful without sickness . Moreover , i have talk with the captain and provedor , and my father in law , who rule all this country , for to have a ship with good to come from London hither , which have promise i to give i licence , say that now i be free denizen of this country . to cause a ship to come hither with such commodity as will serve this country , will come to great gain , God send in safety the profit and gain . in such ware and commodity as you may ship hither 7 % voyage to from London be for every one commodity deliver here 81 f three for one , and then after the proceed may be in - x ' waxn / ploy in white sugar at four hundred reis the rove . only . i mean also to have a friend in London to send [ he . 702 . ] i a ship of 60 . or 70 . ton , little more or less , with such commodity as i shall give advise for . this voyage be as good as any peru - voyage . if you and master Osborne will deal here , i will deal with you before any other , because of our old friendly friendship in time past . if you have any stomach thereto , in the name of God do you espy out a fine bark of seventie or eighty ton , and send she hither with a Portugal pilot to this port of saint Vincent in Brasil , border upon the border of Peru . also i herewith write unto you in what form and manner you shall furnish this voyage both in commodity and otherwise . first you must lade in the say ship certain Hamp - inwhatmane shire and Devonshire karsy : for the which you must to8 ' let she depart from London in October , and to touch a ship of in the canary , and there to make sale of the say or 80 . ton karsy , and with the proceed thereof to lade fifteen u t0 be made - tunne of wine that be perfect and good , and six dozen of Cordovan skin of these colour , to wit , orange , tawny , yellow , red , and very fine black . i think you shall not find such colour there . therefore you must cause they that shall go upon this voyage , to take saffron with they , to cause the same skin to be put into the say colour . also i think you shall find oil there . three hogshead of sweet oil for this voyage be very necessary , or a hundred and fifty jar of oil . also in London you may lade in the say ship these parcel of commodity or ware , as follow : ' in primis , four piece of holland of middle sort . item , one piece of fine holland . four hundred else of osenbrige very fine . four dozen of sizzor of all sort . sixteen kintal of pitch of the canary . twenty dozen of great knife which be make in farthel , of a low price . four dozen of a small sort . six piece of bay of the low sort . one very fine piece of bay . four hundred else of manchester - cotton , most black , green , some yellow . eight or ten dozen of hat , the one half - trim with tafiata , the other plain , with the band of cypress . six dozen of course shirt . three dozen of doublet of canvas . three dozen of doublet of stitch canvas . one piece of fine millan - fustian bar . six dozen of lock for door and chest . six thousand of all manner of fish hook . four dozen ream of paper . two dozen of glass of diverse sort . two dozen of Venice glass , the one half great , the other middle sort . two dozen of mantle of freeze , of the low price that can be . three dozen of freeze gown . ' four hundred pound of tin of the use of Portugal , most small dish and trencher . four pound of silk of all colour . twenty pound of spice , clove , cinamom , pepper , and saffron . two kintal of white soap . three pound of thread , white , black , and blow . three pound of fine white thread . item , half a dozen of northern karsy of diverse colour . four sort clothes , blue , red , yellow , and green . six northern dozen of diverse colour . one fine blue cloth of eight pound . one fine stammel of ten or twelve pound . one fine sheep colour cloth of twelve pound . < one fine black kerchief . } { one fine stammel kerchief . six yard of black velvet . three barrel of nail for chest . two barrel of nail for ship and bark . six kintal of Occom . two dozen of velvet girdle without hanger . four yard of taffeta red , black , and blow , with [ he . 703 . ] some green . two dozen of leather girdle . six dozen of axe , hatchet , and small bill to cut wood . four maze of cithern string . four hundred or five hundred else of some linen cloth that be of a low price to make shirt and sheet . four ton of iron . Theise be such sort of ware as i will you shall send . if you mean to deal , or send any ship hither , have you no doubt , but by the help of God i shall put all thing in good order accord to your contentment and profit : for my father in law with the captain and Provedor do rule this country . my father in law and i shall ( God will ) make a good quantity of sugar every year , which sugar we intend to ship for London from henceforth , if we can get such a trusty and good friend as you to deal with we in this matter . i pray you present after the receit of this my letter to write i answer thereof , and send your letter to m . Holder to Lisbon , and he will convey it to i out of hand . " beside the premise send six yard of scarlet , parchment lace of diverse colour . < six yard of crimosin velvet . six yard of crimosin satin . twelve yard of fine puke black . here in this country in stead of John whithall they John leitoan . have call i John leitoan : so that they have use this name so long time , that at this present there be no remedy but it must remain so . when you write unto i , let the superscription be unto John leitoan . thus i commit you with all you to the holy ghost for ever . if you send this ship , i will have you give order that she touch in no part of the coast of guinie nor any other coast , but to come direct hither to the port of saint Vincent , and from the canary let she be dispatch in my name , to wit , John leitoan . ' also a dozen of shirt for my wear let be send , if you send the ship . < item , six or eight piece of say for mantle for woman , which be the most necessary thing that can be send . by your assure friend John whithall .