, so they sleep not in other devise , but put in practice to burn our ship or remove they out of the harbour . for within some 20 day after our come in , they have prepare 5 caravel and fill they with such thing as will best take fire and burn : these they bring within a mile or little moor of our ship , and there set they on fire , for near they can not well come because of our watch of boat , for as be above say , the admiral have always 6 boat that keep watch above half a mile from the ship for fear of such exploit as these , which be the cause they can not fire they so near the ship as they will have do . but these fire caravel have the tide with they , and also the little wind that blow be in their favour ; which cause they to come down the stream the fast : which our boat perceive make to they with as much expedition as convenient they can , but the tide and wind both serve they , they approach towards the ship with great expedition . our man in the town begin to be in some fear of they , yet no man move or 57 ajx 1595 - start from his quarter more then if there have be nothing to do . also the master and such as be aboard , be somewhat amaze to see 5 so great fire to be come down among their ship , but they prepare for to clear they of it , as well as they can , be provide afore hand and judge that some such stratagem will be there use , the river be very fit therefore . but ( God be thank ) who be always with we and our best defence in this voyage ; by who assistance we perform this so great a attempt with so small force . our company in the boat so play the man when they see the fire come near our ship , that cast grapnel with iron chain on they , as every boat have one for that purpose , some they tow aground , and some they bring to a bitter or anchor , where they ride till all their force be burn out , and so we be deliver by God help from this fearful danger . within some 6 night after this , which may be about the 26 day after our come in and abode there , about 11 of the clock at night , come drive down other 3 great raft burn with the huge fire that i have see . Theise be exceed dangerous , for when our man approach they think to clap their grapnel upon they , as they have do upon the caravel the night before , they be prevent : for there stook out of the raft many pole which keep they from the body of the raft , that they can not come to throw their grapnel into they : and yet they have this inconvenience worse than all the rest which most trouble we . there stook out among the pole certain hollow trunk fill with such provision of firework that they cease not still ( as the fire come down to those trunk to set they on fire ) to spout out such sparkle , that our boat have powder in they for our man use , dare not for fear of tire themselves with their own powder come near those sparkle of the raft , but see they to drive near and near our ship , they wet certain clothes and lay upon their flask and bandeler and so venture upon they , and with 58 their grapnel take hold of they , and so tow they on ground , where they stook fast and be not burn out the next day in the morning . diverse log and timber come drive along by our ship , and burn , but with our boat we easy defend they . and thus ( God be praise ) we escape the second fire . a three fire be prepare , as a negro give we to understand , but this we prevent by our departure . for this three fire be very great preparation ; and we be credible inform of certainty , that this fire shall be such as we shall never be able to prevent , and assure these fire be dangerous thing and not to be prevent upon the sudden , unless it be afore prepare for and foresee . for when it come upon the sudden and unlooked for , and unprovide for , it bring man into a great amazement and at their wit end . and therefore let all man ride in river in their enemy country be sure to look to be provide before hand , for against fire there be no resistance without preparation . also it be a practice in these hot country , where there be such expert swimmer , to cut the cable of ship : and one night it be practise to cut the admiral cable , and yet the boat ride by the cable with two man in she to watch all the night , and the bwoy only be cut , but not the cable : but after that night , see then our good watch , they never after attempt it . while all these thing pass , our ship ( God be thank ) through the industry of our governor , and diligent labour of our man , begin to be whole lade , and all the best merchandise convey aboard our ship , so that our admiral mean to depart that night , which be the 31 day after our entrance , or else on the next day at the far , and so warn be give to all man to make themselves ready . our admiral be aboard his ship you same morning , espy in the sand right against the place where the ship ride , that there be a small bank of sand new cast up , under which he perceive now and then some people to be : present he take his 59 A . D . I595 « [ he - 7i4 - ] boat and go to the town and call all the captain together , declare that the enemy be about some pretence right against the ship , consult whether it be best to sally out and see what they be do , or depart that evening accord to the former determination . the admiral be of opinion to depart that night , say it be but folly to seek war since we have no need to do it : other affirm , it be good to see what they do , lest the wind may be contrary and the ship not get out , and so our enemy may build upon we to our great disadvantage . well , say the admiral , the matter be not great , for there can be no danger in this sally , for where they work it be within falkonshot of the ship , and if any power shall come against you , the ship may play upon they with 40 piece of ordinance at the least , so that a bird can pass there but she must be slay . i be somewhat unwilling you shall go , for i have not be well these two day , and i be not strong to march upon those heavy sand : they answer all at once , you shall not need to trouble your self for this service , for you see it be nothing and of no danger , be so near the ship , doubt you not we will accomplish this service well enough , and return again within this hour . the admiral answer : the danger can be great , but yet you shall go out strong for fear of the worst . and so the admiral marshal they 275 man French and english , which be under the conduct of Edmund Barker , captain Barker of Plymouth , vice - admiral to captain Venner , captain Addy , and the three french captain all go out together , and they be to march upon a narrow piece of ground to the place whether they be send unto : in the brode part betwixt the sea and the water on the other side , it be not above a stone cast , for it be a bank of sand lie between the river and the sea , so they need not to fear any come on their back or on their side , and before they can not man come , but he must pass by all the ship which no company of man be able to do without present death . the admiral command they at their departure to go no further than the place he send they to , and so he himself go aboard the ship and make ready all the ordinance for fear of the worst , not know what may ensue , although he see no danger may follow . thus we march quiet till we come to the place we be send unto , be right over against the ship : out of which place come some dozen shot , which see we come , discharge and run their way with such as be work within the say platform . so that we come into it and perceive they have begin to lay plank to plant ordinance upon . our admiral command , if there be any such thing , to burn the plank and return in again , which we may have do without hurt of any man finger : but our leader be not content to have perform the service commit they in charge , but will needs express and against their order march on further to fight with certain ensign almost a mile off - , clean out of the reach of the ordinance of all our ship , and where lie the strength of the whole country . when our man begin to draw near those ensign of man , the ensign seem to retire with great speed , which our man follow with such great haste that some outrunning other some , our order be break , and those ensign retire themselves into the force of the whole country , so that our foremost man be in the midst of their enemy year they be aware , which be slay year the rest can come to succour [ three . 715 . ] they . the enemy encourage by this , come also upon the rest , which present begin to retire , and the enemy follow they till they come within the reach of the ordinance of our ship , where they be beat off and leave their pursuit . in this conflict be slay captain Barker captain of the Salomon , captain Cotton the admiral lieutenant , captain John Noyer a french captain of diepe , and another french captain of rochel , with m . John Barker and other to the number of 35 : for these be the foremost and hot in the pursuit of the ensign aforesaid , and by their forwardness come all to perish . at our return into the town the admiral come to we much bewail the death of so many good man as be lose , wonder what we mean to pass the express order that be give we . with this loss our man be much daunt , but our admiral begin again to encourage they , declare that the fortune of the war be sometime to win and sometime to loose . and therewithal ! he wish every man to prepare and make himself ready : for that night ( God will ) he will depart . for all our ship be ready and lade , and he will not stay any further fortune . the evening be come , the ship begin to weigh and go forth of the harbour , and God be thank of his goodness towards we who send we a fair wind to go forth withal , so that by two of the clock in the night we be all forth in safety . the enemy perceive our depart , plant a piece or two of ordinance , and shoot at we in the night , but do we no harm . we be at our come forth 15 sail , that be , 3 sail of Hollander , the one of 450 ton , the other of 350 ton , and the three of 300 ton , four sail of french and one ship which the admiral give the french captain , 3 sail of captain venner fleet of Plymouth , and 4 sail of our admiral fleet , all these be lade with marchan dize , and that of good worth . we stay in this harbour to pass all this business but only 31 day , and in this time we be occupy with skirmish and attempt of the enemy 11 . time ; in all which skirmish we have the better , only this last except . to God be the honour and praise of all , etc the whole fleet be out in safety , the next day in the morning the admiral give order to the whole Peranjeu 40 . fleet to sail towards peranjew a harbour lie some 40 league to the northward of Fernambucke , and there Fernambuck . to take in fresh water and to refresh themselves : and 62 to make provision for refresh , our admiral have send thither some 6 day before two french man in a small pinnace , which Frenchmen he have provide from diepe before his come out of England for that purpose . for both these two speak the Indian language very perfect : for at this port of peranjew and a other call Potaju some 6 league to the northward the Frenchman have have trade for brasil - wood , and have lade from thence by the Indian mean , who have fetch it for they some 20 league into the country upon their back , 3 or 4 ship every year . thus we all sail towards peranjew , at which place we arrive in the night , so that we be force to lie off and on with a stiff gale of wind , in which we lose the most part of our fleet , and they not know this coast put off to the sea , and so go direct for England . our admiral and some 4 sail more with he put into the harbour of peranjew , and there water and refresh himself very well , with hen , cony , hare and potatos , with other thing , which the two Frenchman have partly provide before his come : this be a very good harbour where Peranjeu a ship may ride and refresh very well . but , as i be give to understand since our come from thence , ’ the Portugal have attempt the place and do inhabit it , and have put the french from their accustom trade . here have water and refresh our self , we put to the sea , ply after the rest of our fleet which be go before , which we never hear of till our arrival in England at the down in the month of July , where we understand the rest of our consort to be pass up for London , captain Venner and his fleet to be at Plymouth , and the french ship to be safe arrive at diepe , which to we be very great comfort . at our set sail from the down , accord as the custom be , find the queen ship there , we salute they with certain ordinance . the gunner be careless , as they be many time of their powder , in discharge certain piece in you gunner room , set a barrel of powder on fire , which take fire in you gunner room , blow up the admiral caben , slay the gunner with 2 other outright , and hurt 20 more , of which 4 or 5 die . this powder make such a smoke in the ship with the fire that burn in the gunner room among all the fire work , that no man at the first wit what to do : but recall back their fear , they begin to cast water into the gunner room in such abundance ( for the queen ship now and also the other ship that be in our company come present to our help ) that ( God be praise ) we put out the fire and save all , and no great harm be do to the good . by this may be see that there be no sure safety of thing in this world . for now we make account to be out of all danger , where behold a great come upon we , than we suffer all the whole voyage . but the almighty be praise for ever , which deliver we out of this and many other in this voyage . our fire be well put out , and we take in fresh man ( God be praise ) we come to black - wall in safety . [ Iii . 716 . ] the king of Spain resolution to proceed in the discovery in conquest of Rio Grande .