the well govern and prosperous voyage of m . James Lancaster , begin with three ship and a galley - frigat from London in October 1594 , and intend for Fernambuck , the port - town of Olinda in Brasil . in which voyage ( beside the take of nine and twenty ship and frigate ) he surprise the say port - town , be strong fortify and man ; and hold possession thereof thirty day together ( notwithstanding many bold assault of the enemy both by land and water ) and also provident defeat their dangerous and almost inevitable firework . here he find the cargazon or freight of a rich east Indian carrack ; which together with great abundance of sugar , brasil - wood , and cotton he bring from thence ; lade therewith fifteen sail of tall ship and bark . n September 1594 the worshipful m . John wat , aiderman , m . Paul Banning , aiderman , and other of worship in the city of London , victual three good ship ; to wit , the consent , of the burden of 240 ton or thereabouts , the Salomon , of 170 ton , and the virgin , of 60 ton : and appoint for commander in this voyage , m . James Lancaster of London , 43 a ship with 80 ton of wine take . another prize with 40 tun of wine take . the english voyage gentleman , admiral of the fleet , m . Edmund Barker of London , viceadmiral , and m . John aude of Poplar near London , rearadmiral , have in their say ship to the number of 275 man and boy .. be full furnish with all needful provision , we depart from Blackwall in October follow , keep our own coast , until we come into the west country , where we meet with such gust and storm , that the Salomon spend her mast at the range of Dartmouth , put into harbour ; but by the earnest care and industry of the generail and other have charge , she be short again provide . which do , have a pleasant gale for our purpose , we put forth from Dartmouth the last of November follow . but contrary to our expectation , not fifty league from our own coast , we lose the Salomon and the virgin , by a storm of contrary wind that fall upon we : yet be alone , in hope to meet they about the canary or cape blank , we keep on our course to the canary , but can hear no tiding of our consort ; which great grieve we . Thence we go , bear for the isle of tenerif , where in the morning early we have sight of a sail , which be becalm under the shore , be tow with their boat a head , have one other at her stern . for this sail we man our boat , appoint our man well for fight , if need shall require . the Spaniard see our boat come , enter they , and leave the ship , seek to save themselves by flight : but our man pursue they so fast , that they board they , and bring they with their ship to our general . this ship be lade with 80 ton of canary - wine , which come not unto we before it be welcome . we keep and man it , ply that day , and the next night thereabouts . the very next morning we have sight of one other ; to who in like manner we send our boat : but their gunner make a shot at she , and strike off a proper young man arm ; yet we inforce she to yield , and find 40 ton of wine in she . the Spaniard have their free passage , and a acquittance for the delivery of their wine , be all set on shore upon tenerif , make a quick return of their long voyage intend into the west Indies . hence we depart towards cape blank ; and before we come thither , we meet again with the virgin our rear - admiral , who man tell we for very truth , that the Salomon be return for England : enforce so to do , by spend her mast the second time . which when our man understand , they be all in a maze , not know [ in . 709 . ] what to do , and say among themselves that their force be but small when all our strength be together , and now we have lose the one half of our strength , we be not able to perform the voyage : and therefore some of they come to the captain , ask he what he will now do , see the Salomon be lose , the one half of our strength , give he counsel ! to bear up for the west Indies , and prove there to make his voyage , because his first plat for want of strength be clean overthrow . the captain hear this new novelty , as not unacquainted with the variable pretence of mariner , make they this answer : sir , i make know to you all at my come out of England what i pretend , and that i mean to go for Fernambuck , and although at the present we want one of our ship , yet ( God will ) i mean to go forward , not doubt but to meet she at the appoint place , which be either at cape blank or the island of cape Verde : for i be assure that m . Barker the captain be so resolute to perform this voyage , that his mast be repair , he will not fail to meet we , and it be no wisdom for we to divert our course , till we have seek he at those place where our appoint meeting be : for the divert of course be the overthrow of most of our action . and i hope you will be all content herewith : for to go any other course than i have determine , ( by God help ) i will not be draw unto . with these reason and many other show , they rest all satisfy : and at our come to cape Blank ( God be praise ) we four in twenty sail of ship y of caravel take by the Salomon . Maio . a gally - frigat carry out of England in piece . the gally - frigat set up . the english voyage meet with the Salomon with no small joy to we all ; and there she have take of Spaniards and Portugal 24 sail of ship and caravel , fisherman , and have take out of they such necessary as she have need of . of these ship our captain take four along with he , with another that he have take himself , mean to employ they as occasion shall serve . at this place he understand of one of the pilot of those ship , that one of the carrack that come out of the east Indies , be cast away in the road of Fernambuc , and that all her good be lay upon the arrazife which be the low town . of these news we be all glad , and rejoice much ; for our hope be very good , see such a booty before we . of this good company and happy success we be all joyful , and have great hope of the blessing of God in performance of our intend voyage , and so after some parley and make frolic for joy of our meeting one with the other ( praise God for all ) we ply for Maio : where come to anchor , our general 8c the rest of the captain go ashore to view the place where we may in best safety set our gally - frigat together ; which frame we bring from England of purpose to land man in the country of Brasil . here we discharge our great prize of wine , and set she on fire : but before our come thither , you shall understand we have sight of four sail , which be captain Venner in his ship the Peregrine , and a proper biskaine which he take at cape blank , the welcome of Plymmouth 8c her pinnace : all which stand with we . but they see our flag , not expect such good fellow as we , do bear from we all they may ; which our people take very unkind , that be all friend they will neither inquire , nor tell we any news of our friend , but without make any show of kindness will so depart . as before i have say , the choice be make for the place to build the gally - frigat , ashore it be bring , where the carpenter apply their work , still cheer unto it by the general good gift bestow among they , and kind usage of the rest of the commander , not without great care of the captain for the safety of they all , by keep good watch : yet one negligent fellow , ’ which have no knowledge of the country , stray from his company , be by the Portugal take , and very kind use , and bring again unto we : for which good the general reward they well with gift very acceptable , which they take as kind . while we be thus busy employ about the foresay galley , we descry at sea four sail , which we have good hope will have prove Indies man , or some to have bring we what we look for : but they prove captain Venner with his fleet , as aforesaid , who , see we at anchor , anchor also ; where spend some time , and be acquaint with our general determination for land , consort with we , and their bill , accord to the manner of the sea , be make and sign on either part , we to have three part , and he the four , of all that shall be take , whereby our strength be increase , to all our comfort . three week or thereabouts we stay in this place before the gay be finish ; which do , put man into she , and fit she with oar , have fourteen bank on a side , a mast and sail , the commandment of she be commit unto m . wat , a honest skilful mariner . from thence we put again to sea , and go for the isle Brava , where we water : which do , we make no long stay after , but bend our course as direct as we can for the place , make our first fall with the land to the southward of cape S . Augustine ; from whence cape S . we ply still to our desire port of Fernambuck , and do so much , that about midnight we come before the 7 ^ 29 “ of harbour ; where some ply up and down , hold that march . the best policy , to forbear the enter till day may give they light , the harbour be hard , and therefore the more perilous . our ship be in safety well [ three . 710 . ] arrive , God be praise : and the generail in his boat go from ship to ship , will they to make ready such man as they can spare , with musket , pike , bill , bow , arrow , and what weapon they have to follow he . himself , with 80 man from his own ship , embark himself in the gay , which carry in her prow a good sacar , and two murder piece . our admiral spend all the night in give direction to every ship to have their man ready ship in their boat , for he intend to enter the harbour at the break of day , and to leave his ship without , till he have get the fort and the town : for he will not adventure the ship in , till the harbour be get . also he provide five ship , which he bring from cape blank , and put man in they as many as can convenient sail they , and no more , give they charge to enter the harbour with his boat : for at the entrance of the harbour ride three great holland ship , which our admiral doubt will impeach his go in ; and therefore he give order to the man of these five small ship , which be not above 60 ton a piece , if the Hollander do offer any resistance , to run aboard of they , and to set their own ship on fire , and escape in their boat , which they have for the same purpose , that by this mean they may not impeach our entrance . but when the morning be come , we be fall above half a mile down to the northward , below the harbour , which be a great inconvenience unto we : so that before we can get up again , the ebb be come upon we , and thereby we be force to hover before the harbour till two of the clock in the afternoon , in the sight of all the town . in this mean time , our ship ride before the fort without the harbour , about a demy - colvering shot off : in the which time pass many shot between the fort and the ship , and especial between the admiral ship and they : but no great harm be do on either part . all this while our admiral keep the man ready hover in the gay and the boat . the Hollander that ride in the mouth of the harbour , see our resolution , lay out haulser , and wound themselves out of the way of we . our admiral be very joyful , and give great encouragement to all his man : for , to pass these three great Hollander , he hold it the great danger of all . about 12 of the clock the governor of the town send a Portugal aboard the admiral ship , to know what he will have , and wherefore he come . he return he this answer : that he want the carrack good , and for they he come , and they he will have , and that he shall short see . in this process of time , the townsman and inhabitant which see so much ship , and perceive we to be enemy , gather themselves together , three or four ensign of man , esteem to the number of some six hundred at the least . Theise come to the fort or platform lie over against the entry of the harbour , and there attend our land : but before our admiral set forward with his boat , he give express order to all that have charge of govern the boat or galley , to run they with such violence against the shore , that they shall be all cast away without recovery , and not one man to stay in they , whereby our man may have no manner of retreat to trust unto , but only to God and their weapon . now be the time come of the flood , be about two of the clock in the afternoon , when our admiral set forward , and enter the harbour with the small galley , and all the rest of the boat follow he , the Hollander that ride in the mouth of the harbour , nothing impeach he : but now the fort begin to play with their ordinance upon the galley and the boat ; and one of their shot take away a great piece of our ensign out of the galley . but our sail be set , it be no time for we to make any stay , but with all the force we can we run the galley upon the shore right under the fort , within a coit cast of it , with such violence , that we break she back ; and she sink present : for there where we land , go a breach xi 49 penny of the sea , which present cast she away . the boat come after do the like . at our arrival , those in the fort have lade all their ordinance , be seven piece of brass , to discharge they upon we at our land ; which indeed they do : for our admiral leap into the water , all the rest follow he , off come these piece of ordinance : but almighty God be praise , they in the fort , with fear to see we land in their face , have pike their ordinance so steep downward with their mouth , that they shoot all their shot in the sand , although , as i say before , it be not above a coit cast at the most between the place we land and the face of the fort : so that they only shoot off one of our man arm , without do any moor hurt ; which be to we a great blessing of God : for if those