ordinance have be well level , a great number of we have lose our life at that instant . our admiral see this , cry out , encourage his man , upon they , upon they ; all ( by God help ) be we : and they therewith run to the fort with all violence . those four ensign of man that be set to defend our land , see this resolution , begin to go back , and retire into certain bush that be by the same fort ; and be follow , flee through a certain oaze which be dry , be then but the fin of the beginning of the tide : and so abandon the fort , Fernambuck and leave it with their ordinance to we . this day of take . our be ; va ] ] be their Good - friday , when by custom [ three . 711 . ] they usual whip themselves : but God send we now for a general scourge to they all , whereby that labour among they may be well spare . the fort be take with all their ordinance , the admiral wave to the ship , will they to weigh and come in ; which they do with all speed , himself take order in leave certain man in keep the say fort , and place the ordinance towards the high town , from whence he suspect the great danger ; and put his man in order , march towards the low town , which be about some fourteen score from the fort : in which town lie all their merchandise and other good . approach to the town , he enter the same , the people embarking themselves in caravel and boat , with all the expedition they can . the base town , of above a hundred house , be thus take , we find in it great store of merchandize of all sort : as brasil - wood , sugar , calico - cloth , pepper , cynamon , clove , maze , nutmeg , with diverse other good thing , to the great comfort of we all . the admiral go up and down the town , and place at the south end of the same captain Venner and his company , himself and his company in the midst of the town , and captain Barker and captain Addy at the other end of the town , give great charge , that no man upon pain of great punishment and loss of his share , shall break up or enter into any warehouse , without order and direction from the admiral . and this commandment be as well keep as ever any be keep , where so great spoil and booty be find : for it be not know in all the time of our be there , that any disorder be commit , or any lodge or warehouse break open , or any spoil be make , or pillage of any thing ; which be a note much to be observe in such a action : for common mariner and soldier be much give to pillage and spoil , make great account of the same then of their share . order be put in all thing , we keep a very sure watch this first night , and the morning be come , our admiral and captain Venner , with the rest of the captain , go about the town , and give order for the fortify of it with all expedition : so that within two day it be surround with post and plank , all that part of the town next the main land , at least nine foot high ; for ( God be thank ) we find provision in the town , sufficient store for it . now it be to be understand , that this town be environ on the one part by the sea , and on the backside by a river that run behind it ; so that to come to it by land , you must enter it by a small narrow passage not above forty pace over at a high water . at this passage we build a fort , and plant in it five piece of ordinance , which we take out of the first fort we win at our come into the harbour . now we have the town in possession , our admiral send for the Hollander by his chyrurgian , which have be bring up in that country , a man know their condition , and sober and discreet of his own carriage . at his first come aboard of they , they seem to stand upon their own guard and defence , for they be three great and strong ship : but he use himself so , that they at the last will he to come into the great of their ship , which be above 450 ton . than he declare to they our intent of come thither , and that they shall be there as sure from any show of violence or injury offer they , as if they be in their own house , and if they shall think so good , his admiral will fraught they for England , if they will be content with fraught reasonable , and as they shall agree , and it shall be at their own choice whether to go or not , he will not force they , unless it be to their benefit and good like . although this people be somewhat stubborn at the first , as that nation be in these cause , yet be satisfy with good word and good deal they come aland , and after conference have with the admiral , they be so satisfy , that they go through with a fraught : and then we join with they , and they with we , and they serve we as true and as faithful as our own people do , both at watch and ward , by sea and all other service . within two day after our come in , about midnight , a great number of Portugal and Indian with they , come down upon we with a very great cry and noise ; but God be thank , we be ready for they : for our admiral suppose some such assault , have provide all our musket with hailshot , which do so gall both the Indian and the Portugal , that they make they present retreat . and this be to be note , that there 1595 - was both the horse and his rider slay both with one of these shot . our man follow they some five or six score , but no further . we lose in this conflict but only one man , but have diverse hurt . what be lose of their part , we can not tell , for they have before day , after our retreat , carry away all their dead . within three or four day after our come in appear before the harbour 3 ship and 2 pinnace , the pinnace be somewhat near , descry our flag , and one of they come in , which be a french pinnace , declare all the rest to be french bottom ; which our admiral will shall come in : and so they do . Theise be Frenchmen of war , and come thither for purchase . the captain come aland , and be welcome ; among who be one captain John Noyer of diepe , that the year before have take in our admiral at the hand of Mona in the west Indies , where his ship be cast away , come out of the east Indies . to this man our admiral offer great kindness , and perform it , and be not ungrateful for his former [ three . 712 . ] benefit show unto he . this captain desire of our admiral to bestow upon he his ship lade of fernambuc - wood , which fie grant he , and also his pinnace , and more , give he a caravel of about 50 tun , and bid he lade she with wood also ; which with other benefit he grateful receive . to the other two captain he grant their lading of wood , the one captain be of diepe , the other of rochel . the captain of diepe confess that he meet Abraham Cocke Abraham certain month before , and be distress for want of Goeke g / nng water , give he some , and go with he to a water ojpiate , meet place where he have water enough , and so depart from mthall he , say that his man be very weak . the come in of these ship do much strengthen we ; for our admiral appoint both these french and the Fleming to keep watch upon the river by night with their boat , every boat have in her 12 man at the least , and the boat well provide . this be for fear of fire ship or bark to come down , which our admiral have great care unto , and cause our ship to ride by cable and haulser , at all advantage to shun they , if by that mean they shall attempt to put we out of the harbour ; give commandment to we that watch in the town , that what fire soever we shall espy or see , not one man to start from his watch or quarter , unless we be by himself command to the contrary . now this order put in all thing , and have view all the good in the town , and think our self sufficient fortify , we begin to unlade our ship , which come as full lade in as they go forth , but not with so good merchandise . and this order be take about the unlade of they , and also the lade of good out of the town : our man be divide into half , and the one half wrought one day , and the other half the other day ; always those that wrought not keep the watch with their furniture in their hand and about they , and none step far off or wander from his colour , and those that wrought have all their weapon in good order set and place by they , so that at a instant every one know where to go to his furniture : and this be very careful look unto . the three day after our come in , come down from the high town , which may be about four mile off upon a hill , three or four of the principali gentleman of the country , and say that from the bishop , themselves , and the rest , they will have some conference with our admiral . this news be bring to the admiral , he hang down his head for a small season ; and when he have muse a while , he answer , i must go aboard of the Fleming upon business that import i , and therefore let they stay if they will : and so he go and sit there with the Fleming from nine of the clock till two at the afternoon . in this space diverse messenger go to the admiral , to come away , for these gentleman stay . to who he give 54 this answer : be they not go yet ? and about two of the clock he come aland , and then they tell he they be depart . many of the better sort of our man marvel , and think much , because he will not vouchsafe to come and have conference with such man of account as they seem to be . but the admiral make they this answer , sir , i have be bring up among this people , i have live among they as a gentleman , serve with they as a soldier , and live among they as a merchant , so that i shall have some understanding of their demeanour and nature ; and i know when they can prevail with the sword by force , than they deal with their deceivable tongue ; for faith and truth they have none , neither will use any , unless it be to their own advantage . and this i give you warning , that if you give they parley , they will betray we ; and for my part , of all nation in the world , it will grieve i most to be overtake by this nation and the Spaniard : and i be glad it be my fortune to pay they with one of their own fetch , for i warrant you they understand i better than you think they do . and with this i pray you be satisfy ; i hope it be for all our good : for what shall we gain by parley , when ( by the help of God ) we have get already that we come for , shall we venture that we have get with our sword , to see if they can take it from we by word and policy ? there be no wisdom in so do . you know what it have cost we , and how many man lie wound that be not yet hole of this other night hurt : and therefore from henceforth i give this commission , that if any be take , he be send away with this order , although he come as a friend , that if either he or any other approach we from henceforth , he shall | be hang out of hand : and other course then this i will not take with they . which course be follow , for within 3 or 4 day after it be perform by two take in the night : and after that we be never trouble with spy ; and although diverse slave come run from their man to we , by which we understand much of their work and pretence , yet the admiral will entertain few of they . in this mean time that we begin to work , the Portugal with the country people be not idle , for see we so busy , about six night after our come in , they privy in the night cast up a trench in the sand about a sacar shoot from our ship , mind there to plant ordinance , which will have offend our ship great ; and they will not have be able to have ride there to take in their lade , which now begin to go aboard of they . the admiral hear - [ three . 713 . ] ing this , about 3 of the clock in ; then after noon marshal our man , and he and all the rest of the captain march towards they . the Portugal and Indian perceive our come , begin to withdraw themselves within the trench , mean ( as it shall appear ) to fight it out there : but we make no stand , neither do it behove we , but present approach the trench with our musket and pike , afore their trench be thorough finish : so that by god help we enter they . and the Portugal and Indian leave the place , and leave unto we 4 good piece of brass ordinance , with powder and shot and diverse other necessary , and among the rest 5 small cart of that country , which to we be more worth than all the rest we take , for the lade of our good from the town to the water side : for without they we can not have tell what to have do , much of our good being so heavy , that without cart , we be not able to weyld they : all these thing we bring away and destroy all those platform that they have make , and then we have rest with they for certain day , in which we go forward , divide our merchandise with captain Venner accord to our consort , and go daily lade they aboard , every ship company accord as their turn fall out , but only the three dutch ship : for the good be put into their boat their own company jade themselves . and this far good chance or blessing of God we have to help we , that assoon as we have take our cart , the next morning come in a ship with some 60 negro , io PortugaU woman , and 40 Portugal : the woman and the negro we turn out of the town , but the Portugal our admiral keep to draw the cart when they be lade , which to we be a very great ease . for the country be very hot and ill for our nation to take any great travel in . in this town there be no fresh water to be have , and therefore we be every 5 or 6 day compel to pass over the river into the main land to get fresh water , which after the first or second time the Portugal keep and will have defend our water , so that we be drive to water of force , and at several time some of our man be hurt , and only two or three slay , and with this danger we be force to get our water . and as they molest we in our water