go in the time of the southeast wind , which be from march forward , i advise thou that thou fall not in more degree than sixteen and a half , because of the sholde call os baixos do Abrolhos , which be very dangerous , and stretch very far into the sea . and also go west from they , that thou keep thy lead go and be often sound . and if thou chance to see the land , and a high hill and long withal , much like to the pike , it be the hill that be call Monte Pasqual . and from thence thou must go to the north , and when thou have bring it southwest of thou , than thou may bear with the land , but with great care to look about thou . mark when thou see the land and come to see a red cliff , then look to the southward , and thou shall see a great smooth coast along the sea , and then on the north side thou shall descry porto seguro . And go along the coast thou shall see the town of porto seguro stand upon the top of a hill ; which hill be a white rock : and on the north side of the say rock there be a very high land . i advise thou that when thou be east and west with the say land , i mean with this rock , that than thou look to the northward , and 79 to avoid os baixos do Abrolhos . Monte Pasqual . [ Iii . 722 . ] the place of thou shall see certain rock lie two league off into r a th ® sea > whereon the sea do break , and to the south - ptrto seguro , ward of they thou may come to a anchor against which stand the town , and haste a good place to ride in thirteen in 16 deg . and fathom in sight of the town . one three . and if it be thy chance to arrive in the time of the north - east wind , and come in the height of fifteen degree and two three part , and see not certain hill , 16 degree . than thou must go along the coast be in 16 degree , and under the first high land that thou shall descry , thou a dangerous shall see certain sandy bay along the sea coast : and if rwer in 16 thou have sight of a river in this height , put not thy self saint ' into it , neither bear with the land , for it have many sholde . and off they lie certain sink ground , Baixos de call os Baixos de Santo Antonio . and from hence Santo Antonio . to southward lie porto seguro . i advise thou that go along the coast to the southward , and see such sholde , and the sea to break upon they , as the other which i last speak of , thou shall run along they a sea board of they : and when thou be at the end of they , than the town will bear west of thou : and than thou may go to thy anchoring place as be abovesaid , give these shold a good birth . the course to the haven name Baia do Spirito Santo , that be to say , the bay of the holy ghost , lie on the say coast of Brasil , and the mark thereof . how shall understand that the ship go for Spirito Santo , when it double the sholde os Baixos that have do monzmn be certain set wind with which the tide set . Abrolhos , and have bring it self in 20 or 19 degree and a half , than it may hall with the land in 18 or 19 degree and a half , and in twenty . and the say ship must go in this height , because on this coast there be no monzoin . if thou chance to come in the height of 19 degree market on they and see low land to the northwest off thou , than north s , e thou be on the north side of Spirito Santo , and thou SPmt ° ant0 ‘ may make account that it be the land lie over criquare , and over the river call Rio dolce , that be the river of sweet or fresh water . if thou come along the land thou shall find certain high hill : but trust not the first that thou see only . for beside the rest thou shall see a round high hill which be at the cape end , which be call la Sierra de mestre Alvero . take heed that the situation go for this land thou look to the north and thou shall see a river call Rio do Reyes Magos : that be , Aharo . the river of the three king . And come to the Rio do Reyes southward thou shall see present the mouth of the bay to open . at the end of this hill on the south side , thou have a point of a rock , which be call a punta do tubaron . and on the south side of the bay it have two or three black high hill , and in the midst of the bay thou shall go in westward . i advise thou that in go in thou take heed of a shall which lie in the mouth of the bay : thou must leave it to the southward of thou , and then ply to double a certain island which lie within , and thou must leave it to the northward of thou : and when it bear on the north or Northeast , thou may come to a anchor : for all be clean ground . and if thou chance to come by this course , and fall in 20 degree , and see many hill , and one among the rest very high and craggy : it be call a Sierra de Guari - sierra de parim , that be , the hill of guaraparim , and see another inzo ^ degrees hill on the north side , which be call a Sierra de Pero a Sierra de cam : both these lie on the south side of Spirito Santo . Pero Cam . and from these hill thou shall see a little hill name guaipel . and when thou see these hill , thou shall see three little island together , lie to the southward : and then from these thou shall see another rocky , bare , and round island : and to the land off this island thou shall see a great bay . if thou will thou may anchor xi 81 f here safe . and if thou will go in , thou shall bring thy self east and west with the hill , and so thou may go in . and thou shall leave a low land to the north a ilha de of thou , which be call at ilha de Repouso , that be , the Repouso . isle open rest . anj thjs jsje jietaiong the coast : and thou may be bold to ride betwixt it and the main , give it a breadth off . from these three island to Spirito Santo be 12 SpiritoSanta league : and run northwards to come to Spirito stand in 20 gantoj thou shall see another island , and shall go a sea - egrees . board of it , and by and by the mouth of the bay will open towards thou . and this bay stand in 20 degree . [ Iii . 723 . ] the course from the bay de Spirito Santo to the bay of saint Vincent , and the mark thereof . also the course from saint Vincent to the river of plate . Baia de Salvador 12 league north from Cabo frio . two small island . the height of cape Frio in 23 degree . Rio de jenero . Ailing from Spirito Santo for saint Vincent , thou may go along the coast , keep seven or eight league off , and must go to seek Cabo Frio , that be , the cold cape . and as thou come towards Cabo Frio , thou have a very great bay call Bahia de Salvador , that be , the bay of our saviour . and from thence thou have twelve league to Cabo Frio . and before thou come to Cabo Frio , thou have two small island . thou may go safe either a sea board of they , or else between they . thou shall understand that Cabo Frio have as it be a island in the midst of the face or show thereof , that do cut off the cape . thou may ride safe on the west side thereof ; for all be clean ground . understand that Cabo Frio stand in 23 degree : and from it to Rio de Jenero be twelve league . and this river of Jenero have in the mouth thereof 3 or 4 island . and if thou will go into this river de jenero , thou 82 may well go in between two island which stand in the entrance of the river on the south side : near unto this river there be a great hill seem to be a man with long hair . and take this for advise , that if thou be in the height of this river , thou shall see certain high hill within the land , which be like unto organ . and when thou see these organ , then make account thou be right against the river : and come near the land thou shall see a certain island very round , which lie to the southward , and be high and bare in the top . thou must know that the mouth of this river stand in 23 degree and one three part . and from this river to Angra , that be to say , the open haven , thou have 15 league . go not near the land there , except necessity compel thou . i advise thou , that from this river that i speak of , i mean from the entrance thereof , thou must go westsouthwest , and Southwest , and west and by south . and thou shall see a great island call Isla de San Sebastiano , and to the southward thereof another small island very high , call the island of Alcatrarzas , that be to say , the island of pelican : but come not near it , for it have dangerous shoald . and from hence thou may go west , and so thou shall fall right with the mouth of saint Vincent , and thou shall see a island . and if thou mean to go into saint Vincent thou must leave this island to the westward . and understand that saint Vincent lie in four and twenty degree . and when thou be in the mouth of this bay , or art near the mouth of it , than thou shall see many other island , and one among the rest to the seaward . and have these sight , thou have the best mark that be for these island , that i have tell thou of : and this island lie northwest and southeast with the mouth of saint Vincent . the situation of a hill like a man with long hair by Jenero . the organ certain high hill . Angra . a llha de san Sebastiano .. the isle of Alcatrarzas . saint Vincent in 24 degree . many island about you mouth of . Vincent , y one out to the seaward . 83 [ the course Porto de pato . Porto de don Roderigo . Laguna . Rio de Martin de Sousa . Cananea . Rio de San Francisco . the course from saint Vincent to the river of plate . Rome S . Vincent to Cananea thou have 40 league : and the coast lie north - east and by east , and Southwest and by west . from Cananea to the river of saint Francisco be fifteen league , and the coast lie north - east and Southwest . there be a little island , which have as it be two bay , and a good road , and be in 26 degree and a quarter , and towards the main it be high and craggy . from San Francisco to Boca de Overniron be 26 league , and the coast lie north and south . also thou must mark that the river of San Francisco have a great entrance , and 3 small island , and to seaward it have a good road ; and the main be high and craggy . from this Boca the overniron to ilha de Arvoredo thou have no great mark be observe : but this Boca be a very great bay , and this bay be deep within the island , and be a good road , and have many island , and stand in 28 degree . and to the north of this island under the point there be a good road : and there be no other road hereabout but this , and it be under the island . from hence thou shall have sight of the isle call Santa Catharina , which be a great island about eight or nine league long , and lie north and south . and hard by even with this hand be porto de pato , which stand in 29 degree . and from porto de pato to Porto de don Roderigo be ten or eleven league : and the coast lie north and south . and from porto de don Roderigo to Laguna be 5 league . and this be a good harbour for all wind , except the north - east wind . from the Laguna to the river call Rio de Martin de Sousa be 42 league . and the coast be something 84 high , and lie north - east and by north , and Southwest and by south : and it have a island 2 league into the sea , pn 72 + j where ship may ride well . and from the river of Martin de Sousa to Rio de San Pedro be 52 league , Rio de S . and the coast lie north - east and Southwest . Pedro from this river of San Pedro there lie a point of sand a good league off and more , and it lie on the southwest side of the port . and from thence to Cabo Caio de santa de santa Maria be 42 league : and the coast lie Maria . Northeast and Southwest , and all be low land . also on the southeast side of Cabo de Santa Maria there lie a isle two league off into the sea , and it have a good harbour betwixt it and the main . and note that the main be low land . the cape of Santa Maria stand in 35 degree , and at the point thereof it have a island a league into the sea .