a extract out of the discourse of one Lopez Vaz a Portugal , touch the fight of m . Fenton with the spanish ship , with a report of the proceed of m . John drake after his depart from he to the river of plate . five ship of this fleet cast away on the coast of Spain . [ he . 727 - ] Pon the relation of Pedro Sarmiento concern the streit of Magellan , that they may be fortify , and for that the king hear , that there be ship in England prepare for the same streit , he command Diego flores de Valdes a noble man of Spain , to pass thither with 23 ship , and 3500 man to stop the passage of the Englishman . there go in this fleet the governor of Chili , with 500 old soldier that come out of Flanders : but this be the unhappy fleet of ship that ever go out of Spain : for before they come from the coast of Spain a storm take they , and cast away five of the fleet and in they above 800 man , and the 92 rest come into Cadiz . but the king send they word that they shall proceed : and so there go out on the voyage 16 of the ship , for two more of their fleet be much spoil by the storm which they have . in these sixteen ship Pedro Sarmiento be send to be governor in the strait , and have assign unto he 500 man to stay there with he , and he carry with he all kind of artificer to make he fort , and other necessary , with great store of ordinance and other munition . this fleet because it be late , do winter on the this fleet coast of Brasil , in the river of Jenero : and from thence they go when the winter be pass , and about the jen ’ er ^ r ° J height of 42 degree they have a sudden storm , so that Diego Flores beat it up and down 22 day , in which time he lose one of the best ship he have , which have in her 300 man and 20 woman , that go to inhabit the streit : and in this ship also be most part of the munition which shall have be leave in the streit , so in the end the storm grow to be so great , that the ship be not able to endure it any long , but be put back unto a island call Santa Catelina : and there he find a bark wherein be some friar go for the m . Fenton river of plate : which friar tell he of two great it ! iese English ship , and a pinnace , which have take they , ers ' but take nothing from they , nor do they any harm , but only ask they for the king of Spain ship . hereupon Diego Flores know that these english ship will go for the streit , determine to go thither , although it be in the month of February , and choose 10 ship of the 15 that be leave , he leave two ship which be not in case to go to sea at the island , and into the other three ship which be old , and shake with the storm he put all the woman and sick man in all the fleet , and send they to the river of Jenero , and he with the other 10 return again for the streit . fight betwixt our 2 english ship and three spanish ship . they victual at spirit » Santo . richardfaire - vieath remaineth in the river of plate . John Drake proceed on to the river of plate . the english voyage the three ship in which the sick man and woman be , go to Brasil , and there they find within the port of saint Vincent the two ship before mention . they will have have the english man to have go out of the harbour , and thereupon they fall to fight , and because that these three ship be weak with the storm , and the man that they have be the worst in all the fleet , the Englishman easy put they to the worst , and sink one of they , and may have sink another , if the Englishman will : but they mind not the destruction of any man : for that be the great virtue that can be in a man , that when he may do hurt , yet he will not do it . So the Englishman go from this port to Spirit © Santo , where they have victual for their merchandise , and so they go back for England , without do of any harm in the country . the cause why these english ship under the conduct of m . Fenton go not to the streit , i know not : but some say that they be put back by foul weather : other some say that it be for fear of the king ship . but the pinnace of these two ship go from they , in which be captain John Drake : the cause why they part i know not , but the pinnace come into the river of plate , and within five league of seal island , not far from the place where the earl of cumberland ship do take in fresh water , she be cast away upon a ledge of rock : but the man be save in their boat , which be in number 18 , who go ashore on the northside , and go a day journey into the land , and meet with the savage which be no men - eater , but take all the Christians that they can , and make they slave . but the Englishman fight with they and the savage slay five of they , and take 13 alive , which be with the savage about 15 month . but the master of the pinnace , who name be Richard Faireweather be not willing to endure the misery that he be in , and have knowledge that there be a town of Christians on the other side of the river , he in a night call John Drake , 94 1583 - and another young man which be with they , and take a very little Canoa , which have but two oar , and so pass to the other side of the river , which be about 19 league broad , and be three day before they can get over without meat : and come to land , they hit upon a high way that go towards the Christians : and see the foot of horse , they follow it , and at last come to a house where there be corn sow , and there they meet with Indian servant unto the Spaniard , which give they meat , and clothes to cover they , for they be all naked , and one of the Indian go to the town , and tell they of the Englishman ; so the captain send four horseman , who bring they to the town behind they . this captain clothe they , and provide lodging for they , and John Drake diet at the captain table , and they be all very well entreat , the captain purpose to send they for Spain . but the viceroy of Peru have John drake news hereof , send for they , and so John Drake be send s ^ tot , ier to he , but the other two be keep there , because they peru i be marry in the country , so that i know no more of [ in . 728 . ] their affair . upon this come of the Englishman , there be prepare 50 horseman to go over the river to seek the rest of the Englishman , and also certain Spaniard that be among the savage people , but i be not certain , whether they go forward or not .