a rutty or course to be keep for he that will sail from Cabo Verde to the coast of Brasil , and all along the coast of Brasil unto the river of plate : and namely first from Cabo Verde to Fernambuck . he ship that go from Cabo Verde to Brasil , must go southsoutheast : and when she be within 5 or 6 degree of the equinoctial she must go southeast and by south . and if she have the ternado , that be thundering and lightning , than thou must go altogether south , or that way and by that board that do profit thou most . and take this for advise , that have the general wind , and if the wind be at south or southeast , then go Southwest , or westsouthwest . and if the wind you that toitt be south , then go Southwest , and by this way sa3le toBrasil , but little , for it be not a way for thy profit , because thin ^ ow - the moor thou go this way , the more will be thy 70 league of trouble , because thou may not come near than the coast of coast of Guinea then 60 or 70 league unto they shall Gmnea . call os baixos de santa Anna . And be this distance from the same , thou shall cast about the other way towards Brasil , and the wind will be large . thou shall understand that the ship that keep this course to Fernambuck , and go in October or after , and chance to go to windward of the isle 73 of Fernando de Loronha , when thou come to 8 * of Souther - degree , or 8 and than thou shall go west and lie latitude . bear with the land . thou must take this for a warning , that if go west in 8 degree thou see land , then look to the northward , and thou shall see certain white cliff . than i advise thou that thou go well to the southward . and this be to be understand from October forward , for than the time be most subject to Northeast and Eastnortheast wind . and if thou find thy self in the say height above mention , and see cliff , and see a cape to the southward , and see not more land to the south , then make account that thou be at Capiguoari : and from thence to Fernambuck thou have six league , and haste a good port . thou shall take this for a warning , that if in 8 degree and a half thou see land lie all flat , thou may go near it , and be bold till thou come in ten ne or twelve radome : and than thou shall see a great gross land along the sea - coast which be call Capitagua : and be east and west with this land , and , as i have say , in ten or twelve fathom water ; and the time be from October to February , than thou need not to fear any thing : but look to the south and thou shall see the cape of saint Augustine : and look to the north and thou shall see a point , and to the southeast a point call Punta de Olinda , where aponiquay stand . and the land from the cape to the point call Punta de Olinda lie north and south . [ Iii . 720 . ] i advise thou that if thou be east and west with the cape of saint Augustine , thou shall see within the land a high hill , have as it be a saddle upon it like to a camel : and thou shall see to the southward three hill along the sea , and then present thou shall see the coast to lie Northeast and Southwest . the height of thou shall understand that from this cape of saint Augustine , to the town of Olinda , thou have nine of Olinda ^ league to the north . and this cape stand in eight fernambuck . degree and two three part , and Olinda stand in eight 74 degree and a quarter , and fernam buck stand in eight degree . and this course be to be understand to be observe and keep , if thou depart from Lisbon in October or November . take this advise , that if thou depart in February or march from Lisbon , than thou shall go to bear in what height with the land in nine degree , because that from worse march forward reign most common southeast and art Southwest wind . and if by this height and course from Lisbon thou bring thyself nigh to the shore , fear not to in February bring thy ship into 18 or 20 fathom , for all the ° r march . • coast be clean : and there be no more danger , but such as the sea do break upon . and if after thy fall with the land thou have occasion to go to the northward , and so go see - certain sholde , doubt not to come for the north , and he ) i0 kncm thou shall see the cape of saint Augustine , which lie as it be slope to the seaward , and have as it be ’ ' a whale head , and have upon it a round hill , with many hill round about it . and if thou come along the sea ■ coast much about the depth above mention , thou shall see a little island call saint Alexio : and from this A & the Santo island to the cape of saint Augustine be four league , Xi ° ' - and it stand in eight degree and three quarter . the course that a man must keep to the bay call a Bahia de todo os santos , that be to say , the bay of all saint , which lie on the foresay coast of Brasil . f thou go for Bahia de todo os santos , thou must keep the course which i have already set down , and shall observe the time from march forward , as also from October forward . thou shall understand that the Bahia de todo os santos stand in 13 degree and i : and if thou go in October or after October , then go to fall with the land in 12 degree or 12 and a half . and take this for a warning , that when thou see a 75 the height of Bahia de todo os Santos in 13 degree and one three part . white land , and long bank of white sand , which show much like linen cloth when it be in whiting , than thou must go along from the north to the south until this white land do end : and thou need not to fear to go along the coast , for there be no shold . before thou be clean past the white land or white sand , thou shall have sight of a island that stand along the bay , i say on the northside of the bay , which be call the situation Tapaon : and here the land lie west and by south . of the isle of when thou be so far shoot as Tapaon , thou shall a * wm " see a certain great tree which be round , and stand near the sea upon the very point of the entrance into Bahia on the northside . and mark well that if thou look to the southward , and see no white ground such as i write of before , but that they be all behind thou to the northward : when a man then when thou see none to the southward , thou ^ th ^ balia1 may be bold to bear in with Bahia . and if when ' thou go into Bahia to the northwest , and see the sea to break , fear nothing : for it be the breach of a certain bank , whereon thou shall have always 5 or 6 fathom water : and this be sure of . thou shall understand that if thou come for this place from march to the end of April , i will wish thou not to fall to the southward of 13 degree and a half . And fall with the land , and not see the white sand , thou shall strive to go to the northward . And see the land in 13 degree and a half , thou shall have sight of a hill along the sea : and if thou be nigh the land , and can make it certain what land it be : thou shall mark if it be a round high hill the distance along the sea , that it be o morro de san Paulo , or , the Paulo hill saint p ^ l : and it lie black and bare on the from Bahia . top . and from thence to Bahia be ten league . and here along this hill on the northwest side Pio de tin - there be a great river call Tinsare : and it be a very sare a very good river . and in the entrance of Bahia there be ’ six or seven fathom water in the channel . and i advise thou that be in the height of 13 degree and a half , thou come not near the land , for it have a bay very dangerous . and if thou go from Bahia to Fernambuck , than i advise thou that thou take good heed of the coast on the north - east and Southwest , and thou shall go east , if the wind will suffer thou to go east : and so go thirty or forty league off to the sea . i advise thou that thou bear not in with the land of Fernambuck , but in the height of 9 or 10 degree , because that in 11 degree thou shall fall with the bay call a enseada de Vazabaris . also if thou come from Portugal and fall with the land in eleven degree , bear not in with it , neither come near it , for thou may hurt thy self in so do : but thou shall shun it , and go to the southward . for if thou lie to the north thou shall bring thy self into some trouble . this bay of all saint stand in thirteen degree . and from thence to Fernambuck thou have a hundred league : and the coast lie north - east and Southwest . and from thence to Rio das ilhas , that be , the river of the island the coast run north - east and Southwest , i mean take a quarter of the north and south . the course for Baia das ilhas , that be , the bay of the island , which lie on the say coast of Brasil , and the mark for the find of they . f thou go for Baia das ilhas thou must look for it in fifteen degree lack a quarter . if thou be mind as i say to go for these isle , if it be from march forward , thou shall fall with the land in 15 degree and a half , and though it be in 15 degree and f , it be all the better . and if thou have sight of certain high hill , that seem to reach to the sky , these hill be call as serras Raiemores . then have sight of these hill , 77 a dangerous bay in 13 degree and a half . [ Iii . 721 . ] the height of the bay call a enseada de Vazabaris . Baia de todo santos in 13 degree . Baia das ilhas lie in 15 degree lack a quarter . in what height a man must fall with this place in time of the north - east wind . Giemana . Mangues . thou shall go dung the coast ; and fear nothing , for there be no sholde along to the north . and when thou see the island , thou may make account they be these which thou seek , for there be no other on all this coast , and thou shall see a round hill along the sea . thou shall understand that on the north side of this hill be the go in of the river . but if it chance that thou find thy self in a time that will not suffer thou to go in , then go along the island give they a breadth off . and thou may well come to a anchor hard aboard they , for all be clean ground . and thou shall find eight or nine fathom , and from thence thou may go into the river hard aboard the shore . and if it chance that thou go from the north to the south all along the great island , thou must keep thy self from the land : and when thou have bring it eastnortheast , than thou may anchor two cable length from the shore : for all be clean ground . if thou chance to arrive on this coast in the time of the north - east wind , thou shall seek to fall with the land in fourteen degree . and if thou see a low land , thou may make account it be the land call Ciemana , and than thou shall see mangue : and also thou shall come along this coast to the south : and when thou see a end of the low land , than thou shall find a high land along the sea like the other that i have make mention of before , that be , all sandy along the sea coast . and thou must understand , that where the high land begin , there be a little river call Rio das Contas , but enter not into it : it have for a mark to be know by as it be a white mouth . and from thence to the island thou have nine league . and at the end of this high land to the southward of it thou shall find a great bay within the land , and than thou shall look to the westsouthwest , and shall see another high land , which lie as it be in the midst of the bay , and thou shall there see certain white house 78 • which be the ingenios or house wherein they make the white sugar of Lucas Giraldo . from thence thou shall see sugar house the isle be so far shoot as Rio de Contas . and thou shall see within the land a round hill which it be like monte de laud , and it have another copy on the south side . the course to sail to porto seguro , that be to say , the safe haven , lie on the foresaid coast of Brasil , and the mark to know the same by . in thou go for porto seguro and