[ ill . 769 ] the voyage set out by the right honourable the earl of Cumberland , in the year 1586 . intend for the south sea , but perform no far than the latitude of 44 . degree to the south of the equinoctial , write by m . John Sarracoll merchant in the same voyage . he 26 . day of June , in the year 1586 . and in the 28 . year of the queen majesty reign , we depart from Gravesend in two ship ; the admiral call the red dragon , and the other the bark Clifford , the one of the burden of 260 . ton , with 130 . man , and the other of the burden of 130 . ton , with 70 . man : the captain of the admiral be m . Robert Withrington , of the viceadmiral m . Christopher Lister , both be furnish out at the cost and charge of the 202 1586 . right honourable the earl of Cumberland , have for their master two brethren , the one John Anthony , and the other William Anthony . the 24 . of July we come into the sound of plymouth , and be there constrain by westerly wind , to stay till the 17 . of August , we then depart with another ship also for our rear - admiral call the roe , whereof m . Hawes be captain , and a fine pinnace also call the Dorothy , which be sir Walter ralegh . we four being out in the sea , meet the 20 . of August , with 16 . sail of hulk in the sleeve , who name themselves to be man of Hamborough , lade and come from Lisbon . our admiral hail their admiral with courteous word , will he to strike his sail , and to come aboard to he only to know some news of the country , but he refuse to do so , only strike his flag and take it in . the vice - admiral of the hulk be a head , will neither strike flag nor sail , but pass on without budge , whereupon our admiral lend he a piece of ordinance , which they repay double , so that we grow to some little quarrel , whereupon one of the sternemost hulk , be as i suppose more afraid than hurt , strike amain , our admiral be near he , lay he aboard , and enter with certain of his man , how many i know not , for that we be give chase to the windermost man , think our admiral will have come up again to we , to have make they all to have stroke : but the weather grow to be very thick and foggy , with small rain , he come not up but keep with another of the hulk which captain Hawes have board and keep all night , and take out of her some provision that they best like . they learn of the man that be in the hulk , that there be 7 . hulk lade in Lisbon with Spaniards good , and because their lade be very rich , they be determine to go about Ireland , and so they let she go again like a goose with a break wing . the next day after be the 21 . day , we espy 5 . sail more , which lie along to the eastwards , but by 203 reason of the night which then be near at hand , we can hardly come to they . yet at last we hail one of the big of they , and they tell we that they be all of Hamborough : but another say she be of denmark , so that indeed they know neither what to say , nor what to do . our admiral be more desirous to follow his course , than to linger by chase the hulk , call we from pursue they with his trumpet , and a piece of ordinance , or else we will have see what they have be , and wherewith they have be lade . the 22 . day because of contrary wind we put into Dartmouth all 4 . of we , and tarry there seven day . the 29 . we depart thence and put out to sea , and begin our voyage , think at the first to have run along the coast of Spain , to see if we can have meet with some good prize to have send home to my lord : but our captain think it not the best course at the last , but rather keep off in the sea from the coast . and upon Saturday the 17 . of September we fall with the coast of Barbary , and the 18 . hail in with the road of Santa Cruz . the 21 . day we fall with one of the island of the canary , call Forteventura . in run alongst this island , we espy upon a hill by the water side , one wave with a white flag , whereupon we man both our boat , and send they towards the shore , to understand what news . they find they to be two ragged knave and one horseman , and they Lanzarota tell we that Lanzarota be take , and spoil in August spoil by the Turk : when we see they have nothing else to menoj gie / s . we anj proceed on our course , and fall again with the coast of Barbary . the 25 . day of September about 10 . of the clock we riodelqro , ' ™ feH with Rio del oro , stand just under our Tropike : nda ^ alfe we ancker in the mouth of it in 8 . fathom , the entrance ' of it be about 2 . league over . and the next day our captain with the boat search the river , and find it to be as broad 14 . or 15 . league up , as at the entry of it , ’ but find no town nor habitation , save that there 204 come down two poor man , and one of they speak good spanish , and tell our captain , that certain Frenchman use to come thither , and jade some ox trade of the hide , and goat hide , but other commodity there be none . we depart thence the 27 day , and the last day pjj 77o j ' of the month be calm we go aboard our general , and there consent to go for Sierra Leona , to wood and water . from thence till the 10 . of October we be much becalm with extreme hot weather , much lightning , and great store of rain . this 10 . day we sound , find a great current as we suppose by the rippling water , which after we find to be a ordinary tide , the flood set to the northwest , and the ebb southeast , and here we have but 18 . fathom water , and no land to be see : it be on the southermost part of the showle that lie in about 11 . degree , but hail south off again , it present deep unto 50 . fathom , and after hail southeast and by east , and east southeast , we sound , but have no ground in 120 . fathom . the 21 . of October we fall with land upon the coast of Guinea , in the height of 8 . degree , a very high land , but of no great length : it be the high land over sierra sierra Leona . Leona . we draw in to the land , and find near the shore more water than in the off : at the northern end of the high land our ancker about a mile , and somewhat more from the shore in 11 . fathom . to go into the harbour of Sierra Leona we do borrow upon the south side , have no ground in 10 . fathom , half a mile from the shore . upon the northside of this harbour be very shoal water , but on the southside no fear , more than be to be see . the 23 . day be Sunday we come to a anchor in the bay of fresh water , and go ashore with our boat , we speak with a Portugal , who tell we that not far off there be negro inhabit , and that in give to the king a Botija of wine , and some linen cloth , he will suffer we to water and wood at our pleasure . but 205 our captain think it not good to give any thing for that which they may take free , land , and certain of our man with they , whereupon the Portugal and the negro run all away into the wood . than we return again into our boat , and present go and land in another place , think to have fetch a walk , and so to come to our boat again . but wander through a little wood , we be sudden and unaware a ton of they upon a town of the negro , whereupon they strike up negro . their drum , give withal a great shout , and off go their arrow as thick as hail . we be in number about 30 . caliver , and 20 . with our weapon , which we also let fly into the wood among they , and what hurt we do , we know not . than we return to our boat , and take wood and water at our pleasure , and reasonable store of fish , and a strange among the rest we hail up a great foul monster , monster . who head and back be so hard , that no sword can enter it : but be thrust in under the belly in diverse place , and much wound , he bow a sword in his mouth , as a man will do a girdle of leather about his hand , and likewise the iron of a boar spear . he be in length about nine foot , and have nothing in his belly , but a certain quantity of small stone , to the value of a pottle . another great the four of November we go on shore to a town “ oh / thne ™ ™ Negros , which stand on the southeast side of er egro . the harbour , about a sacar shoot from the road , which we find to be but late build : it be of about two hundred house , and wall about with mighty great tree , and stake so thick , that a rat can hardly get in or out . but as it chance , we come direct upon a port which be not shut up , where we enter with such fierceness , that the people flee all out of the town , which we find to be fine build after their fashion , and the street of it so intricate , that it be difficult for we to find the way out , that we come in at . we find their house and street so fine and clean keep , that 206 it be a admiration to we all , for that neither in the house nor street be so much dust to be find , as will fill a egg shell . we find little in their house , except some matt , goard , and some earthen pot . our man at their departure set the town on fire , and it be burn ( for the most part of it ) in a a town quarter of a hour , the house be cover with burnt - reed and straw . after this we search the country about it , where we find in diverse plain good store of rice in stack , rice in stack . which our man do beat out , and bring a board in the husk , to the quantity of 14 . or 15 . ton in both our ship . the 17 . day of November we depart from Sierra Leona , direct our course for the strait of Magellan . in this harbour diverse of our man fall sick of a disease in the belly , which for the time be extreme , but ( God be thank ) it be but of small continuance . we find also in diverse place of the wood , image set idol . upon pin , with diverse thing before they , as egg , meal , rice , round shoot of stone , and diverse other thing , such as the barbarous people have to offer up . when we come near to the line , we find it nothing so hot as it be at Sierra Leona , by reason of the great wind and rain . about the 24 . day of November one or two of our man die , and other also be sick of a Calentura . the second day of January we have a little sight of land , be about the height of 28 . degree to the southward of the line . the 4 . day we fall with the shore high and bold , in 30 . degree , and a terse , little more or less . all of it to the northward be a high land , but to the southward it do present fade , and be a very low land , and all sandy . about six league from the shore we sound , and have about fifteen or sixteen fathom water , and black sandy oz . we think to have go to the shore , and to have water , but we 207 [ in . 771 . ] they fall with a highland in 30 . degree | . a Portugal ship take , wherein be for pilot Abraham Cocke a Englishman , leave there before by the minion of London 1581 . five town upon the river of plate . the english voyage can not discern any good harbour , and therefore we cast off to seaward again . the 12 . day we find our self in 32 . degree and 27 . minute . from the day of the nativity of Christ , till the 13 . day of this month , although the sun be very near unto we , yet we find no want of wind but variable as in England , and not so hot but that a man shoulder may well digest a freeze gown , and his belly the best Christmas cheer in England , yet we for our part have no want , but such as may content honest man . the ten day be about 8 . league from the shore , and a little short of the river of plate , it be my good hap to espy a sail , which be a small Portugal bind for the river to a town call Santa fee : and from thence by horse and cart , the merchant , and part of their good be to be transport into Peru . this ship be about the burden of 45 . or 50 . ton , we take that day about three of the clock , wherein there be for master or pilot a