send they to conduct our ship into a better road . soon after the king himself repair , accompany with 6 . grave and ancient person , who do their obeisance with marvellous humility . the king be a man of tall stature , and seem to be much delight with the sound of our music , to who as also to his nobility , our general give present , wherewith they be pass well content . at length the king crave leave of our general to depart , promise the next day to come aboard , and in the mean time to send we such victual , as be necessary for our provision : so that the same night we receive of they meal , which they call Sagu , make of the top of certain tree , taste in the mouth like sour curd , but melt like sugar , whereof they make certain cake , which may be keep the space of ten 126 1579 - yeere , and yet then good to be eat . we have of they store of rice , hen , unperfect and liquid sugar , sugar cane , and a fruit which they call figo , with store of clove . the king have promise to come aboard , break his promise , but send his brother to make his excuse , and to entreat our general to come on shore , offer himself pawn aboard for his safe return . whereunto our general consent not , upon mislike conceive of the breach of his promise , the whole company also utter refuse it . but to satisfy he , our general send certain of his gentleman to the court , to accompany the king ’ s brother , reserve the vice - king for their safe return . they be receive of another brother of the king , and other state , and be conduct with great honour to the castle . the place a ** that they be bring unto , be a large and fair ternatehouse , where be at the least 1000 person assemble . the king be yet absent , there sit in their place 60 . grave personage , all which be say to be of the king counsel . there be beside 4 . grave person , apparel all in red , down to the ground , and attire on their head like the Turk , and these be say to be roman , and Ligiers there to keep continual traf - romana and fike with the people of ternate . there be also 2 . Turks Ligiers in this place , and one Italian . the king majesty at last come in guard with 12 . lance cover over of the king . with a rich canopy , with emboss gold . our man accompany with one of their captain call Moro , rise to meet he , he gracious do welcome , and entertain they . he be attire after the manner of the country , but more sumptuous than the rest . from his waste down to the ground , be all cloth of gold , and the same very rich : he leg be bare , but on his foot be a pair of shoe , make of Cordovan skin . in the attire of his head be fine wreathe hoop ring of gold , and about his neck he have a chai ne of perfect gold , the link whereof 127 be great , and one fold double . on his finger he have six very fair jewel , and sit in his chair of estate , at his right hand stand a page with a fan in his hand , breathe and gather the air to the king . the fan be in length two foot , and in breadth one foot , set with 8 . sapphire , rich embroider , and knit to a staff 3 . foot in length , by the which the page do hold , and move it . our gentleman have deliver their message , and receive order accord , be license to depart , be safe conduct back again by one of the king counsel . Temate the this island be the chief of all the island of Maluco , and the king hereof be king of 70 . Islands auco - ts shilling . bgsidg the king with his people be moor in religion , observe certain new moon , with fast : during which fast , they neither eat nor drink in the day , but in the night . after that our gentleman be return , and that we have here by the favour of the king receive all necessary thing that the place can yield we : our general consider the great distance , and how far he be yet off from his country , think it not best here to linger the time any long , but weigh his anchor , set a utle island out of the island , and sail to a certain little island ard ^ f ^ ' to southward of celebe , where we grave our celebe . ship , and continue there in that and other business 26 . day . this island be thorough grow with wood of a large and high growth , very straight and without bough , save only in the head or top , who leaf be not much differ from our broom in England . among these tree night by night , through the whole tiery worm , land , do show themselves a infinite swarm of fiery worm fly in the air , who body be no big than our common english fly , make such a show and light , as if every twig or tree have be a burn candle . in this place breed also wonderful store of bat . Bats , as big as large hen : of crayfish also here Cravlshes . want no plenty , and they of exceed bigness , one 128 1580 . whereof be sufficient for 4 . hungry stomach at a dinner , be also very good , and restore meat , whereof we have experience : and they dig themselves hole in the earth like cony . when we have end our business here , we weigh , and set sail to run for the Malucos : but have at that time a bad wind , and be among the island , with much difficulty we recover to the northward of the island of celebe , where by reason of contrary wind not able to continue our course to run westwards , we be enforce to alter the same to the southward again , find that course also to be very hard and dangerous for we , by reason of infinite shoald which lie off , and among the island : whereof we have too much trial to the hazard and danger of our ship and life . for of all other day upon the 9 of Januarie , in the Januarie in year 1579 . we run sudden upon a rock , where ’ 579 - we stick fast from 8 . of the clock at night , till 4 . ' 741 of the clock in the afternoon the next day , be indeed out of all hope to escape the danger : but our their danger general as he have always hitherto show himself 0 reck ’ courageous , and of a good confidence in the mercy and protection of God : so now he continue in the same , and lest he shall seem to perish wilful , both he , and we do our best endeavour to save our self , which it please God so to bless , that in the end we clear our self most happy of the danger . we light our ship upon the rock of 3 . ton of clove . clove , 8 . piece of ordinance , and certain meal and bean : and then the wind ( as it be in a moment the klfe of11 by the speciali grace of God ) change from the star - the board to the larboard of the ship , we hoist our sail , " and the happy gale drive our ship off the rock into the sea again , to the no little comfort of all our heart , for which we give God such praise and thank , as so great a benefit require . p , . the 8 . of February follow , we fall with the fruitful island of Barateve , have in the mean time suffer island . xi 129 1 nutmeg and long pepper grow in Barateve . commendation of the island of Barateve . Java major . the english voyage many danger by wind and shoald . the people of this island be comely in body and stature , and of a civil behaviour , just in deal , and courteous to stranger , whereof we have the experience sundry way , they be most glad of our presence , and very ready to relieve our want in those thing which their country do yield . the man go naked , save their head and privity , every man have something or other hang at their ear . their woman be cover from the middle down to the foot , wear a great number of bracelet upon their arm , for some have 8 . upon each arm , be make some of bone , some of horn , and some of brass , the light whereof by our estimation weigh two ounce apiece . with this people linen - cloth be good merchandise , and of good request , whereof they make roll for their head , and girdle to wear about they . their island be both rich and fruitful : rich in gold , silver , copper , and sulphur , wherein they seem skilful ! and expert , not only to try the same , but in work it also artificial into any form and fashion that please they . their fruit be diverse and plentiful , as nutmeg , ginger , long pepper , lemon , cucumber , coco , figu , sagum , with diverse other sort : and among all the rest , we have one fruit , in bigness , form , and husk , like a bay berry , hard of substance , and pleasant of taste , which be sodden , become soft , and be a most good and wholesome victuali , whereof we take reasonable store , as we do also of the other fruit and spice : so that to confess a truth , since the time that we first set out of our own country of England , we happen upon no place ( ternate only except ) wherein we find more comfort and better mean of refresh . at our departure from Barateve , we set our course for Java major , where arrive , we find great coiirtesie , and honourable entertainment . this island be govern by 5 . king , who they call Rajah : as Rajah Donaw , and 130 1580 . Rajah Mang bange , and Rajah Cabuccapollo , which live as have one spirit , and one mind . of these five we have four a shipboard at once , and two or three often . they be wonderful delight in red and green colour clothes , as red and green : their upper part cl °^ 1 of their body be naked , save their head , where - eseeme • upon they wear a turkish roll , as do the maluccians : from the middle downward they wear a pintado of silk , trail upon the ground , in colour as they best like . the maluccians hate that their woman shall be manner see of stranger : but these offer they of high peo ^ e courtesy , yea the king themselves . the people be of goodly stature , and warlike , well provide of sword and target , with dagger , all be of their own work , and most artificial do , both in temper their mettle , as also in the form , whereof we buy reasonable store . they have a house in every village for their common assembly : every day they meet twice , man , woman , and child , bring with they such victual as they think good , some fruit , some rice boil , some hen roast , some sagum , have a table make 3 . foot from the ground , whereon they set their meat , that every person sit at the table may eat , one rejoice in the company of another . they boil their rice in a earthen pot , make in form of a sugar loaf , be full of hole , as our pot which we water our garden withal , and it be open at the great end , wherein they put their rice dry , without any moisture . in the mean time they have ready another great earthen pot , set fast in a furnace , boil full of water , whereinto they put their pot with rice , by such measure , that they swell become soft at the first , and by their swell stop the hole of the pot , admit no more water to enter , but the more they be boil , the hard and more firm substance they become , so that in the end they be a firm and good bread , of the which with oil , butter , 131 a strange fashion of boy ling rice . the cape of buena esperanza not so dangerous as the Portugal have give out . Sierra Leona . oyster - tree . the english voyage sugar , and other spice , they make diverse sort of meat very pleasant of taste , and nourish to nature . the french pock be here very common to all , and they help themselves , sit naked from ten to two in the sun , whereby the venomous humour be draw out . not long before our departure , they tell we , that not far off there be such great ship as we , wish we to beware : upon this our captain will stay no long . from Java Major we sail for the cape of good hope , which be the first land we fall withal : neither do we touch with it , or any other land , until we come to Sierra Leona , upon the coast of Guinea : notwithstanding we run hard aboard the cape , find the report of the Portugal to be most false , who affirm , that it be the most dangerous cape of the world , never without intolerable storm and present danger to traveller , which come near the same . this cape be a most stately thing , and the fair cape we see in the whole circumference of the earth , and we pass by it the 18 . of June . from thence we continue our course to Sierra Leona , on the coast of Guinea , where we arrive the 22 . of July , and find necessary provision , great store of elephant , oyster upon tree of one kind , spawn and increase infinite , the oyster suffer no bud to grow . we depart thence the 24 . day . we arrive in England the three of November 1580 . be the three year of our departure .