harbour , as he think he shall , bear out again to sea the 27 . of April , and in bear out we lose sight of our flyboat wherein master Doughtie be , but we sail along , find a fair and reasonable good bay wherein be many , and the same profitable abundance of island , one whereof have so many seal , as will at the seal . 107 the file - boat cast off and burn . the people of the country . the english voyage least have lade all our ship , and the rest of the island be as it be lade with fowl which be wonderful to see , and they of diverse sort . it be a place very plentiful of victual , and have in it no want of fresh water . Oure general after certain day of his abode in this place , be on shore in a island , the people of the country show themselves unto he , leap and dance , and enter into traffic with he , but they will not receive any thing at any man hand , but the same must be cast upon the ground . they be of clean , comely , and strong body , swift on foot , and seem to be very active . the eighteenth day of May our general thought it needful to have a care of such ship as be absent , and therefore endeavour to seek the flyboat wherein master Doughtie be , we espy she again the next day : and whereas certain of our ship be send to discover the coast and to search a harbour , the marigold and the canter be employ in that business , come unto we and give we understanding of a safe harbour that they have find , wherewith all our ship bare , and enter it , where we water and make new provision of victual , as by seal , whereof we slay to the number of 200 . or 300 . in the space of a hour . here our general in the admiral ride close aboard the flyboat , and take out of her all the provision of victual and what else be in she , and hail she to the land , set fire to she , and so burn she to save the iron work : which be a do , there come down of the country certain of the people naked , save only about their waste the skin of some beast with the fur or hair on , and something also wreathe on their head : their fence be paint with diverse colour , and some of they have on their head the similitude of home , every man his bow which be a ell in length , and a couple of arrow . they be very agile people and quick to deliver , and seem not to be ignorant in the feat of 108 war , as by their order or range a few man , may appear . Theise people will not of a long time receive any thing at our hand ; yet at length our general be ashore , and they dance after their accustom manner about he , and he once turn his back towards they , one leap sudden to he , and take his cap with his gold bane off his head , and run a little distance from he and share it with his fellow , the cap to the one , and the band to the other . have dispatch all our business in this place , we depart and set sail , and immediate upon our set forth we lose our canter which be absent three or four day : but when our general have she again , he take out the necessary , and so give she over near to the cape of good hope . the cape of the next day after be the twenty of June , we harbour our self again in a very good harbour , u ‘ call by Magellan port S . Julian , where we find a port . Julian . gibbet stand upon the main , which we suppose to be the place where Magellan do execution upon some of his disobedient and rebellious company . the two and twenty day our general go ashore to the main , and in his company , John Thomas , and Robert Winterhie , Oliver the master gunner , John Brewer , Thomas hood , and Thomas Drake , and enter on land , they present meet with two or three of the country people , and Robert Winterhie have in his hand a bow and arrow , go about to make a shoot of pleasure , and in his draught his bowstring break , which the rude savage take as a token of war , begin to bend the force of their bow against our company , and drive they to their shift very narrow . in this port our general begin to inquire diligent of the action of m . Thomas Doughtie , and find they not to be such as he look for , but tend rather to contention or mutiny , or some other disorder , whereby ( without redress ) the success of the voyage may great have be hazard : whereupon the company 109 be call together and make acquaint with the particular of the cause , which be find partly by master doughties own confession , and partly by the evidence of the fact , to be true : which when our general saw , although his private affection to m . Doughtie ( as he then in the presence of we all sacred protest ) be great , yet the care he have of the state of the voyage , of the expectation of her majesty , and of the honour of his country do more touch he , ( as indeed it ought ) then the private respect of one man : so that the cause be thorough hear , and all thing do in good order as near as may be to the course of our law in England , it be conclude that m . dough tie shall receive punishment accord to the quality of the offence : and he see no remedy but patience for himself , desire before his death to receive the communion , which he do at the hand of m . Fletcher our minister , and our general himself accompany he in that holy action : which be do , and the place of execution make ready , he have embrace our general and take his leave of all the company , with prayer for the queen majesty m . Thomas and our realm , in quiet sort lay his head to the block , doughty where he end his life . This be do , our general ’ make diverse speech to the whole company , persuade we to unity , obedience , love , and regard of our voyage ; and for the better confirmation thereof , will every man the next Sunday follow to prepare himself to receive the communion , as christian brethren and friend ought to do , which be do in very reverent sort , and so with good contentment every man go about his business . August . the 17 . day of August we depart the port of the strait saint Julian , and the 2o . day we fall with the strait or of Magellan . fret of Magellan go into the south sea , at the cape or headland whereof we find the body of a dead man , who flesh be clean consume . the 21 . day we enter the strait , which we find to have many turn , and as it be shutting up , as if there be no passage at all , by mean whereof we have iio in that the wind often against we , so that some of the fleet recover a cape or point of land , other shall be force to turn back again , and to come to a anchor [ m . 7 $+ ] where they can . in this strait there be many fair harbour , with store of fresh water , but yet they lack their best commodity : for the water be there of such depth , that no man shall find ground to anchor in , except it be in some narrow river or corner , or between some rock , so that if any extreme blast or contrary wind do come ( whereunto the place be much subject ) it carry with it no small danger . the land on both side be very huge and mountainous , the low mountain whereof , although they be monstrous and wonderful to look upon for their height , yet there be other which in height exceed they in a strange manner , reach themselves above their fellow so high , that between they do appear three region of cloud . Theise mountain be cover with snow : at both the southerly and easterly part of the strait there be island , among which the sea have his indraught into the strait , even as it have in the main entrance of the fret . This straight be extreme cold , with frost and snow continual ; the tree seem to stoop with the burden of the weather , and yet be green continual , and many good and sweet herb do very plentiful grow and increase under they . the breadth of the strait be in some place a league , the breadth of in some other place 2 . league , and three league , and the itreight of in some other 4 . league , but the narrow place have ° se and a league over . the 24 . of August we arrive at a island in the strait , where we find great store of foul which - abundance of can not fly , of the bigness of goose , whereof we * e kill in less than one day 3000 . and victual our self thorough therewith . 57 degree and a terce of southerly latitude . Botero wit that another have find this place all island . m . winter separate and return . the trending the english voyage the 6 . day of September we enter the south sea at the cape or head shore . the seven day we be drive by a great storm from the enter into the south sea two hundred league and odd in longitude , and one degree to the southward of the strait : in which height , and so many league to the westward , the fifteen day of September fall out the eclipse of the moon at the hour of six of the clock at night : but neither do the elliptical conflict of the moon impair our state , nor her clear again amend we a whit , but the accustom eclipse of the sea continue in his force , we be darken more than the moon seven fold . from the bay ( which we call the bay of sever of friend ) we be drive back to the southward of the strait in 57 degree and a terce : in which height we come to a anchor among the island , have there fresh and very good water , with herb of singular virtue . not far from hence we enter another bay , where we find people both man and woman in their canoas , naked , and range from one island to another to seek their meat , who enter traffic with we for such thing as they have . we return hence northward again , find the 3 . of October three island , in one of which be such plenty of bird as be scant credible to report . the 8 . day of October we lose sight of one of our consort wherein m . winter be , who as then we suppose be put by a storm into the strait again , which at our return home we find to be true , and he not perish , as some of our company fear . thus be come into the height of the strait again , we run , suppose the coast of Chili to lie as the general map have describe it , namely northwest , which we find to lie and trend to the north - east and of the coast of eastwards , whereby it appear that this part of Chili have not be true hitherto discover , or at the least not true report for the space of 12 . degree at the 112 least , be set down either of purpose to deceive , or of ignorant conjecture . we continue our course , fall the 29 . of November with a island call la Mocha , where we cast anchor , 2 % and our general hoist out our boat , go with ten of Mocha in 38 . our company to shore , where we find people , who the cruel and extreme deal of the Spaniard have force for their own safety and liberty to flee from the main , and to fortify themselves in this island . we be on land , the people come down to we to the water side with show of great courtesy , bring to we potato , root , and two very fat sheep , which our general receive and give they other thing for they , and have promise to have water there : but the next day repair again to the shore , and send two man aland with barrel to fill water , the people take they for Spaniards ( to who they use to show no favour if they take they ) lay violent hand on they , and as we think , slay they . Oure general see this , stay here no long , but weigh anchor , and set sail towards the coast of Chili , and draw towards it , we meet near to the shore a Indian in a Canoa , who think we to have be Spaniards , come to we and tell we , that at a place call S . Iago , there be a great spanish ship lade from the kingdom e of Peru : for which good news our general give he [ three . 735 . ] diverse trifle , whereof he be glad , and go along with we and bring we to the place , which be call the port the port of of Valparizo . when we come thither , we find indeed the ship nute . ride at anchor , have in her eight Spaniard and three negro , who think we to have be Spaniards and their friend , welcome we with a drum , and make ready a Bottija of wine of Chili to drink to we : but as wine ofChili . soon as we be enter , one of our company call Thomas moon begin to lay about he , and strike one of the Spaniard , and say unto he , Abaxo Perro , that be in english , go down dog . one of these Spaniards xi 113 h see person of that quality in those sea , all to cross , and bless himself : but to be short , we stow they under hatch all save one Spaniard , who sudden and desperate leap over board into the sea ,