the relation of a voyage make by a pilot call 1579 . Nuno da Silva for the viceroy of new Spain , the 20 . of may , in the year of our lord 1579 . in the city of Mexico , from whence it be send to the viceroy of the portugall - indy : wherein be set down the course and action pass in the voyage of sir Francis Drake that take the aforesaid Nuno da Silva at S . Iago one of the island of Cabo Verde , and carry he along with he through the strait of Magellan , to the haven of Guatulco in new Spain , where he let he go again . Uno da Silva bear in Porto , a citizen and inhabitant of Guaia , say , that he depart out of his house in the begin of November in the year of our lord 1577 . take his course to Cabo Verde , or the green cape , where he anchor with his ship close by the haven of the island of Sant Iago , one of the island of Cabo Verde aforesay , be the nineteenth of 133 [ three . 743 . ] January in the year of our lord 1578 . And lie there , there come six ship , which seem to be Englishman , whereof the admiral board his ship , and by force with his man take he out of his ship , bring he in the boat aboard the admiral ship , leave some of his best man aboard his ship : and although the fortress of the island shoot four or five time at they , yet they hurt not the Englishman : who have do , set sail from thence to the island of Brava , take with they the ship of the say Nuno da Silva : be there , they fill certain vessel with fresh water : from thence hold their course inward to sea , have first with a boat set the man of Nuno da Silvas ship on land , only keep Nuno da Silva in his ship , as also his ship with the wine that be therein . and Nuno da Silva say , the cause why they keep he on board be , because they know he to be a pilot for the coast of Brasilia , that he may bring they to such place in those country as have fresh water . be put off " from the island of Brava , they hold their course to the land of Brasilia , which they descry upon the first of April , under the height of thirty degree : and without land or take in fresh water , Rio de plata , they hold on their course to Rio de la plata , that be , the river of silver , lie under five and thirty degree , little more or less : where they go on land , and provide themselves off fresh water . from thence they hold on their course till they come under nine and thirty degree , where they anchor : and be there they leave two of their six ship behind they , and sail but four in company ( that of Nuno da Silva be one ) till they come to the bay call bay de las Baya de las Islas , that be , the bay of the hand , lie under nine and forty degree , where it be say , that Magellan lie and winter there with his ship , when he first discover the strait , which now hold his name . into this bay the twenty of June they enter , and there anchor so close to the land , that they may 134 send to it with a harquebus shoot : and there they see the land to be inhabit with Indian , that be apparel with skin , with their leg from the knee downward , and their arm from the elbow downward naked , all the rest of their body be clothe , with bow and arrow in their hand , be subtle , great , and well form people , and strong and high of stature : where six of the Englishman go on land to fetch fresh water , and before they leap on land , four of the Indian come unto their boat , to who the Englishman give bread and wine : and when the Indian have well eat and drink , they depart thence : and go somewhat far from they , one of the Indian cry to they , and say : Magallanes , esta he minha terra , that be , Magallanes , this be my country : and because the Englishman follow they , it seem the Indian flee upward into the land , and be somewhat far off , they turn back again , and with their arrow slay two of the english shipper , one be a Englishman , the other a Netherlander : the rest come back again and save themselves in the boat , wherewith they present put off from the shore . here they stay till the seventeenth of August , upon the which day they set sail , run along by the coast about a league and a half from the land , ( for there it be all fair and good ground , at twenty , and five and twenty fathom deep ) and be about four or five day before they come to the mouth or entry of the strait : but because the wind be contrary , they stay till the 24 of August before they enter . the entry or mouth of the strait be about a league the descrif - broad , on both side be bare and flat land : on the turn of the north side they see Indian make great fire , but on the south side they see no people stir . the four * ‘ and twenty day aforesaid , they begin to enter into the strait , with a eastnortheast wind . This straight may be about a hundred and ten league long , and in breadth a league . about the entry of the strait , and J35 half way into it , it run right forth without any wind or turn : and from thence about eight or ten league towards the end , it have some boutes and wind , among the which there be one so great a hook or headland , that it seem to run into the other land : and there it be less than a league broad from one land to the other : and from thence forward it run straight out again : and although you find some crooking , yet they be nothing to speak of . the issue of the straight lie westward , and about eight or ten league before you come to the end , than the straight begin to be broad , and it be all high land to the end thereof , after you be eight league within the strait , for the first eight league after you enter be low flat land , as i say before : and in the entry of the strait you find the stream to run from the south sea to the north sea . and after they begin to sail in with the eastnortheast wind , be enter they pass along without any let or hindrance either of wind or weather : and because the high land on both side lay cover with snow , and that all the strait be fair and clear , they hold their course a [ three . 744 . ] harquebus - shot in length from off the north side , have nine and ten fathom depth , with good ground , as i say before , where ( if need require ) a man may anchor : the hill on both side be full of tree , some of the hill and tree reach down to the sea - side in some place have plain and even land : and there they see not any great river , but some small river that issue out of the rifle and breach of the land : and in the country where the great cape or crooking be , on the south side they see certain Indian fisherman in their canoas or skiffs , be such as they see first on the north side , but more people they see not on the south side . be out of the strait on the other side , upon the sixth of September of the aforesaid year , they hold their course northwest for the space of three day , and the three day they have a north - east wind , that by force drive they westsouthwest , which course they hold for 136 the space of ten or twelve day with few sail up : and because the wind begin to be very great , they take in all their sail , and lay drive till the last of September . the 24 day of the same month have lose the sight of this be the one of their ship which be about a hundred ton , then again they hoist sail because the wind come winter better , hold their course Northeast for the space of seven day , and at the end of the say seven day , they have the sight of certain island , which they make towards for to anchor by they , but the weather will not permit they : and be there , the wind fall northwest : whereupon they sail Westsouthwest . the next day they lose the sight of another ship of their company , for it be very foul weather , so that in the end the admiral ship be leave alone , for the ship of Nuno da Silva be leave in the bay where they winter before they enter into the strait : and with this foul weather they run till they be under seven and they be fifty degree , where they enter into a haven of a drivenunt0 island , and anchor about the length of the shot of a great piece from the land , at twenty fathom deep , latitude . where they stay three or four day , and the wind come southward , they weigh anchor , hold their course northward for the space of two day , and then they espy a small unhabit island , where be arrive , they strike sail , and hoist out their boat , and there they take many bird and seal . the next day they set sail again , hold their course Northnortheast , and north , to another island lie five the isle of or six league from the firm land , on the north side Mocha in 38 . of the strait , where they anchor about a quarter 3 °‘ mm ' of a league from the land , in twelve fathom water . this island be small and low land , and full of Indian , the island be altogether possess and inhabit by they , where they hoist out their boat , wherein the admiral and twelve Englishman enter , go to fetch fresh water , and to seek for victual : and be land upon the island , the Indian in exchange of other thing , 137 bring two spanish sheep , and a little Maiz or root whereof they make bread , and because it be late , they return again unto their ship , without do any other thing for that day . the next day the say captain with the aforesaid twelve man be harquebusier , row to land again , and set two of their company on shore with their vessel to fetch fresh water , and by the place where they shall fill their water there lay certain Indian secret hide , that fall upon the two Englishman and take they : which they in the boat perceive , go out to help they , but they be so assail with stone and arrow , that all or sir Frandt the most part of they be hurt , the captain himself be wound with a arrow on the face , and with a w u ' other arrow in the head , whereby they be constrain to turn back again , without once hurt any of the Indian , and yet they come so near the boat , that they take four of their oar from they . this do , they set sail again , run along the coast with a south wind , sail so for the space of six day , pass by the haven call Sant Iago , and put into another haven , and there they take a Indian that lie fish in a Canoa , give he linen and butcher chap knife , with other trifle , and not long after there come another Indian aboard their ship call Felippe , and he speak Spanish , he give the english captain notice of a certain ship that lie in the haven of Sant Iago , which they have leave six league behind they : with that intelligence the Indian be their guide , the next day they set sail and go to the aforesaid haven of saint Iago , and enter therein , they take the say ship , wherein they find a thousand seven hundred and 70 botija or spanish pot full of wine , and other thing : which have do , they leap on land , where they take certain sack with meal , with whatsoever they can find ; they take likewise the ornament and the relic out of the church , wherewith they depart from thence , take the aforesaid ship , with two 138 man ( that they find in she ) with they , and so depart from that haven , which lie under 32 degree and a half , run along by the coast till they come under one and thirty , and thirty degree : which be the place where they have appoint to meet , and there to stay for each other , if by tempest or foul weather they chance to be separate , and so loose each other company . And come under thirty degree , they find a very good haven , whereinto they enter , and anchor at six fathom deep , the shot of a great piece from the land , which be right over against a river , where they take in six pipe of fresh water : and to defend they that fetch the water , they set twelve man upon the land , and be busy in fill of their water , they espy a company of man come towards they , whereof half of they be Spaniard , be about two hundred and fifty horseman , and as many footman , but they have no soon espy they , but they present enter into the boat , and escape away , loose but one man . the same night they set sail again with both their ship , run along the coast about ten league far , where they take in some fresh water , but because they perceive certain horseman , they depart without lade any more water . from thence they follow on their course along the coast for the space of 30 . league , where they enter into a desert or unhabit haven : yet they go not on land , for every day they see people upon the shore , and there they make out a small pinnace , the piece whereof they bring ready frame out of England , and have prepare it , they launch it into the water , wherein the captain with fifteen man enter with the chief boatesman call John the greek , ( be master of the ship which they have take in the haven of saint Iago , ) wherewith they go to see if they can find the two ship that they have lose by stormy 139 A . D . 1578 . the haven of saint Iago in 32 degree and a half . [ Iii . 745 . ] weather , as i say before : and likewise think to go on land to fill certain vessel with fresh water , they dare not venture , for they see people on all side of the shore : so that in the end they return again without hear of the other ship : be there , they take all the ordinance out of their ship , and new dress and rig she : which do , they put a small piece of ordinance into the pinnace , wherewith they set sail again , follow