on their course . Having sail thirteen day , they come to a island lie about the shot of a base from the land , where they anchor , and there they find four Indian fisherman in two canoas who tell they that on the firm land they may have fresh water , but they understand that there be not much , and that it be somewhat within the land , will not spend any time about it , but set sail again , leave the fisherman with their canoas , follow on their course along by the shore . the next day be somewhat further , they espy certain Indian fisherman that be upon the land in their house , which the english captain perceive , present enter into his pinnace , and row on land , where he take three of the say fisherman , take with he half of the fish that lie pack upon the shore ready to be lade , with the which Indian and booty , they come on board again . the next day follow , they see a bark lade with fish , that belong to the Spaniard , with four Indian in it . this bark with the Indian and the fish they take , and bind the spanish ship to their stern , and so draw it after they , leave the say Indian within it , who by night unbind the bark , and secret make away with bark and fish , and be not more see . the next day the captain go into the pinnace , and because fie saw certain house upon the shore , he make thither , and be on land , he find two man in they , one whereof he take , leave the other 140 behind , and there he find three thousand pezo of silver , ( every pezo be the value of a rial of eight , ) and seven Indian sheep , and hen , and take all ■ whatsoever they find : wherewith they depart from thence , follow on their course . and two day after they come to the haven call Arica , where they find Arica . two ship , the one lade with good and spanish ware , out of the which they take only two hundred botija , or spanish pot with wine , and out of the other seven and thirty bar of silver , which be piece of ten or twelve pound each bar , and think to leap on shore ( with two bark that they find in the say haven , with about seven and thirty harquebus and bow ) they perceive on the land certain horseman come towards they , whereupon they leave off their pretence , and take with they a negro that they find in the bark , with who they return aboard . the next day in the morning they burn the ship , that be lade with the spanish ware , and take the other with they , pass forward with it on their course , the captain sail along the shore with his pinnace , and the ship keep about a league from he to seaward , to seek for a ship whereof they have intelligence : and have in that manner sail about five and forty league , they find the ship that lie at anchor in a haven , who about two hour before have be advertise of a english pirate or sea - rover , and have discharge eight hundred bar of silver out of she , and hide it on the land , which silver belong to the king of Spain , of the which silver the english - [ three . 746 . ] man have receive some intelligence , but they dare not go on land , because there be many Indian and Spaniards that stand to guard it , and they find nothing in the ship but three pipe of water : the ship they take with they , and be about a league in the sea , they hoist up all her sail and let she drive , do the like with the ship that they have take in Arica , as 141 also the other of Sant Iago , which likewise they let drive , follow on their course with their own ship , and the pinnace . be seven or eight league from the haven of Calao de Lyma , they espy three ship , and board one of they , they take three man out of she , and so hold on their course towards Calao de Lyma , where they enter , be about two or three hour within night , sail in between all the ship that lie there , be seventeen in number : and be among the ship , they ask for the ship that have lade the silver , but when answer be make they , that the silver be lay on land , they cut the cable of the ship , and the mast of two of the great ship , and so leave they . at the same time there arrive a ship from Panama lade with ware and merchandise of Spain , that anchor close by the english ship , which be , while the english captain seek in the other ship for the silver . assoon as the ship of Panama have anchor , there come a boat from the shore to search it : but because it be in the night , they let it alone till morning , and come to the english ship , they ask what ship it be : whereupon one of the spanish prisoner ( by the english captain commandment ) answer and say it be the ship of Michael Angelo , that come from Chili : which they of the boat hear send a man on board , who climb up , light upon one of the great piece , wherewith he be afraid , and present step back again into the boat ( because the ship that lie there , and that sail in those country , use to carry no great shot ) and therewith they be abash , and make from it : which the ship of Panama hear , that be new come in , she judge it to be a rover , and therewith cut her cable , she put to sea , which the Englishman perceive , ship certain man in their pinnace , and follow she : and be hard by she , they bid she strike , which they of the ship refuse to do , and with a harquebus shoot 142 kill one of the Englishman , wherewith they turn again into their ship , and present set sail , follow after the ship , which not long after they overtake : which they of the ship perceive hoist out their boat , and leap into it , row to the land , leave the ship with all the good , which the Englishman present take , and with she sail on their course . the next day they see a boat with sail make towards they , whereby they present mistrust it to be a spy , and not long after they perceive two great ship come towards they , which make the english think they come to fight with they , whereupon they let the ship of Panama drive , therein leave John the greek , with the two man that they have take the same day that they enter into the Calao de Lyma , as i say before , and present hoist all their sail , and sail forward , not once set eye again upon the aforesaid ship , for they make towards the ship of Panama , which the Englishman let drive . from thence they sail again along the coast , follow on their course : and have sail certain day , they meet a frigate that go towards Lyma , lade with ware and merchandise of the country , from whence the Englishman take a lamp and a fountain of silver , and ask the pilot be a Spaniard , if they meet not with a ship , that they understand shall be lade with silver , but the one pilot say he meet she not , and the other say he see she about three day before . this frigate come not to the ship , but to the pinnace , wherein the captain sail , for the pinnace run close by the shore , and the ship keep a league and a half from the land : whereupon they let the frigate go , follow on their course . two day after , they come to the haven call Payta , Payta . where they find a ship lade with spanish ware , which the pinnace board , and take without any resistance : for assoon as the Spaniard perceive the Englishman , they present make to land with their boat , and two of they leap into the sea , none stay in the ship , but 143 the master , pilot , and some negro , out of the which ship the Englishman take the pilot , and all the bread , hen and a hog , and so sail forward with the ship : but be about two harquebus shoot to seaward , they let it go again , not take any thing out of it , and ask after the ship , which they seek for , they tell they that about two day before she depart from that place , wherewith they follow on their course , and before night they meet with a ship of Panama , which they present board , but take nothing from she but only a negro , and so leave it , hold on their course . the next day be the first of February , they meet another ship that sail to Panama , lade with fish and other victual , and forty bar of silver , and some gold , but i know not how much , which they take , and send the passenger ( with two friar that be in she ) in a boat [ three . 747 . ] to land . the next day they hang a man of the ship , because he will not confess two plate of gold that he have take , which after they find about he : which do , they let the ship drive , follow on their course . the first of march towards noon , they espy the ship lade with silver , be about four league to seaward from they : and because the english ship be somewhat heavy before , whereby it sail not as they will have it , they take a company of Botijas or a / retie de - spanish pot for oil , and fill they with water , hang vice to make they by rope at the stern of the ship to make her sail on wiftl ^ better : and the ship that sail towards Panama swjty - maje towards the english ship to know what she be , think it to be one of the ship that use to sail along the coast , and to traffic in the country : and be hard by she , the english captain bid they strike , but the other refuse to do it , with a great piece he shoot her mast overboard , and have wound the master with a arrow , the ship present yield , which they take , and sail with her further into the sea , all that night and the next day and night , make all the way they can . 144 the three day be out of sight of the land , they begin to search the ship , and to lade the good out of she into their ship , which be a thousand three hundred bar or piece of silver , and fourteen chest with ryal of eight , and with gold : but what quantity it be i know not , only the passenger say that there be great store , and that three hundred bar of the silver belong to the king , the rest belong to certain merchant . that do , they let the ship with the man sail on their course , put the three pilot in she that they bring with they , so that as then they have none but their own man aboard , be the sixth of march , and from thence they hold their course towards the land of Nicaragua . the thirteenth of march , either the day before or after , in the morning they descry land , not be very high , be a small island two league from the firm land , and there they find a small bay , wherein they anchor at five fathom deep close by the land , and there they stay till the twenty day . upon the which day there pass a frigate close by the island , which with their pinnace they follow , and take she , bring she to the english ship , which frigate be lade with Salsaperilla , and Botijas or pot with butter and honey , and with other thing . the english captain go on board , and cast the Salsaperilla on the land , leave all the rest of the ware in the frigate , and then he put all his piece into the frigate , that so he may lay his ship on shore , to new calk and trim she , which continue till the three and twenty or four and twenty of march . which do , and have make provision of wood and fresh water , they hold on their course along by the coast , sail westward , take the say frigate and her man with they , and have sail two day , they take their man out of she , and set they in the pinnace , among the which be four sailor , that mean to sail to Panama , and from thence to China , whereof one they take , with the letter and patent that he have about he , among xi 145 king 1579 - Nicaragua the island of can . the first sight of Nueva Espanna . they calk and trim their ship at the lie of can over against Nicaragua . sea - charts of the south sea take . they arrive at Guatuko . a prill 13 . Stilo novo . Nuno da Silva set on land . [ he - 748 . ] the english voyage the which be the letter of the king of Spain , send to the governor of the philippinas , as also the sea - card wherewith they shall make their voyage , and direct themselves in their course . and so sail until the sixth of April , about evening they discover a ship that hold two league to seaward from the land : and before the next day in the morning they be hard by she , and sudden fall upon her while her man sleep , and present make the man enter into their ship , among the which be one don Francisco Xarate . which do , they follow on their course with the say ship , out of the which they take certain pack and other ware , but i know not what it be . they likewise take a negro out of it , and three day after they both let the ship and man go whether they will , set therein the two sailor that shall go for China , which they have take in the frigate , keep only one sailer to show they where they shall find fresh water , to the which end they take the empty vessel with they to fill with water , and so keep on their course to the haven of Guatulco , where they put in , be upon Monday the thirteenth of April , and have anchor , they stay there till the six and twenty of April : and about three or four hour within the night , they set sail , hold their course westward , and a hour or two before they let Nuno da Silva go , put he into another ship , that lie in the haven of Guatulco . from thence forward the Englishman pass on their voyage , to the island of Malucos , and from thence they pass by the cape de buena esperanza , and so to England , as it be well know , so that thjs be only the description of the voyage that they make , while the say pilot Nuno da Silva be with they .