young foul plenty , and dangerous come to they . by this time ( i have set the isle , and headland about in sight with a compass ) come a small gale at southsoutheast ; than our admiral shoot off a piece for the boat , and hence i go , and dine aboard with he , and come after aboard , and go in Northnortheast and Northeast till morning : at which time we be within a league of the isle , enter before their arrwall s . Vincent , but know not how much water be upon at saint Vtncent . bar to go out < the 20 day in the morning , be calm , the general pinnace come in to the shore , with intent to sound three canoas the entrance , but see three canoas , with each at the least ° { / 7ndian man > whereof the great part be naked Indian , ' which row , the rest Portugal , they return aboard again . the canoas come with a flag of truce within , call of our ship , and we show they the like , ask what we be , and of what nation : at length one Portugal go aboard the admiral , by who the general send a letter to the governor , crave a pilot to bring in 190 our ship of courtesy , and to have traffic . about noon , have the wind at south , we bear in northwest , and so to the north - east , as the channel trend : but come into seven fathom water , we anchor , until our boat have sound the bar . during which time , i go aboard the admiral , to confer with he about our proceed . after i have stay a while aboard the admiral , the generail come aboard with i , where we publish unto all my company very good rule for their behaviour and profit , to their great satisfaction : after he go down into my cabin , where with all his assistant he confer of diverse particular of our voyage : by which time the boat be return from sound , we depart , and set sail , follow our skiff and with our ship get within the bar into seven fathom : then be becalm , we anchor again before a sandy bay , wherein stand a castle a castle . and house : we rid within musket shoot of it : and anchor about four a clock afternoon . then go i forward with my skiff unto a further point , sound along . before my return , the generail have send for i to supper ; and thither i go : but be ready to sit down , there come out to we a canoa , wherein can ° a with be ten Indian and two Christians ; the one a ancient genouois , the other a Portugal : who come aboard , and “ christian there receive a small banquet , declare their come whereof one be to understand our intent , and what we seek : who be a old be satisfy , depart with a farewell of three great piece from each ship . the 2i day about three a clock afternoon , come a canoa , with the old genouois name Joseph Dory , a John whithall fleme name Paul badeve , and Steven repose a Portugal , and bring a letter from the governor , and well at withal , answer of fear and doubt of we , etc after Santos , have many speech and request , a banquet be make they , and marry this the generail in his pinnace with his music , and trumpet ; dory and i in my skiff with trumpet , drum and fife , and tabor and pipe , accompany they a mile up the river : at go 191 off , we salute they with a volley of three great piece out of each ship : and after we come captain Parker with the admiral long boat , and certain shot in the same , to attend on the generail . the 22 day betimes in the morning , i go aboard the admiral to confer about the send of some token and present to the governor , which be by all the assistant determine to send he three yard of fine scarlet , and three yard of fine murry - cloth ; and to Joseph Dory the old genouois , Steven repose the Portugal , and to Paul badeve the fleming , each of they three yard of fine Santos . black cloth , which our merchant go up to Santos withal in the admiral skiff , about nine a clock aforenoon . also this forenoon , we be mind to go up high [ three . 765 . ] with our ship into harbour , i advise they to go view the place , and sound the road before we go up ; which we do : where be find the place both unconvenient , and the road worse : and so we return , and leave the first determination . this day we take down our maintop , and topmast , and all the shrowd . about two a clock after noon our merchant return with their present , not have be at the town , because Steven repose by the way meet they on the river , and advise they to stay until there have be word send to the governor , who be unwilling to speak with they yet , but short will send their answer . the rest of this forenoon we spend in communication about the appoint of a purser for the Edward . also we sign a assent for come to this place : about which thing grow foul speech between the general and his lieutenant , after the old custom . the Indian then go we to supper : and be at supper , certain present . Indian come aboard , and bring the generail a strange crow , and potatos , and sugar cane , to who he give inn tin o - glass , great pin , and biscuit : and so we be late . also this afternoon i run over saint Vincent , and sound the bay a league over , 192 the channel of , . , S . Vincent depart , sound . towards island find the channel and flat , and return aboard again within two hour , have a good gale of wind . the 23 day our skiff go ashore to fish , and take pretty store : we send our maintop ashore to be mend , and many of our man to wash their clothes ; also i go my self with they aland , to take order that no man shall any way offend the Indian . in the mean time the general with all the rest of the chief gentleman , come ashore , and view the place , and appoint out the fit room to set up our smith forge , and oven portable wen to bake our biscuit , and place for our cooper to trim t0 tn - our water cask . the 24 day at four of the clock , before day , we hear one call for a boat on the north shore , to who i send my skifle , who bring aboard one name John John whithall , a english man , which be marry here in this whtthali - place , and with he two of his Indian ; who i entertained until i send word to the general to prepare himself to receive he : in which time he and i talk of many several particular . about six a clock i convey he aboard the goodcounseu admiral : there he discover unto we what have be do at the town , as fortification , and send their t0 our wife away , etc advise we to receive no more delay , man . but to come up present before the town with our ship . about ten a clock come a canoa , and bring down Joseph Dory and Steven repose , who tell we that on Saturday the governor will meet our generail , and talk with he , pray we in the mean time to use our ordinary business of cooperage , carpenter work , fill water , fish , and wash , etc but not to set up forge , nor oven , until speech have with the governor . after this answer , we dine together aboard the gallion : after dinner we leave the messenger sit in the cabin , and go upon the poop ; where the generail demand the advice of his assistant , whether it be not best to stay these man while we have they or not , or whether it be best to go up with our ship to the town or no . xi 193 n whereunto each man pause to make answer : wherefore i deliver my opinion ; which be , that we be forbid to use violence to any nation for trade . the minion of second , i consider that diverse of our nation , wor -^ m ^ inbrasill merchant , and now adventurer in this voyage , for traffic . have set out the minion hither , and begin a trade , which with our forcible deal may be spoil , and our nation bring in hatred . last , that with force we be not like to attain so much commodity , as we be in possibility to have with courtesy . hereupon all be conclude , and they suffer to pass away : to who the generail give the three cloak - clothe , to Joseph Dory , to Paul Baudevese , and to Steven repose , to each of they one , which be before cut out for they : and so friendly we and they depart about two a clock after noon . three Spanish about four of the clock this afternoon we see ship this - three sail of ship come bear in about the point , ' which assoon as they see we , anchor upon the bar , and put themselves in readiness , send from one ship to another with their boat , and blow off their ordinance , mean to take we : and we before night , get our man and other necessary from the shore , which be busy on land , arm our ship to defend our self . then go i aboard the admiral to know what he mean to do : who determine to set his watch in warlike sort ; and so he do : for after the trumpet and drum have sound , he shoot off a great piece , as they before have do ; and present the viceadmiral shoot at i , who i answer with another , and so cease . we then set up our maintop , and topmast , rig before eleven of the clock the same night . in the mean while they let slip their anchor and cable , and come drive and tow with their boat in upon [ three . 766 . ] we , mean to have board we : and be near our admiral , he hail they ; who refuse to tell of whence they be , think by spend of time to get 194 aboard of he : to who i call still to beware , and to shoot at they in time . at length he let fly at they , yet be glad to let a anchor and cable slip to avoid they : then come they all drive down thwart my half , so that i be fain to let slip a anchor and cable to shun the gallion . all this while the ordinance and small shot ply of all part , and i be fain to send the gallion my skiff with a hauls to ride by , for she be loose , and with the flood drive up within i . then be the viceadmiral on my broad side , who be well pay before , yet i leave not gall of he , till i think our powder spend in vain to shoot at he , he be so tear , and break down by we . about four of the clock it rain so fast , that we can scant discern one the other , the moon be go down , yet rid the admiral , and the rearadmiral , but a little ahead of we : during which time , we pause , and make ready all our munition . the 25 day , by daylight , we see the viceadmiral sink hard by we , so that his yard which be hoist across , and his top , and that over head , be above water : most of their man be get away in their boat , save about fourty person which hang in the shrowd , and top , who i advise our general to send for away , and have make ready , and well man our pinnace ; but be upon the way go , the generail call they back , and will not suffer they to go . there be three of their boat also go for they from their ship ; at who i shoot , and make they to retire , and leave they upon the shrowd . at length our generail send for two of the man away : which his pinnace bring to he ; the one be heave over board , because he be sore hurt , not like to live ; and he be a Marsillian ; the other be a greek , bear in Zante , boatswain of the viceadmiral : the rest of the man , some swim away upon raft , some be drown , and some remain still hang on she . by this time it be fair daylight , and i call to our generail to r95 A . D . I583 - the fight betwixt the english in spanish ship at saint Vincent . the spanish viceadmiral sunhe by the english . this greek tell the general that there be 600 and odd in the 3 spanish ship . weigh , and drive down to they , who require i to go first and anchor on their quarter , and he will follow , and anchor on their bow . i weigh , and go down , and anchor by they ; yet not so near as i mean , for the ebb put i off to the northward . there rid i alone , spend shot at they , and they both at i , four hour , before our admiral anchor will come up ; during which time i have some spoil do ; but when our admiral come , she have her part , and ease i very well . at length our admiral begin to warp away , and be come without i , set sail , and begin to stand out into the sea : i go aboard of he to know his pleasure . who determine to get out of shot ; but can not , because the wind scant on they . the Edward before she can get up her