like a sword with three and twenty prick of a side , sharp and strange : the body we do eat , and it be like a shark . the 30 and last day of September the Francis cook come aboard about seven a clock in the forenoon from fish with my net , and bring among other a strange fish fish , a sea - calf ( as we call it ) with hair and lympit , take ' and barnacle upon he , be seven foot long , four foot nine inch about : which to see i send for the general , and such as please to come see it out of the admiral , who come and bring with he m . Maddox , captain Hawkins , captain Parker , and most part of his company , who have view the beast , which be ugly be alive , it be flay , open , and dress , prove a excellent , fair , and good meat , broil , roast , sod and bake , and suffice all our company for that day . the first day of October in the morning , we take in to make up our full compliment of rice twenty barrel for the twelve barrel of salt , deliver the Portugal Lewis Henriques before . the 2 day about six a clock in the morning , we set sail have little wind : the captain with the master , and other of their company of the Portugal come aboard i , complain that the carsey by they receive for the four negro of the general , be not sufficient for their payment , whereupon i give they 178 1582 . scarlet cap , and other thing to their content , who find themselves well please , depart away in the Gundall , and we have little wind , get down thwart of the fish bay , and there come to anchor about nine a clock the same forenoon . the three day about two a clock in the morning we set sail , and go hence Southwest by west till two in the afternoon then be little wind : at five we anchor six league eastsoutheast of the southermost [ three . 760 . ] partly of the land in fifteen fathom , and there we ride till eight a clock at night , and set sail with a stiff gale at Northeast , which sometime blow , and sometime be little wind , and so continue all night . the first day of November in the forenoon , we take in our main sail to mend it : in the mean time , the admiral come up by we , and desire i with my master , and m . Blackcoller to come aboard to he about certain conference , he send his boat for we , where by he be propound , whether it be best for we to stand on with the coast of Brasil as we do , or else to stand about starboard tack to the eastwards : whereupon diverse of their charts and reckon be show : by some it appear , we be a hundred and fifteen league , by some a hundred and fifty league , by some a hundred and forty league , and some a great deal further short of Brasil , next hand north - east of we : but all agree to be within twenty minute of the line , some to the north , some to the south of the line . after many debatement , it be agree by most consent to stand on for the coast of Brasil , except the wind change , and there to do , as weather shall compel we . in this consultation , we have speech of course , and place of meeting , if by misfortune we shall be separate , wherein be no full order conclude , but that we shall speak every night with the admiral , if we convenient may , and so to appoint our course from time to time , if we lose company , to stay fifteen day 179 in the river of plate , and from thence to go for the strait , and there to ride , and water , and trim our ship . the 12 in the afternoon m . Maddox , m . hall , m . Bannister , and other come aboard to visit m . Walker . after a time of abode with he , they return to the gallion all again , except m . Maddox who remain with m . Walker here aboard . this night m . Maddox and i , behold many constellation in the firmament , and set down certain new star raise to the southward . all day and night we go south , and south by east among . the seventeenth day in the afternoon we shoot off three piece of ordinance in honour of our queen majesty . this day after dinner come master Maddox , and captain drake with other to take their leave of master Walker , as i with , all my company have do before , suppose he past hope of recovery . at 19 degree of four of the clock , find our self in nineteen southerly degree to the southward of the line , and clear of aiu e ' the shoald call by we Paul , we go hence south - southwest all night follow . the 18 day be Sunday , after dinner the general , m . Maddox , captain Parker , and many other come aboard , and visit m . Walker : which do , they drink , and depart aboard again . all this day and night , we go our course Southwest by south , with a frank gale . the 19 day about noon , the sun be in our zenith , be decline to the southward 21 degree , and 33 minute , where we find the air fresh and temperate , as in England in June , when a fresh gale of wind cold evening , do blow in the heat of the day , but the evening , the night , and the morning be more fresh and cold here , than it be in England either in June or Julie . the first of December , about six of the clock in the morning , we see land on the coast of Brasil , in the height of 28 degree or there about , which bear 180 northwest , and be eight league from we very high land . we stand in with it , be much wind , and come near , find diverse island : and see the diverse hand . Francis will not come room nor run ahead we , we stand in with the shore , and sound in 30 fathom oaze three league off the land , bear from the westnorthwest to the northnorthwest of we , and so stand still till it shoald orderly into seven fathom , within a mile of a headland : then perceive a breach over our bow , and no hope of a good harbour , in that place , we bear up room , and our admiral after we , who we hale : than he tell we he will seek harbour to leeward , require i to go ahead . then see the bark be astern i hoist out my skiff , and set her mast and sail , take her ging , and Tobias one of my master mate with i , and run before the ship , sound in 15 fathom fair sand , leave a ledge of rock aseaboord of we : so the ship and the bark looff up under a headland , and anchor in eight fathom , half a mile off the land , have bring the headland which lie in 27 degree 50 minute the latitude southsoutheast off they , and the north land Northeast dezree off they . 50 minute . i stand on with the skiff , hope to find a better harbour to leeward three league , but it prove not so : wherefore i return , and in my way aboard i meet with a rock in the sea , where we land , and kill good store of fowl , and after i go aboard the admiral , where i present he with foul , and return aboard to supper . in this time our boat have be aland , and find water , ballast , and two decay house , as they tell i , and our man aboard hook freshfish . this night we ride quiet . the second , be Sunday , our master moar our [ three . 761 . ] ship further into the bay . we bring the south point southeast off we , and the north land Northeast : and so rid . 181 jin exceed great draught offish . the wood set on fire by our man . a sail see and take . the english voyage after dinner captain Parker , with my boat , and company , go a land , and there place pipe , and make three well . in the mean time , i accompany with m . Hawkins , m . Maddox , m . Cotton , and diverse of my own people , land far within the bay , and find two river of fresh water , and a good fish place . present i send aboard for my net , with which at one draught we draw 600 great mullet , and 5 great bass ; the like draught be never see with so small a net : with which we go aboard , give to the admiral 240 , to the Francis 80 , and the rest our company spend , and give almighty God thank for his great goodness . all this while be captain Parker and other go into the land , and fire the wood ; which burn extreme . the three day in the morning our carpenter calk without board , and the master and other take up all the merchandise in the stern sheet to the keel , and there put down a boat load of stone : and see the merchandise well condition , stow the same again . in the mean time , my self , and other in our boat , scrape off the worm , and wash the rudder , and part of one side of our ship . after dinner , the master , pilot , and i , go ashore , and observe the sun at noon , which be pass , with our net we draw plenty of diverse sort of fish , and go from that bay to the water place : from thence , aboard the generail , which have take physic , and give they and the Francis fish for their company , and so go aboard , where our company have rummage aforemast : so that this afternoon we take in two boat more lade of stone afore mast . the sixth day in the morning , before six of the clock , we see a sail which go towards the southward , the admiral not have knowledge thereof . i go aboard , and certify he ; who appoint i to go and bring she in , and to take captain Parker 182 and some of the galleon man into the Francis , and the admiral skiff with we : so we give her chase , and take she six league to the leeward of the place we ride in . than not be able to fetch the road again , we anchor in the sea . i intend to come away in the pinnace , and leave the Francis , and the prize together , be ready to depart , the wind blow at south a stout gale , and rain ; so that about six of the clock , we anchor in the road , where our ship rid . after we have take they , and that captain Parker and i be aboard , we have much talk with they before they come to the ship ; and be anchor there , the chief man be carry aboard the general , which be a gentleman , name don Francisco de Torre Vedra , nephew to the governor of the river of plate , name don John de Torre Vedra . we find a Englishman , name Richard carter Richard bear in limehouse , who have be out of England four and twenty year , and have be near twelve ta ^ en - tn year dwelling in the river of plate , at a town name prize . ascension , three hundred league up in the river , whither they be now determine to go and inhabit , have two woman , and two young child , seven friar , the rest boy , and sailor , to the number of one and twenty person . the number the old friar be have in great reverence among the 1 in the rest : insomuch that they call he the holy father . r ’ he be abide in no place ; but as visitor he go visit from monastery to monastery . the substance of all the speech be , that the spanish fleet be before the strait of Magellan , as they think ; for they be depart six week pass from the river of Jenero , where they have be seven month to refresh and winter , and that these be not of that company , but come out of Spain the 26 of May 1582 in a bark of fourscore tun , and fourscore person , of purpose for the river of plate . 183 the english voyage the friar be eighteen in number , can not agree , and their bark be a ground at Spirito santo , like to be lose : therefore the old friar buy this small bark of 46 tun , at a port name Spirito santo , in Brasill ; and so divide themselves : and come from thence , lose company at sea : but they think they be before at the river of plate . after his speech , i go and appoint ( by the general order ) man to remain aboard the prize with captain Parker , and bring one of the Portugal sail away with i , and come aboard , where i find that our man have fill water all day . the 7 day in the morning the general send for i ; where he show i and m . Maddox certain article which the friar and mariner Spaniards be examine of ; which tend altogether to the knowledge of the spanish fleet intent , and of the mean whereby we may be discover by the way of the river of plate by land to Peru . in this time come the rest : after who come it be debate , whether it be best to take the boat and people with we or not . which be not determine ; but refer till further examination . then be it determine to pass by the strait , notwithstanding the Spaniard be there , but not to set up forge , nor to build pinnace , but water , and so thorough . the eight day