complaint of the Dutchman , master Withrington enter into bond to they for the payment of their fraught , but how my lord will like that bond of debt at our return , i know not . i give he my advice and counsel to get his bond again into his hand . the thirteenth day our captain send out of our ship certain victual unto the admiral , as one butt of dight rise , two chest of clean rise , one barrel of oatmeal , one barrel of peason , and one barrel of oil , because they be somewhat scant of victual , and we at this time be to have out of the admiral our part of five and twenty chest of fine sugar , and more , of eight chest , and six chest that be take in the bay of todo santos , at the ingenios , more of one hundred and thirty hat , and other diverse pillage , which be take in the prize , and at the shore . the fourteen day be Monday , it be conclude among we all , not to leave the town of Baya so , but notwithstanding the time that they have to strengthen themselves and the town , yet to give a attempt for the win of it : and therefore we provide our pinnace , caravel , and boat for the enterprise : and as we be depart from our ship , the wind turn direct contrary to our course , so that our determination for that time be break , and we return again to our ship : and to say the truth , if the weather and wind have serve , our attempt have be very desperate , consider the number of Portugal and Indian which be then gather together , to the number of seven or eight thousand , and their artillery upon the shore , play upon we : but nevertheless we have proceed , if the wind have favour we . the 16 day we go to certain ingenios of the Portugal , where we find the people flee and we enter their house without resistance . we find 221 A . D . I587 . in their purge house 1000 pot of sugar , some half purge , some a quarter , and some new put into the pot : so that every man take his pot of sugar for their provision , and set all the rest on fire . the 17 day we all weigh to go to another ingenio , to see if we can find there better sugar , and in the way we meet with a prize , which be a caravel , which we find drive with the weather , and enter she , and have in she only three falcon of iron , which our pinnace bring away , and set the ship on fire . dalamor in the small prize run so far in , that he bring his ship on ground , where she lie three or four hour , till such time as there come from the town five caravel full of man , which be perceive of we , our captain with our man go to he to aid he . the caravel come within falcon shoot of we , but dare come no near , lest they may have taste of the like banquet , that they receive the last time . about half flood come the galley again , and three caravel more , but before they come , the bark be a float , and set sail : and then they all go to guard their ingenios , which we have purpose to visit : but the night come on , persuade we to the contrary . the 19 day we set sail to go into the road of Baya again , with our pinnace , and a flag of truce , to see if we can recover our four man , which remain alive of those ten , that perish in our boat , of who we speak before , which four be unfortunate fall into their hand : but they at our approach near the town , shoot at we , and we as ready as they , give they in all 27 shot , and so ankor a little from the town , to see what they will do . the 20 day ride still before the town , our admiral send a negro ashore , with letter from the Portugal , that we have prisoner aboard : the effect of which letter be , that if we may have our man release and deliver we , they shall have they from our ship . 222 the next day in the morning , in stead of their [ three . 777 . ] bloody flag , they put up two white flag , and send a Gingatho off to we with two Indian , with letter of answer from the governor ; but they will not consent in any case that we shall have our man , and will their Portugal to take their captivity patient , for they will not redeem they : a motion they make in their letter , to buy again one of their prize , which we have take out of the road : but our admiral answer they , no , see they detain our man , we will keep both their man , and ship too . the same evening we weigh , and come out of the haven , half a league to seaward . the 22 we set sail to sea , and the 23 come to a a island \ z island twelve league to the southward of Baya , to wood , tesgustothe j ten 6 7 > > south of Bata . and water . i the 24 day be aboard with our pinnace , we meet with a Canoa , wherein be one Portugal , and six Indian : we shoot at the Canoa , and kill a Indian , and take the Portugal , and one of the Indian , and bring they aboard our ship : we there examine they , and the Portugal confess that there be a ship lade with meal , and other victual , bind for Fernambuck , but put into a creek , because she dare not go along the coast , hear of our ship . whereupon we man both our pinnace , and take the Portugal with we , to go and seek the same ship , but that night we can not find she . the 26 day we go again , and find she , be hail up into a creek , where a man will have think a ship boat can not have enter : we find she indeed lade with meal principal : but she have also in her fourteen chest of sugar , of which two be in powder , and twelve in loaf . this ship be of the burden of one hundred and twenty ton , and a new a new portu - ship , this be the first voyage that ever she make , ^ s ^ . ete ^ een and as the Portugal confess , she be freight for ' Fernambuck , but the man of Baya have great want 223 a good warn fir we to be circumspect in land . June . a offer of captain Lister to go with his one ship only for the south sea . the english voyage of bread , buy both they ? ship and her lade , and so think to stay she in this creek , till we be go off the coast : but it be our good hap to disappoint their pretense , and to fetch she from thence , where they think she as safe as if she have be at Lisbon . the 28 day we divide the meal among we , accord to the want of every ship . the 30 day , 16 or 17 Dutchman go with their boat from the hulk to shore , to fill water : and upon a sudden they be assault with fifty or sixty Portugal , and so many more Indian arm with shot and other weapon , and they slay their master and Purser , and the rest be hurt , but yet escape with their life : a good warn for we to be circumspect , and careful in our land . the last day of may we cast off one of our prize , which we call the George , and our admiral and the hulk take the man and other necessary out of she , into they . the same day the Portugal which have hurt the Dutchman come to the shore , and dare we to come on land : whereupon we go into our pinnace with forty shot : but the cowardly villain run all away to the hill , from the water side : but master Lister with nine man follow they , and they flee still before they , and dare not stay their approach : so they come back again , and we fill water quiet , and at our pleasure . the three day of June our captain master Lister , have a great desire for the performance of this voyage , accord to my lord direction , go to our admiral , and request he to give he six butt of wine , one barrel of oil , three or four barrel of flesh , and to have Thomas hood and seven or eight seaman for some of our landman , and by God help he with the bark Clifford , will alone proceed for the south sea : but admiral mighty withstand his motion , and will grant no jot of his particular request . 224 the 7 of June , have no use at all of our prize , we burn one , and cast off another , and fill our own ship with the necessary of they . the 8 day we put off to sea , but yet with much ado come again to our anchor place , because of the weather . the 10 day the admiral send for we to come aboard he , and be come , he open a card before all the company , and tell we that my lord voyage for the south sea be overthrow for want of able man , and victual , and that therefore he think it best to ply for some of the island of the west India , or the azore , to see if they can meet with some good purchase , that may satisfy my lord . Theise word be take heavy of all the company , and no man will answer he , but keep silence , for very grief to see my lord hope thus deceive , and his great expense and cost cast away . the common sort see no other remedy , be content to return as well as he . the 16 day we espy a sail , whereupon our pinnace and dalamor give her chase , and put she ashore upon the island , where the man forsake she , and run away with such thing as they can convenient carry : [ Hi . 778 . ] our pinnace board she , and find little in she ; they another pin - tooke out of her nine chest of sugar , and one hog , ness taken - and 35 piece of pewter , and so leave she upon the sand . from this time forward we begin to ply northwards , july - and the first of July fall with the land again , where we they return fish , and find reasonable good store . i take the ° ri war ' latitude that day , and find our self in 10 degree and 22 minute . the 7 day we determine to fall with Fernambuck , and we come so near it , that dalamor ( as he tell we ) espy some of the ship that be in the harbour : yet notwithstanding we all fall to leeward of the river , and can not after that , by any mean recover the height of it again : but we cease not on all part to xi 225 p fernambuck in the southerly latitude of 7 deg . 50 min . a low island in 3 degree and 49 minute . August . the english voyage endeavour the best we can , and oftentimes lose company for a day or two , one of another , but there be no remedy , but patience , for to Fernambuck we can not come , have so much overshoot it to the northward , and the wind keep at the south and Southwest . the 20 day i take the sun in 5 degree 50 minute , which be 2 degree to the northward of Fernambuck , and the further we go , the more untoward do the rest of our ship work , either to come into haven , or to keep company one with another . and true i suppose , that by reason of the froward course of the admiral , he mean of purpose to lose we : for i know not how the near we endeavour to be to he , the further off will he beef from we , and we see that , keep on our own course , and look to our self as well as we can . the 24 day our whole company be call together to consultation , for our best course : some will go for the west India , some direct north for England ; and in conclusion , the great part be bend to ply for our own country , consider our necessity of victual and fresh water , and yet if any place be offer we in the way , not to omit it , to seek to fill water . the 26 day in the morning , we espy a low island , but we lose it again , and can descry it no more . this day we find our self in 3 degree and 49 minute . the 27 day we search what water we have leave we , and find but nine butt only , so that our captain allow but a pint of water for a man a day , to preserve it as much as may be , wherewith every man be content , and we be then in number fifty man and boy . the first of August we find our self 5 degree to the northward of the line , all which month we continue our course homeward , without touch any where : towards the end whereof , a sorrowful accident 226 1572 - 87 . fall out in our hulk , which be divide from we in thehulkeof a calm , fall afire by some great negligence , and per - ^ s ^ ngJ > urnt ish by that mean in the sea , we be not able man ne ^ any way to help the ship , or to save the man . gence . the 4 day of September , we have bring our self into the height of 41 degree and 20 minute , somewhat to the northward of the island of the azore : and thus bult up and down with contrary wind , the 29 of the same month , we reach the coast of England , and so make a end of the voyage .