make we to think well of his company , and in fine a agreement and conclusion be thus make on all side , to follow the admiral , without any more talk of the strait till the spring . 214 the io day of march , it fall out so unfortunate , that Samuel Teller our master mate , fall overboard , and so perish , we be not able by any mean to recover he . the eight and twenty day be in the height of one and twenty degree , we espy a sail , which we judge came out of the strait , and have rich lade , but the night be at hand , we lose she very unlucky , and the next day can have no sight of she . the five day of April we fall with the land of Brasilia , in the height , as i judge , of sixteen degree and a tierce , and our captain go then aboard the admiral , where they conclude to send the pinnace and our boat on shore for fresh water , because we stand in need of it , which do so with eighteen good man , and three or four ton of water cask . they be from we till the eight day in the morning , at which time we espy they again , and that day we come all together into the road of Camena , where there come a Canoa aboard we , and one of the chief Portugal that belong to the place . here we take in beef , hog , water and wood at our pleasure , have almost no man able to resist we , but some of our Portugal steal from we in the Canoa . the 11 day we enter into the haven of Baya , where we be receive at the point come in , with two great piece of ordinance , which discharge bullet at we five time a piece , but they lose shot and powder , and do we not harm . after we have pass the point , we hail in for the road as close as the wind will permit we , but can not come so near as we desire , and therefore we come to a anchor a fair birth off the town , not without great store of shot from thence , but yet our harm be none at all for ought they can do . at our come in , we find in the road eight ship and one caravel , of the which one be a hulk or double fly boat of the burden of two hundred and fifty ton , have in her 24 piece of good ordinance : she with the 215 A . D . 1587 . march . [ HL 77 + - ] the road of Camena . they come into the river of Baya . they take 4 ship out of the harbour of Baya , notwithstanding the shot of the enemy . a hulk of Flushing . the english voyage rest of the ship , together with the town , give we shot , and shoot , but not one touch so much as any of our sail . and lest we shall seem in the mean time to be idle , we repay for every shot of they , two or three sometime at the ship and the town together . the next day at night we think to have hail in with the ship , and to have fetch out some of they : but the wind blow then off the shore , so that we can not possible do it . and again the next day at night we conclude to go with our own two boat , and two other boat of the country which we have take before , which go with caravel - saile , into the road , and accord perform the same , notwithstanding the shot of the enemy . the moon do shine , and give very good light , and in we go with our caravel and boat , and the shot come about our ear as thick as hail : but the Portugal and the rest perceive we no whit at all to shrink or be dismay , forsake their ship , and begin to provide to save themselves , some with their boat , some by swim , and so we enter the ship with a great shout , and find few to resist we : but yet the shore not be a cable length from we , they do so ply both their great and small ordinance at we , that it much annoy we : but yet for all that we make light of their shot , and our man of the bark Clifford enter the admiral and vice - admiral , and our admiral man enter two other ship of the like burden , and present every one cut the cable in the house , and so by the help of God in despite of they all , we bring away four of they . the least whereof be of the burden of 130 ton . in this broil the hulk shoot at we many time , but do no hurt at all : but at the last come by the hulk tow our new prize , we hail they and demand whence they be , they answer we of Flushing , and then we command he to weigh anchor , and to come after we : and not dare to refuse it , he do so , and bring with he a caravel with forty or fifty butt of wine in she , and 216 another small bark which have little or nothing in she : and ride by we as one of our company , and be a ship of the burden of two hundred and fifty ton . our hard hap be to find no great matter , either of merchandise or victual in these ship , save in one of they we find four butt of wine , in another two , in another one , and some fish , and all the rest of their lade be on shore . all this be do upon easter eeve , and we give thank to God , that we have speed so well : and that very night there come a boat from the town , with a dutch merchant , and one Portugal , to offer some ransom for the ship , as they say , but as i judge rather to espy our strength : we keep they that night aboard , and the next day we send they to our admiral . the next day be easter day arise a very great storm insomuch that our caravel which we first take brake from we , and one of our new prize also , by mean of the break of her cable , slip away : whereupon , although the wind be great , and the sea troublesome , yet we send certain of our man in our boat , to recover they if they may , but we fear , that the rage of the weather have cause we to lose both our man and prize . in the midst of this storm , our two Spaniard which we take in the river of plate , see we all busy about our prize , begin to think how they may escape our hand , and sudden slip both out of one of the cabin window , and by swim get a shore , a thing which seem to we impossible , consider the outrage of the weather . this storm continue long , and prevent we of make our intend attempt against the town , have as much to do as possible we may , in keep our ship and prize from run ashore ; and fall into the hand of those that stand gape greedy for our ruin . the 19 day the storm be a little cease , we all weigh and come to a island that lie next northwest 217 [ three . 775 . ] the english voyage from the bay , and the twenty day we go on , shore , and our carpenter set up our pinnace . the 23 day the people of the country come down amain upon we , and beset we round , and shoot at we with their bow and arrow , but in short time we cause they to retire , and many of they be carry away by the help of their fellow , although we have some of our man hurt with some of their arrow . the 24 day we receive out of the caravel twelve butt of wine and four barrel of oil , and half a quarter . the 26 of April our pinnace be launch : and the same day come down unto we a great number of Portugal and Indian , with who we skirmish the space of two hour to their cost . the second day of may the admiral boat go a shore with 14 man to fill water , and present be on shore , they be entrap with two or three hundred Indian which assault they , and slay one or two of our man , but the rest escape notwithstanding the number of the enemy , and come safe again with water to the ship . we suffer this loss by mere negligence , and want of circumspection . the 5 day the captain of the admiral himself take a small bark , his own little caravel , our pinnace and the dutchmans boat , and at night go on shore to get victual , among the bullock which be in the field : and in the morning they be go so far , that they be out of sight . which be perceive by the enemy , they present make ready their galley for admiral , with four caravel , with as many man in they as possible can thrust in and stand one by another : and they bear over with the north shore to meet with our pinnace and boat : whereupon our man fall into great danger , although m . Lister our captain dissuade m . Withrington from that attempt , by lay before he the danger both of himself and we also , be so far one from the other . but be once go , there be no remedy but they be to abide whatsoever may happen : we in the bark Clifford , 218 although we be weak leave , yet perceive the galley to make after our man , weigh and pursue the galley , as near the shore as we can convenient come for want of water : the hulk also weigh and come after we to follow the enemy , but the enemy with his oar get sight of our pinnace and boat before we can , and bear direct with they : which be espy of our man , and they see no way to avoid they , make themselves ready ( notwithstanding the great odds ) to fight it out like man , and to live and die together . the course that they take for their best advantage upon the sudden , be this : they go all into the pinnace , and make fast the dutchmans boat to one side , and the small caravel to the other side , and so wait the come of the enemy , give they first of all a piece of ordinance for their welcome , which they present repay again with a piece out of the prow of the galley , and present after , with three or four small brass piece , charge with hailshot , and so give a mighty shout , come all aboard together , cry , entrad , entrad : but our man receive they so hot , with small shot and pike , that they kill they like dog . and thus they continue aboard they almost a quarter of a hour , think to have devour our man , pinnace and all . and sure to man judgement , no other thing be likely in regard of their great number , and the fewness of our man , and they at the first think all be their own : but God , who be the giver of all victory , so bless our small company , and so strengthen their arm and mind to fight , that the enemy have receive a mighty foil , be glad to rid himself from their hand : and whereas at their marvellous entrance , we esteem they to be no less than betwixt two hundred and three hundred man in the afewofour galley , we can scarce perceive twenty man at their man . departure stand on their leg , but the great part of they be slay , many deadly wound , their oar break , and she depart from our man , hang upon one side ( as a sow that have lose her left ear ) with 219 above 360 Portugal and Indian slay . the english voyage the number of dead and wound man that lie one upon another . and whereas their come aboard be in a great bravado , with drum , shout , and cry , they depart without either noise of drum or speech . we lose in this conflict of our man , three only , which be Alexander the master Gunners mate , Laurence Gambrel , a proper young man of Hampton , and another that be master benman man . some also be hurt with the arrow of the enemy , but the wound be curable : and thus it please Almighty God , of his great goodness , to give victory to 50 or 60 Englishman , against six or seven hundred Portugal and Indian , for which we cease not to give such dutiful thank to his majesty , as so miraculous a victory require . now touch the purpose of our man , who make that attempt for fresh victual , their labour be nothing lose , but in despite of the enemy they bring to our ship 16 or 17 young bullock , which be to our great comfort and refresh . as for we that be in our ship , we can not come near they by two mile , or more , to give they any aid , yet we suppose that the countenance of our ship be a encouragement to our man , and some manner of fear to the enemy . now whereas our opinion concern the number of the Portugal and Indian which be slay , as aforesaid , be ground at that time upon our probable conjecture , not be able otherwise to come to the knowledge thereof : you shall understand that the next night after the fight there come aboard we two Indian upon a Gyngatho , who be run away from their master , and they tell we for a very good truth , that the galley go out from the town with four hundred man in she , but there come not back to the town again alive above thirty of they all : and i among the rest be desirous to know of one of they , what the news be at the town , he answer i with great laughter : todo esta cacado en tierra . 220 the twelve day i be send for to come aboard the admiral , about the hulk : where upon the