a discourse of the west Indies and South sea write by Lopez Vaz a Portugal , bear in the city of Elvas , continue unto the year 1587 . wherein among diverse rare thing not hitherto deliver by any other writer , certain voyage of our Englishman be true report : which be intercept with the author thereof at the river of plate , by captain Withrington and captain Christopher Lister , in the fleet set forth by the right honourable the earl of Cumberland for the south sea in the year 1586 . Rancis Drake a Englishman be on the sea , and have knowledge of the small strength of the town of number de dios , come into the harbour on a night with four pinnace , and land a hundred and fifty man : and leave one half of his man with a trumpet in a fort which be there , he with the rest enter the town without do any harm till he come at the market place : and there his company discharge their caliver , and sound their trumpet ( which make a great noise in the town ) be answer by their rellowe in the fort , who discharge and sound in 227 this voyage vias make in the year 1572 . like manner . this attempt put the townsman in such extreme fear , that leave their house , they flee into the mountain , and there bethink themselves what the matter shall be in the town , remain as man amaze at so sudden a alarm . but the Spaniard be man for the most part of good discretion join fourteen or fifteen of they together with their piece , to see who be in the town : and get to a corner of the marketplace they discover the Englishman , and perceive that they be but a few , discharge their piece at they ; and their fortune be such , that they slay [ three . 779 . ] the trumpeter , and shoot the captain ( who name be Francis Drake ) into the leg : who feel himself hurt retire towards the fort , where he have leave the rest of his man : but they in the fort sound their trumpet , and be not answer again , and hear the caliver discharge in the town , think that their fellow in the town have be slay , and thereupon flee to their pinnace . now Francis Drake ( who his man carry because of his hurt ) when he come to the fort where he leave his man and see they flee , he and the rest of his company be in so great fear , that leave their furniture behind they , and put off their hose , they swim and wade all to their pinnace , and depart forth of the harbour , so that if the Spaniard have follow they , they may have slay they all . thus captain Drake do no more harm at number de dios , neither be there in this skirmish any more than one Spaniarde slay , and of the Englishman only their trumpeter , who they leave behind with his trumpet in his hand . from hence the coast lie all along till you come to Cartagena . between number de dios and Cartagena be a great sound or gulf , where the first Spaniard that ever dwell upon the firm land build and inhabit the town of Dariene : howbeit they abide not long there , because of the unholesomenesse of the place . but captain Drake be discontent with the repulse 228 that the man of number de dios give he , go with his pinnace into the say bay or sound of Dariene , where have conference with certain negro which be run away from their master of Panama and number de dios , he be inform that at the very same time many mule be come from Panama to number de dios lade with gold and silver . upon this news Francis Drake take with he a hundred shot , and the say negro , stay in the way till the treasure come by , accompany and guard only by those that drive the mule , who mistrust nothing at all . when captain Drake meet with they , he take away their gold : but the silver he leave behind , because he can not carry it over the mountain . and two day after this he go to the house of cross call by the Spaniard Venta de cruze , Venta de where all the merchant leave their good , where he slay cruzes - sixe or seven of the merchant , but find neither gold nor silver , but great store of merchandise : and so he fire the say house , with all the good , which be judge to be worth above two hundred thousand ducat . thus not find gold in this house to satisfy his mind , he burn the merchant good , and forthwith recover his pinnace : where fortune so favour his proceed , that he have not be aboard half a hour , but there come to the sea side above three hundred soldier , which be send of purpose to take he : but God suffer he to escape their hand , to be a far plague unto the Spaniard . also another Englishman name John Oxenham hear - JohnOxenham ing what spoil captain Drake have do upon that coast , anno make a voyage thither to enterprise the like . his ship be of burden about a hundred and twenty ton , and he be accompany with seventie person : he have conference also with the foresay negro , but be advertise that the treasure be conduct by soldier , he determine with himself to do that which never any man before dare undertake to do . for be most resolute of his purpose , and not look nor forecast what danger may ensue of this bold enterprise , he land his 229 man in the same place where captain Drake be , and hail his ship to shore , cut down bough of tree , and cover his ship with they , and hide up his great ordinance in the ground . thus leave not one man in his ship , he take two small piece of ordinance , and his caliver , and good store of victual , with all other necessary for his intend voyage . and he go with the negro above a fwer run - twelve league up into the main land , unto a river that seuti ” ea run into the south sea : and by this river in a wood he ’ cut down timber , and build a pinnace , which be 45 foot long by the keel ; which pinnace be finish , he go down the river and pass into the south sea , carry six negro with he for his guide , and he arrive at the hand of pearl be 25 league distant from Panama . this hand lie in the south sea as they sail from Peru to Panama , and here he stay ten day , before he can take any ship , but at length there come a small bark from a place call Quito in Peru : this bark he take , and find in her 60000 pezo of gold , with much wine and bread : and not be content with this , he stay a long while , before he will send away his prize or any of his man . Shortly after he take another bark that come from Lima , wherein he find 100000 pezo of silver in bar , which be all aboard his pinnace , he shape his course towards the river from whence he come : but before his departure he land on the foresay hand to find pearl , and go to a small town of the hand inhabit by negro for the same purpose : where find but small store , he return to his pinnace , and come near unto the river he send away his two prize , and with his pinnace enter up the river . the negro of the hand of pearl , so soon as the Englishman be depart , [ three . 780 . ] post in their canoas to Panama , to signify unto the governor what they have do . whereupon the governor within two day after send out four bark and a hundred soldier , and negro to row , the captain of which soldier be call Juan de Ortega : who go first to the hand of pearl , and there have knowledge which way 230 the Englishman do take , and in pursue they he meet with the two prize take by the Englishman , which tell he that they be go up the river . but when he be come to the entrance of the river , he know not which way to take , because the river run into the sea by three mouth , and not all at one . therefore be determine with himself to pass up the great of the three , he see come down with the stream many feather of hen out of one of the lesser mouth : which mouth he enter , and sail four day up the same , he descry the Englishman pinnace lie upon the sand , and come to board she , they find in she no more but six Englishman , of which they kill one , and the other 5 flee , and have thorough ransack the say pinnace , they can find nought in she , but victual . the Spaniard see this , determine to seek out the Englishman by land , and leave about twenty man to keep their bark they march with eighty shot up into the country , and half a league from the river they find a little house make with bough , where the Englishman have leave all their treasure ; which the Spaniard take and carry back to their bark , mean not to follow the Englishman any further ; but the english captain with all his man , and above 200 negro follow the Spaniard unto the river side , and set upon they with great fury : howbeit the Spaniard lie behind the bush do easy put the english to flight , and they take seven of they alive , and slay eleven and five negro : so the Spaniard return with the loss of two man and five or six hurt . than they ask those Englishmen which they have take prisoner , why they depart not with their treasure , have fifteen day liberty ? they answer , that their captain have command they to carry all that gold and silver unto the place where their ship be , and they be agree to carry it , although they make three or four journey , for he promise to give they part of the treasure beside their wage , but the mariner will needs have it by and by : whereat the captain be angry because they put so 231 A . D . 1572 - 87 . small trust in his word , will not suffer his sailor to carry it , but say he will get negro to serve his turn , and so these be the negro aforesaid , who he have bring to carry away the gold and silver : but by the way he meet with the five Englishman which flee from the pinnace , who tell he of the Spaniard ; and than he make friend with all his man , and get the negro to take his part : but have the overthrow , and his best man be slay and take prisoner , he think to have return to his ship , and so to have go for England . the spanish captain have hear this discourse of the english prisoner , bury the dead body , embark all thing , and with the Englishman and their pinnace return back unto Panama . thus be the Englishman voyage overthrow . now so soon as the four bark and the pinnace be arrive at Panama , the governor of that place send a messenger overland to number de dios , to advertise the townsman , where the Englishman ship lie : whereupon they of number de dios man out four ship and go into the bay of Dariene where the Englishman have leave their ship , which they take away with they to number de dios , with all her ordinance ; so that the poor Englishman be leave in the mountain very naked and destitute of all comfort : for the Spaniard have take out of the foresay house of bough all their tool and other necessary , so that they can by no mean have any succour : whereas otherwise they may have build another pinnace , and provide better for themselves to have return for their own country . Theise news come to the ear of the viceroy of Peru , he think it not convenient to suffer those fifty Englishman which be yet alive , to continue in the mountain among the say negro . wherefore he send a servant of his call Diego de Frees with 150 shot to seek they , who at length find they make of canoas to take some one small bark or other that sail to and again in the north sea , whereby they may the 232 better shift for themselves : but before they have finish their pretend work , the spanish soldier set upon they , and take fifteen of they that be sick : but the rest flee , who the Spaniard pursue among the mountain , and in the end the negro betray they , and they be all take and carry to Panama . where the justice ask the english captain , whither he have the queen licence , or the licence of any other prince or lord ? and he answer that he have none , but that he come of his own proper motion . which be know to the justice , the captain and his company be condemn and be all put to death at Panama , save the captain himself , the master , and the pilot , and five boy , which be carry to Lima , where