which exercise they be attentive , and seem great to be affect with it : but when they be come unto we , they restore again unto we those thing which before we bestow upon they . the news of our be there be spread through the country , the people that inhabit round about come down , and among they the king himself , a man of a goodly stature , and comely personage , with many other tall and warlike man : before who come be send two ambassador to our general , to signify that their king be come , in do of which message , their speech be continue about half a hour . This end , they by sign request our general to send some thing by their hand to their king , as a token that his come may be in peace : wherein our general have satisfy they , they return with glad tiding to their king , who march to we with a princely majesty , the people cry continual after their manner , and as they draw near unto we , so do they strive to behave themselves in their action with comeliness . in the forefront be a man of a goodly personage , who bear the sceptre or mace before the king , whereupon hang two crown , a less and a big , with three chain of a marvellous length : the crown be make of knit work wrought artificial with feather of diverse colour : the chain be make of a bony substance , and few be the person among they that be admit to wear they : and of that number also the person be 120 stint , as some ten , some 12 . etc next unto he which bear the sceptre , be the king himself , with his guard about his person , clad with conie skin , and other skin : after they follow the naked common sort of people , every one have his face paint , some with white , some with black , and other colour , and have in their hand one thing or another for a present , not so much as their child , but they also bring their present . in the mean time our general gather his man together , and march within his fence place , make against their approach a very warlike show . they be troop together in their order , and a generail salutation be make , there be present a general silence . than he that bear the sceptre before the king , be inform by another , who they assign to that office , with a manly and lofty voice proclaim that which the other speak to he in secret , continue half [ three . 738 . ] a hour : which end , and a general amen as it be give , the king with the whole number of man and woman ( the child except ) come down without any weapon , who descend to the foot of the hill , set themselves in order . in come towards our bulwark and tent , the scepter - bearer begin a song , observe his measure in a dance , and that with a stately countenance , who the king with his guard , and every degree of person follow , do in like manner sing and dance , save only the woman , which dance and keep silence . the general permit they to enter within our bulwark , where they continue their song and dance a reasonable time . when they have satisfy themselves , they make sign to our general to sit down , to who the king , and diverse other make several oration , or rather supplication , that he will take their province and kingdom into his hand , and become their king , make sign that they will resign unto he their right and title of the whole land , and become his subject . in which , to persuade we the better , the king and the rest , with one 121 the king consent , and with great reverence , joyful sing a reside hu song , do set the crown upon his head , enrich his kingdom * to neck with all their chain , and offer unto he many sir Francis other thing , honour he by the name of Hioh , drake . add thereunto as it seem , a sign of triumph : which thing our general thought not meet to reject , because he know not what honour and profit it may be to our country . wherefore in the name , and to the use of her majesty he take the sceptre , crown , and dignity of the say country into his hand , wish that the riches and treasure thereof may so convenient be transport to the enrich of her kingdom at home , as it abound in you same . the common sort of people leave the king and his guard with our general , scatter themselves together with their sacrifice among our people , take a diligent view of every person : and - such as please their fancy , ( which be the young ) they enclose they about offer their sacrifice unto they with lamentable weep , scratch , and tear the flesh from their face with their nail , whereof issue abundance of blood . but we use sign to they of dislike this , and stay their hand from force , and direct they upward to the live God , the like they who only they ought to worship . they show unto do in Hoche - we their wound , and crave help of they at our hand , whereupon we give they lotion , plaster , and ointments , agree to the state of their grief , beseech God to cure their disease . Every three day they bring their sacrifice unto we , until they understand our meaning , that we have no pleasure in they : yet they can not be long absent from we , but daily frequent our company to the hour of our departure , which departure seem so grievous unto they , that their joy be turn into sorrow . they entreat we , that be absent we will remember they , and by stealth provide a sacrifice , which we mislike . our necessary business be end , our general with his company travail up into the country to their 122 village , where we find herd of deer by 1000 in great herd a company , be most large , and fat of body . of deer . we find the whole country to be a warren of a abundance of strange kind of cony , their body in bigness as be stran & continue ™ 5 - the Barbary cony , their head as the head of we , the foot of a want , and the tail of a rat be of great length : under her chin be on either side a bag , into the which she gather her meat , when she have fill her belly abroad . the people eat their body , and make great account of their skin , for their king coat be make of they . Oure general call this country Nova Albion , and Nova Albion . that for two cause : the one in respect of the white bank and cliff , which lie towards the sea : and the other , because it may have some affinity with our country in name , which sometime be so call . there be no part of earth here to be take up , gold and wherein there be not some probable show of gold or r ° earth of Nova S11V5 - , , „ Albion . at our departure hence our general set up a monument of our be there , as also of her majesty right and title to the same , namely a plate , nail upon a fair great post , whereupon be engrave her majesty name , the day and year of our arrival there , with the free give up of the province and people into her majesty hand , together with her highness picture and arm , in a piece of six penny of current english money under the plate , whereunder be also write the name of our general . it seem that the Spaniard hitherto have never be their deparin this part of the country , neither do ever discover ture - the land by many degree , to the southward of this place .. October . after we have set sail from hence , we continue certain without sight of land till the 13 . day of October island in % , follow , which day in the morning we fall with certain island 8 . degree to the northward of the line , qanoas > i ^ e from which island come a great number of canoas , those of Java . 123 have in some of they 4 . in some 6 . and in some also 14 . man , bring with they coco , and other fruit . [ Iii . 739 . ] their canoas be hollow within , and cut with great art and cunning , be very smooth within and without , and bear a glass as if it be a horn dainty burnish , have a prow , and a stern of one sort , yield inward circlewise , be of a great height , and full of certain white shell for a bravery , and on each side of they lie out two piece of timber about a yard and a half long , more or less , accord to the smallness , or bigness of the boat . this people have the nether part of their ear cut into a round circle , hang down very low upon their cheek , whereon they hang thing of a reasonable weight . the nail of their hand be a inch long , their tooth be as black as pitch , and they renew they often , by eat of a herb with a kind of powder , which they always carry about they in a cane for the same purpose . Islands . leave this island the night after we fall with it , the 18 . of October , we light upon diverse other , some whereof make a great show of inhabitant . we continue our course by the island of Tagulada , Zelon , and Zewarra , be friend to the Portugal , the first whereof have grow in it great store of cinnamom . November . the 14 . of November we fall with the island of Maluco , which day at night ( have direct our course to run with Tydore ) in coast along the island of mutyr , belong to the king of ternate , his deputy or vice - king see we at sea , come with his Canoa to we without all fear , and come aboard , and after some conference with our general , will he in any wise to the isle of run in with ternate , and not with Tydore , assure ternate . hjm tjiat the king will be glad of his come , and will be ready to do what he will require , for which purpose he himself will that night be with the king , and tell he the news , with who if he once deal , he 124 shall find that as he be a king , so his word shall stand : add further , that if he go to Tydore before he come to ternate , the king will have nothing to do with we , because he hold the Portugal as his enemy : whereupon our general resolve to run with ternate , where the next morning early we come to anchor , at which time our general send a messenger to the king with a velvet cloak for a present , and token of his come to be in peace , and that he require nothing but traffic and exchange of merchandise , whereof he have good store , in such thing as he want . in the mean time the vice - king have be with the king accord to his promise , signify unto he what good thing he may receive from we by traffic : whereby the king be move with great like towards we , and send to our general with speciali message , that he shall have what thing he need , and will require with peace and friendship , and moreover that he will yield himself , and the right of his island to be at the pleasure and commandment of so famous a prince as we serve . in token whereof he send to our general a signet , and within short time after come in his own person , with boat , and canoas to our ship , to bring she into a better and safe road than she be in at present . in the mean time , our general messenger be come to the court , be meet by certain noble personage with great solemnity , and bring to the king , at who hand he be most friendly and gracious entertain . the king purpose to come to our ship , send before 4 . great and large canoas , in every one whereof be certain of his great state that be about he , attire in white lawn of cloth of Calicut , have over their head from the one end of the Canoa to the other , a cover of thin perfume mat , bear up with a frame make of reed for the same use , under which every one do sit in his order accord to his 125 A . D . » 579 - the king of ternate offer himself and his kingdom to the service of the queen of England . the great and strange canoas of the king of ternate . the king of ternate come to visit sir Francis . Drake . [ Iii . 740 . ] saga a kind of meal . the english voyage dignity , to keep he from the heat of the sun , diverse of who be of good age and gravity , do make a ancient and fatherly show . there be also diverse young and comely man attire in white , as be the other : the rest be soldier , which stand in comely order round about on both side , without who sit the rower in certain gallery , which be three on a side all along the canoas , do lie off from the side thereof three or four yard , one be orderly build low than another , in every of which gallery be the number of 4 . score rower . Theise canoas be furnish with warlike munition , every man for the most part have his sword and target , with his dagger , beside other weapon , as lance , caliver , dart , bow and arrow : also every Canoa have a small cast base mount at the least one full yard upon a stock set upright . thus come near our ship , in order they row about we , one after another , and pass by , do their homage with great solemnity , the great personage begin with great gravity and fatherly countenance , signify that the king have