have the government of Peru , the king of Spain shall be enforce to agree with they : if not ( say he ) we shall not lack they that will succour we , to have the riches of Peru . by these persuasion he bring many soldier to be of his mind , and conspire also with a young gentleman of Seville call don Fernando de Gusman ( who be in love with a young woman which the captain Pedro de Orzua have , and therefore do the 244 don Ferdinando de Gusman proclaim kin Lopez VAZ soon agree unto the wicked intent of Agira ) to murder the captain . who on a night be asleep in his bed , the say conspirator and their faction enter into his bedchamber , and there stab he with their dagger ; which be do , they slay also all the captain that be his friend , and therewithal ! make a great outcry , say , God save the king , God save the king : whereupon all the camp be in a uproar . then Lopez de Agira make unto the soldier a long oration , and get they all to consent unto he , some by force , and some because they dare not say to the contrary , and other of their good will , and so in the end they all agree unto his determine purpose . then make they Fernando de Gusman their head , 8c Agira be make a captain . this do , because the people shall the better hold their opinion , he do as great a villainy as ever any Spaniard commit : for he make a altar , whereon he and all the soldier renounce their service unto the king of Spain , 8c so as people without a king , choose the say don Fernando to be their king , and do homage unto he . Theise matter be thus finish they consult among themselves which shall be the best way for they to go of Peru . “ to Peru ? for they can not go up the river , by which they come down , in regard of the strong current , and go back overland they shall be very weak for want of horseman : wherefore they determine to go down the river . then say Lopez de Agira , that they will carry nothing with they but the pinnace and soldier which shall fight , and that it be best to leave behind they all the Indian which they bring from Peru , with the woman and the sick man . whereunto the general don Ferdinando will not agree , because he know that when they be go the people of the country will kill they all . Lopez de Agira hear this , and long to be chief governor himself , take unto he 30 of his own countryman of his Fernando and disposition , and on the sudden slay don Fernando , Gusman who not many day before he have swear to obey : 8c slay . 245 now by his subtle practise , be withal eloquent in his talk , he cause the soldier to appoint himself their governor , and make they believe that all the cruelty commit be for their saveguard : neither do the tyrannic of this wretched man here end . he be bear in Biskay a country near unto France , wherefore i believe he rather to have be a Frenchman than a Spaniard , for that in the heart of a Spaniard can not be a new mass - so much cruelty as this man show . now be ready sacre ’ to go his way , he determine not to carry with he any gendeman or person of quality , and therefore he slay all such person ; and then depart only with the common soldier , he leave behind he all the spanish woman and sick man , with all other creature . if i shall rehearse all the cruel murder of this wicked man one by one , i shall be over tedious unto you . only in few word i say , that this man proceed down the river , have with he only four hundred man : but before he pass the [ three . 786 . ] river , and be come to Margarita , he have no more leave but two hundred and thirty man , for the rest he have put to death , and leave on shore among the people of the country : all which tyranny he use , because he ever stand in fear of his life : for have he see at any time but two soldier talk together , he will straight suspect that they be conspire of his death , and therefore he use the practise abovesaid . and he never go any way , but that he have in his company thirty Biscayne of his own will and mind ready to execute his cruel purpose . great store of as these soldier with their captain come down gild in the the r [ verj they see many canoas with gold in they nver of Mar - passjn „ too a j fro and people on both side of the river , and in their passage many time they land , and get good store of gold and victual . now also do they amazmes find that to be true which Orellana have report , namely at there be Amazon , that be to say , woman that husband ^ in fight in the war with bow and arrow : but these the war . woman fight to aid their husband , and not by they - 246 self alone without the company of man , as Orellana report . there be of these woman upon diverse part of this river , who see the Spaniard fight with their husband come in to succour they , and show themselves more valiant than their husband ; for which cause it be name , the river of Amazones . the Spaniard intent be only to pass down the river , neither seek they at all to discover the inland , and yet they take good store of gold , put it into one of their pinnace , where Lopez de Agira himself be embark , which pinnace at the mouth of the river be cast away , but he himself escape , because he have not as yet fulfil his bloody mind . and when he be come to the island of Margarita , the governor thereof suppose he have be one of the king loyal captain , receive he with pinnace , and bring good store of victual unto he . but he put the say governor immediate to death , land on the hand , and take it and two ship that be there , and constrain likewise a hundred and fifty man , which he good store of gold . Lopez de Agira arrive at Margarita 1568 . there find , to go with he , beside other that go voluntary , carry from thence good store of victuales , and many horse also . and then he return to the main land , say , that with his small force he will subdue the whole India : imagine belike that all the old soldier and poor people , at the first sight of he , will turn to his side and take his part . howbeit he be foul deceive : for before he have march two day journey up into the land , the governor of Nueva Granada come against he with a power of man : but Lopez de Agira hope that other soldier will have join themselves unto he , whereby his strength may have be the more , be quite frustrate of his expectation : for even his own man leave he , and take part with the king captain . now see himself thus leave destitute of his soldier , and void of all help , he commit a more unnatural bloody act then ever Nero the tyrant do , for he murder his own 247 great riches hide within the river of Marannon . the coast of Brasill , why it be so call , and by who it be at the first discover . the english voyage daughter be but sixteen year of age , which he have bring with he out of Peru : the cause why he kill she be , that she may not become a concubine to villain , nor be call the daughter of a traitor : and these word he use unto she , so soon as he have give she her death wound : but before he can finish this cruel act , the soldier come upon he , and cut he in piece , also his daughter die of her wound in that place . thus have you hear the miserable end of this bloody caitiff : in regard of who treacherous and mischievous deal the king will never since suffer this river to be thorough discover ; so that the riches and treasure of the say river remain unknown even until this present day . now leave to discourse any long of this river of Marannon , all the coast between the say river and the river of plate , be call the coast of Brasill , take that name from a kind of wood in the same country , call brasill - wood , whereof there be great store in those part . this coast of Brasill be first discover by Pedro Alvarez Cabral , in the second voyage which the king of Portugal cause to be make to the east Indies : and the foresay Pedro Alvarez take possession of this land for the king of Portugal : whereupon the king don Emanuel hear news thereof send present ship to discover the whole country , and find it to be part of America otherwise call the west Indies : for which cause there grow some controversy between he and the king of Spain : but be kinsman and great friend one to another , they agree in the end , that the king of Portugal shall hold all the country that he have discover , the which be ( as i have say ) from the river of Marannon to the river of plate ; albeit the Spaniard affirm , that it stretch no further than the hand of Santa Catelina ; whereupon there have rise many controversy between the Portugal and Spaniard , which have cost many man their life . 248 there come into the say river of plate in the year 1587 two english ship and a pinnace of the right honourable the earl of Cumberland , which be bind for the strait of Magellan , and ankor ten league [ three . 787 . ] within the say river before a little hand lie hard by another call seal - hand . on which hand the captain of one of the ship call Christopher Lister , and his whole company land , find the king of Portugal arm grave on a rock by the sea side ; which be think to have be there engrave by one Martin Alonso de Souza , who be send by the king don Emanuel to discover this coast . therefore i think the Portugal have reason for that which they allege concern the extension of the say coast of Brasil . wherefore the king of Portugal ! give this land to diverse of his gentleman to inhabit . most of the natural inhabitant of this country be very rude , and go stark naked both man and woman , and be maneater ; for which cause they make war one against another to get man to eat ; they be stout and good bowman . the first place inhabit on this coast beyond the river of Maran non be call Fernambuck so name by the Indian , but in Portugal ! it be call Villa de Olinda . before you come to this place there be a port call Parajua , unto which port not many year past the Frenchman hear of the trouble which be then in Portugal resort , and build there a fort ; whereunto certain french ship make yearly voyage to lade brasill - wood . but they of Fernambuck , with the help of the Spaniard , go and burn five french ship within the port , and take the fort it self , and the Frenchman that be there flee part into the mountain , and part of they be slay ; so that since that time the Spaniard have inhabit there till this present . now to return to Fernambuck inhabit by a Portugal captain call Duarte Coelio , it be the great town in all that coast , and have above three thousand house in it , with seventie ingenios for sugar , and great store Fernambuck . a fort build by the Frenchman at Parajua . Parajua now inhabit by Spaniards . Fernambuck contain 3000 house . 249 of brasill - wood and abundance of cotton , yet be they in great want of victual : for all their victual come either from Portugal or from some place upon the coast of Brasill . the harbour of this town be a bar harbour , and fit only for small bark : this place belong as yet unto the son of Duarte Coelio . cape S . au - beyond this town lie the cape of Sant Augustin , , and next thereunto be the river of Sant Francisco , which Francisco . 1S a great nver . between this river and naya it be all a wilderness inhabit with cruel savage , for whosoever they take they kill and eat he . the bayhaatowne town of Bayha belong to the king , and therefore ofvcoohmue . governor of all the coast keep his residence in the same , as also the bishop . it contain xooo house , and 40 ingenios for sugar , and have much cotton , but no brasill - wood at all . the sea run up into the country here 14 or 15 league , where they get some year good store of amber - griese . here be great plenty of victual , and although the country be hot , yet be it healthful , and the air wholesome . the next town upon as Ilhas . the