happy perform round about the world , by sir Francis Drake , and m . Thomas candish esquire , together with the rest of our english voyage intend for the south sea , the kingdom of Chili , Peru , the back side of Nueva Espanna , the Malucos , the philippinas , the mighty empire of China , though not so happy perform as the two former : whereunto be annex certain rare observation touch the present state of China , and the kingdom of Coray , late invade by quabacondono the last monarch of the 66 . princedom of Japan . the famous voyage of sir Francis drake into the south sea , and therehence about the whole globe of the earth , begin in the year of our lord , 1577 . 15 . day of November , in the year of our i 1577 . m . Francis Drake , with a fleet of s ^ ips and bark , and to the number of 164 . man , gentleman and sailor , depart from plymouth , give out his pretend voyage for Alexandria : but the wind fall contrary , he be force the ioi A . D . ’ 577 - the ci tie of Assumption , or ascension 60 . league from the mouth of Paraguai . 200 . league from Assumption subject to the Spaniard , to the ci tie of xaraes . next morning to put into Falmouth haven in cornwall , where such and so terrible a tempest take we , as few man have see the like , and be in deed so vehement , that all our ship be like to have go to wrack : but it please God to preserve we from that extremity , and to afflict we only for that present with these two particular : the mast of our admiral which be the pelican , be cut over board for the safeguard of the ship , and the marigold be drive ashore , and somewhat bruise : for the repair of which damage we return again to Plymouth , and have recover those harm , and bring the ship again to good state , we set forth the second time from Plymouth , and set sail the 13 . day of December follow . the 25 . day of the same month we fall with the cape Cantin , upon the coast of Barbary , and coast the isle of along , the 27 . day we find a island call mogador , mogador on lie one mile distant from the main , between which arbarie ^ island and the main , we find a very good and safe harbour for our ship to ride in , as also very good entrance , and void of any danger . on this island our general erect a pinnace , whereof he bring out of England with he four already frame . while these thing be in do , there come to the water side some of the inhabitant of the country , show forth their flag of truce , which be see of our general , he send his ship boat to the shore , to know what they will : they be willing to come aboard , our man leave there one man of our company for a pledge , and bring two of they aboard our ship , which by sign show our general , that the next day they will bring some provision , as sheep , capon and hen , and such like : whereupon our general bestow among they some linen cloth and shoe , and a javelin , which they very joyful receive , and depart for that time . the next morning they fail not to come again to the water side , and our general again set out 102 our boat , one of our man leap over rash ashore , and offer friendly to embrace they , they set violent hand on he , offer a dagger to his throat if he have make any resistance , and so lay he on a horse , carry he away : so that a man can be too circumspect and wary of himself among such miscreant . our pinnace be finish , we depart from this place the 30 . and last day of December , and coast [ three . 731 . ] along the shore , we do descry , not contrary to our expectation , certain canter which be spanish fisherman , to who we give chase and take three of they , and proceed further we meet with 3 . caravel and take they also . the 17 . day of January we arrive at cape Blanco , Januarie . where we find a ship ride at anchor , within the cape , and but two simple mariner in she , which ship we take and carry she further into the harbour , where we remain 4 . day , and in that space our general muster , and train his man on land in warlike manner , to make they fit for all occasion . in this place we take of the fisherman such necessary as we want , and they can yield we , and leave here one of our little bark call the Benedict , we take with we one of they which they call canter , be of the burden of 40 . ton or thereabouts . all these thing be finish , we depart this harbour the 22 . of Januarie , carry along with we one of the Portugal caravel which be bind to the island of cape Verde for salt , whereof good store be make in one of those island . the master or pilot of that caravel do advertise our general that upon one of those island call Mayo , the isle of there be great store of dry cabritos , which a few maj °- inhabitants there dwell do yearly make ready for such of the king ship as do there touch , be bind for his country of Brasile or elsewhere . we fall with this island the 27 . of January , but the inhabitant will in no case traffic with we , be 103 thereof forbid by the king edict : yet the next day our general send to view the island , and the likelihood that may be there of provision of victual , about threescore and two man under the conduct and government of master winter and master doughty , and march towards the chief place of habitation in this island ( as by the Portugal we be inform ) have travail to the mountain the space of three mile , and arrive there somewhat before the day break , we arrest our self to see day before we , which appear , we find the inhabitant to be flee : but the place , by reason that it be manure , we find to be more fruitful than the other part , especial the valley among the hill . rife grape in here we give our self a little refresh , as by very winter . ripe anj swee [ e grape , which the fruitfulness of the earth at that season of the year yield we : and that season be with we the depth of winter , it may seem strange that those fruit be then there grow : but the reason thereof be this , because they be between the Tropike and the equinoctial , the sun pass twice in the year through their zenith over their head , by mean whereof they have two summer , and be so near the heat of the line , they never lose the heat of the sun so much , but the fruit have their increase and continuance in the midst of winter . the island be wonderful store with goat and wild hen , and it have salt also without labour , save only that the people gather it into heap , which continual in great quantity be increase upon the sand by the flow of the sea , and the receive heat of the sun kern the same , so that of the increase thereof they keep a continual traffic with their neighbour . the descrip - among other thing we find here a kind of fruit cion of the tree cahe Cocos , which because it be not common know kos ^* we in England , i think good to make some description of it . 104 the tree bear no leaf nor branch , but at the very top the fruit grow in cluster , hard at the top of the stem of the tree , as big every several fruit as a man head : but have take off the uttermost bark , which you shall find to be very full of string or sinew , as i may term they , you shall come to a hard shell which may hold of quantity in liquor a pint common , or some a quart , and some less : within that shell of the thickness of half a inch good , you shall have a kind of hard substance and very white , no less good and sweet than almond : within that again a certain clear liquor , which be drink , you shall not only find it very delicate and . sweet , but most comfortable and cordial . after we have satisfy our self with some of these fruit , we march further into the island , and see great store of * cabritos alive , which be so chase by the inhabitant , that we can do no good towards our provision , but they have lay out as it be to stop our mouth withal , certain old dry cabritos , which be but ill , and small and few , we make no account of . A . D . 1578 . * or goat . be return to our ship , our general depart hence the 31 . of this month , and sail by the island the isle of saint of S . Iago , but far enough from the danger of the inhabitant , who shot and discharge at we three piece , but they all fall short of we , and do we not harm . the island be fair and large , and as it seem , rich and fruitful , and inhabit by the Portugal , but the mountain and high place of the island be say to be possess by the moor , who have be slave to the Portugal , to ease themselves , make escape to the desert place of the island , where they abide with great strength . be before this island , we espy two ship under [ in . 732 . ] sail , to the one of which we give chase , and in the end board she with a shipboat without resistance , which we find to be a good prize , and she yield unto we 105 a prize , and good store of wine : which prize our general commit to the custody of master doughty , and retain the % lfot take . p ^ ot > send the rest away with his pinnace , give they a butt of wine and some victual , and their wear clothes , and so they depart . the isle of the same night we come with the island call by the Portugal , ilha del fogo , that be , the burn island : in the northside whereof be a consume fire , the matter be say to be of sulphur , but notwithstanding it be like to be a commodious island , because the Portugal have build , and do inhabit there . upon the south side thereof lie a most pleasant and sweet island , the tree whereof be always green and fair to look upon , in respect whereof they call it ilha brava , that be , the brave island . from the bank thereof into the sea do run in many place reasonable stream of fresh water easy to be come by , but there be no convenient road for our ship : for such be the depth , that no ground can be have for anchor , and it be report , that ground be never find in that place , so that the top of Fogo burr ne not so high in the air , but the root of Brava be quench as low in the sea . be depart from these island , we draw towards the line , where we be becalm the space of 3 . week , but yet subject to diverse great storm , terrible lightning and much thunder : but with this misery we have the commodity of great store of fish , as dolphin , bonito , and fly fish , whereof some fall into our ship , wherehence they can not rise again for want of moisture , for when their wing be dry , they can fly . from the first day of our departure from the island of cape Verde , we sail 54 . day without sight of land , and the first land that we fall with be the coast April . of Brasil , which we see the five of April in the height 33 - agree . o £ 33 . degree towards the pole antarctike , and be discover at sea by the inhabitant of the country , 106 1578 . they make upon the coast great fire for a sacrifice ( as we learn ) to the devil , about which they use conjuration , make heap of sand and other ceremony , that when any ship shall go about to stay upon their coast , not only sand may be gather together in shoald in every place , but also that storm and tempest may arise , to the cast away of ship and man , whereof ( as it be report ) there have be diverse experiment . the seven day in a mighty great storm both of lightning , rain and thunder , we lose the canter which we call the Christopher : but the eleven day after , by our general great care in disperse his ship , we find she again , and the place where we meet , our general call the cape of joy , where every ship take in some cape of water . here we find a good temperature and sweet air , a very fair and pleasant country with a exceed fruitful soil , where be great store of large and mighty deer , but we come not to the sight of any people : but travel further into the country , we perceive the foot of people in the clay - ground , show that they be man of great stature . be return to our ship , we weigh anchor , and run somewhat further , and harbour our self between a rock and the main , where by mean of the rock that break the force of the sea , we rid very safe , and upon this rock we kill for our provision certain seawolve , common call with we seal . from hence we go our course to 36 . degree , and t ^ ir entrance enter the great river of plate , and run into 54 . and 55 . fathom and a half of fresh water , where we fill our water by the ship side : but our general find here no good