do this brutish people bear against the Spaniard , that they choose rather to die the death , than to endure their insolence . it happen on a time , that a Spaniard call certain Indian to work in the mine ( which labour of all other do most grieve they ) they , rather than they will go , offer to lay violent hand on themselves : which the Spaniard perceive say unto they : see you will hang your self rather than go a pretty jest . and work , i likewise will hang my self and will bear you company , because i will make you work in a other world : but the Indian hear this , reply , we will willing work with you here , to the intent you may not go with we into another world : so unwilling be they of the Spaniard company . so that of all the inhabitant of this hand there be none that escape death , save only these few , which come to pass by the mean of this one Spaniarde , otherwise they will have hang themselves also . some of these people be yet live , but very few . this hand of Hispaniola be for the most part call the he of Sant Domingo , because the chief city thereof be so call , which be the first city in all the west Indies that be inhabit . there be in this city above eight hundred fire - house of good building inhabit by gentleman of great wealth . this hand be unhealthful , for it rain here the most part of the year . the riches that now this hand afford be sugar ( for sugar , hide , here be many ingenios or sugar - house ) and great coppermine . store of hide by reason of the abundance of cattle ; there be copper mine also , which be the cause that they have such store of copper - money , for their gold mine be all ' exhaust , and the gold which they have come from other place . this hand be ( as be beforesaide ) destitute of the first inhabitant , and the 239 Spaniard lack man to work in their ingenios , and to look unto their cattle , they be force to bring negro negro thither out of Guinea , where they have so ' increase increase , that the hand be now as full of they , as ncreas .. t be of natural inhabitant ; so that the Spaniard carry negro from this hand to the main land and there sell they . the chief victuali that they have i root call in this hand , be a kind of root call Juca , which be juca ' eat as it come new out of the ground be present death : but first they boil it and after press it , and the liquor that be strain therefrom be deadly poison : howbeit this root be press so dry , that there remain no moisture in it , they mingle and temper the same with water and so make cake thereof , which be very savoury and good to eat , and this be all the bread which they have in those hand . there go from hence yearly into Spain 7 or 8 ship at the least full freight with sugar and hide . the we off near unto Hispaniola lie another great hand Cuba - call Cuba , it be like unto Hispaniola , although there be not so much sugar . the principali town of this island be call Havana , which have a excellent harbour belong thereunto . the townsman be very rich by reason of the fleet that come from Nueva Espanna , and Tierra firma which touch there ; for the safeguarde of which fleet and of the town it self there be a castle build near the say harbour keep with spanish soldier ; neither be there any castle or soldier in all the hand but only here . there be also another hand saint Juan de inhabit with Spaniards call boriquen or Sant Juan Puerto neo . je puerto rico . p be but little , yet every way as plentiful ! as the other two be ; and therefore i omit to speak thereof . but now to prosecute my discourse of the port - town upon the main land : eastward and southward from Margarita there be no town inhabit by Spaniard or Ternambuck . Portugal , till you come to Fernambuck upon the coast of Brasil ; notwithstanding that between the say hand 240 the material original position here be too large for reproduction in this reissue . a pdf can be download from the web address give on page iv downloadeflkrfomhttps ^ www . cambndge . orga ^^ Nofa flatWn 30 Aug 2021 at 14 : 09 : 32 , subject to the 1572 - 87 . and Fernambuck run the mighty river of Marannon , the great whereof ( both because of the greatness and the riches ww ° f contain therein ) i must needs make some relation , in marmnon - regarde i have promise to speak of every place that be of any value in all the Indies . this river be one of the great in the world , and be first find when as the Spaniard seek out the other coast : but none can pass up this river because of the greatness of the current which come down , as also there be many shelf of sand lie in the mouth thereof : whereby it be long [ three . 784 . ] before the riches in and about this river be know , until such time as the kingdom of Peru be conquer : at which time a captain call Gonsalo Pizarro pass through the country of Peru come at length into a land which they name la Canela , because there grow great store of Sinamome , but not altogether so good as that which come from the east Indies . the say captain proceed far into the country come at length to a mighty river , where he see the country people row in their canoas , and bring gold to buy and sell with the Spaniard . captain Pizarro see this , be desirous to find out the end of this river , but he can not travel by land because of the high mountain : wherefore he make a small bark or pinnace to go and discover from whence the say Indian bring their gold , and send in the say pinnace a captain under he call Orellana , who with fifty man go down the river , but can not return to their general Pizarro , because of the great current 0 0 which be very strong against they , force they to fifty man . pass along the river , and to enter into the sea , and so they sail on forward to the foresay he of Margarita : but as they pass down this river they find it well inhabit with Indian , which be possess of great store of gold . Theise man with their pinnace be pass down this river eight month , for the river lie very crooked , which make a long way by water , neither dare the Spaniard ever land , because they see xi 241 q the great river of Marannon or Orellana . Orellana send down the river of Mar - the country so full of people , but they take many canoas , wherein they have great store of victual and some gold . now this Orellana come unto Margarita with these good news and riches , determine not to return unto his captain Pizarro which send he , but take his way from thence to the king of Spain , and present he with the gold that he bring out of the river : whereupon the king send he with a fleet of ship and six hundred man to inhabit the say river : but because of the great current and sholde that be therein , he leave the most part of his man and ship , and with those that remain he go unto certain island hard by the river , and build he pinnace ; but the country be very unhealthful , himself and many of his man die , and the residue go every man which way please he best . the fame of this river be straightway spread through Spain and Portugal , insomuch that a gentleman of Portugal call Lewis de Melo ask licence of don Juan the three , than king of Portugal to go and conqu the say river : for from the mouth of this river to the mouth of the river of plate , be that part of America which the king of Portugal ( accord to the partition make between they and the king of Spain ) do hold : so that the king of Portugal have this river in his part give it to the say Lewis de Melo to conquer : who take ten ship and eight hundred man ( among which many be gentleman ) and come to the mouth of this river , lose all the say ship save two , in one of the which two be Lewis the Melo himself : also the most part of the man that be in the ship cast away be save and get to the shore , and so go by land to the hand of Margarita ; from whence they be disperse throughout all the Indies . thus these two fleet of ship be so unfortunate cast away , never dare any captain afterward attempt by sea to conquer the say river . howbeit from the kingdom of Nueva Granada before mention there have 242 go two or three captain by land to discover it , for a rumour go over all the country of the great riches contain in this river ; whereupon the Spaniard name it el Dorado , that be to say , the golden river . it be el Dorado . thought that God will not have this river to be know , for that one captain by land have most of his people slay by those of the country , and other for want of victual return . so that none of all these come to any plain discovery , till a few year past a captain of the country of Navarre call Pedro de Orzua , who Pedn de go from Peru almost the same way that Gonsalo Orzua - Pizarro have before discover , and be accompany with about some seven hundred Spaniard , it be a great marvel how he can get so many , among who be many gentleman and old soldier of Peru , who cause diverse mutiny and insurrection , as hereafter i will more at large declare , which mutinous soldier be the cause of their captain death . howbeit with all these man captain Pedro de Orzua come unto the head of the say river : but you must understand , that this river be nourish not only with the water and freshet that come from the mountain of Peru , but also by all the river between the equinoctial and sixteen degree of southerly latitude , which fall thereinto and cause it to be so great . now at the head of this river the say captain Pedro de Orzua make fifteen pinnace with many canoas , wherein he carry above two thousand Indian to help he , with many horse and other provision , as mean to inhabit there : for it be not possible for he to carry all his provision by land , because the mountain be very great , there be also between they many small river which fall into this [ three . 785 . ] great river above twenty league out of the land . so this captain have all his thing in good order go down the river wjth his whole company , and at length come from among the mountain to a plain country where the Indian dwell ; and there he hold a council , determine in the same place to build a town and to fortify 243 Lopez de jdgira . his dangerous conspiracy . Pedro de Orzua murdered . the english voyage it very strong , to the end he may leave all his stuff there , and such man as be not soldier . and so they begin to build the say town , and wrought upon it all the winter : where because it rain much , and withal be very hot , sickness and want of victual begin to prevail among they , whereupon the soldier fall a murmur among themselves . for come out of Peru , which be one of the fruitful and rich country of the world , they be more incline to have their fill of bread and meat then to apply their body to labour : which be the cause that albeit the country in which they now be , be exceed fruitful , and that they see with their eye most evident appearance of gold , and also that up into the country it seem to be much better ; yet for all this they murmur and will needs return for Peru from whence they come . in the company of these man there be a soldier of Biskay call Lopez de Agira , a very little man of body and lame of one of his leg , but very valiant and of good experience in the war . this man have be one of the principali mutineer in Peru , can not here give over his old wont , but ask his fellow - soldier , what they go to seek for in those wild desert whither they be bring : for ( say he ) if you seek riches , there be enough in Peru , and there be bread , wine , flesh , and fair woman also ; so that it be better to conquer that , and to take it out of the hand of the Spaniard , and that it be no hard enterprise , because all the soldier and poor man of Peru will turn unto they , and that that be a better course , than to go and conquer the savage people in those mountain : so that once