port - town call Copiapo inhabit altogether by Indian which serve the Spaniard : and here a gentleman which be governor of the town have a ingenio for sugar : at this place end the whole province of Chili . here also the mountain join hard upon the sea be the cause why all the land between Copiapo and Peru , contain 160 league , lie desolate . 278 the first town on the coast of Peru call Atacama be a description inhabit by Indian which be slave unto the Spaniard . ° fperu - but before i pass any far i will here also declare unto you the first discovery of Peru with other matter thereto belong , and then will i return to the seacoast again : and to the end you may understand i the better , i will begin with Panama . after that the Spaniard have inhabit the north side of this main land , pass over the mountain they discover the south sea : where because they find Indian people with gold and pearl , they build a town eighteen league to the west of number de dios hard upon the seaside , and call it Panama . from hence they discover along the coast of Nueva Espanna : and for that Nueva Espanna be at the same time inhabit by Spaniards , there begin a trade from thence to Panama : but from Panama by sea to the coast of Peru they can not trade in a long time , because of the southerly wind blow on this coast almost all the year long , which be a hindrance to ship sail that way : and by land the passage be impossible , in regard of mountain and river : yea it be fifteen year before they pass the island of pearl , which be but twenty league from Panama . there be at this time in Panama two man , the one call Francisco Pizarro bear in the city of Truxillo in Spain , a valiant man , but withal poor : the other call Diego de Almagro be very rich . Theise man get a company unto they , and provide two caravel to discover the coast of Peru : and . have obtain licence of the governor of that place , Francisco Pizarro set forth with the two foresay caravel and 100 man , and Diego de Almagro stay in Panama to send he victual and other necessary . now Francisco Pizarro sail along the coast meet with much contrary wind and rain , which put he to great trouble ; and he begin also after a while to lack victual , for he be sail of that in eight month which they now pass in fifteen day , and not know the right course he run into every river and bay that he see along the coast : which 279 be the chief cause that he stay so long on his voyage : also thirty of his company die by reason of the unhealthfulness of the coast . at last he come to a Isla deal Gallo . Island call by he Isla deal Gallo , be situate from the main land six league . from hence he send one of his ship to Panama for a new supply of victual and of man : which ship be depart , 40 of his man that remain behind make a mutiny , and pass up into the country , mean to return by land to Panama , but in the way they all perish , for they be never hear of until this day . so that Francisco Pizarro be leave upon the say island only with thirteen man : who although [ three . 799 . ] he have his ship there in which he may have return , yet will he rather die than go back ; and his 13 man also be of his opinion , notwithstanding that they have no other victual , but such as they have from the main land in the night season . thus he continue nine month , before any succour be bring he from Panama : but in the end his ship return with 40 man only and victual : whereupon he prosecute his voyage till he come to the first plain country of Peru call Tumbez , where he find a fort make by the king of Peru against the Indian of the mountain . wherefore Pizarro and his man be very glad in that they have find a people of so good understanding and discretion , be rich also in gold and silver and well apparel . at this port of Tumbez he take 30000 pezo of gold in truck of merchandise : and have too few man to proceed any further he carry two Indian with he to learn the language and return back for Panama . upon this discovery Francisco Pizarro think it expedient to travel into Spain to crave of the king the conquest of this land . whither be come , the king grant his request . and with the money which he carry over with he he hire a great number of man with a fleet of ship , and bring also along with he four of his brethren very valiant and hardy man . And be come to Panama he straightway go on his voyage 280 for Peru , be accompany with his partner Diego de Almagro . they sail first to the island call Isla deal Gallo ; where Francisco pizarroand his brethren go on land , and leave Diego de Almagro in the ship . and the whole number which afterward land on the main land be 60 horseman and 120 footman , with two great fieldpiece . but before we proceed any far , we think it not tir river of amiss to describe unto you the situation of Peru , and the natural disposition of the inhabitant : this country be call Peru by the Spaniard , of a river so name by the Indian , where they first come to the sight of gold . from which river stand under the line , till you come to Copiapo the first town on the coast of Chili , stretch the land of Peru , for the space of eight hundred league : upon six hundred whereof from Atacama to Tumbez do never drop of rain fall , since the flood of Noah : and yet it be the fruitful land for all kind of victual and other necessary for the sustentation of man life that be to be find in all the world beside . the reason why it the cause why rain not in this land be because it be a plain coun - ^ mth not trey and very narrow and low , situate between the ' equinoctial and the tropic of Capricorn , there run on the west frontier not above twenty league from the sea call mar deal Sur eastward thereof , a mighty ridge of high mountain cover with snow , the height of which mountain so draw the moisture of the cloud unto it self , that no rain fall upon the valley of Peru . from these mountain issue great store of river into the south sea , with the water whereof draw by certain sluice and channel they moisten their vineyard and cornfield , and by this mean the land be so exceed fruitful . between these mountain and the mountain of Chili that stretch unto the streit of Magellan , lie a plain of 60 league over , be so cold that it yield no wheat , but good store of other victual . this country of Peru be full of people well apparel and of civil behaviour . it have many mine 281 gold , silver , of gold and moor of silver , as also great store of copper , aft - peur ^ nd and tinne - mine , with abundance of salt peter , and of brimstone . brimstone to make gunpowder . there be likewise cattle the sheep of of all sort , among which there be a beast in shape some - Peru call what resemble a camel , but no big than a steer of a Llamas . year old ; they serve to carry burden , their flesh be good to eat , and their wool apt for many purpose . this beast be account the most profitable of all other for the use of man : howbeit the Spaniard since their first come have replenish this country with horse , cow , sheep , and goat , and likewise with plenty of wheat . so that in few word this land have abundance of riches and victual , and be the healthfull place in the world . there be in time past king of this land which be mighty monarch , who dominion stretch 1200 . league , and their law be very civil , save that they be worshipper of the sun . at what time the Spaniard first enter this land there be two brethren of Atabalipa and the blood royal which strive who shall have the king -^ rethren ^ com d ° me > the one call Guascar , and the other Atabalipa . petitoursfor ' now Guascar have possession of all the mountain and the empire of the land within they : and Atabalipa be lord of all the pen . sea coast , and of the valley situate between the say mountain and the sea . the Indian see the Spaniard at the first arrive upon their shore call they vera coach , which in their language signify , the foam of the sea . also Atabalipa the Indian prince send unto they to know what they do in his land , and what they seek for : the Spaniard make answer that they be the messenger of a great lord , and that they come to speak with the prince himself : who send they word that they shall come with a very good will ; and so Atabalipa stay for they at a city call Caxamalca , be thirty league distant from the sea side . whither be come , they find the Indian prince sit in a chariot of gold , carry upon [ three . 800 . ] man shoulder , and accompany with above 60000 Indian all ready arm for the war . then the Spaniard tell they that they be send from a 282 emperor ( unto who the pope have give all that land ) to convert they unto the christian faith . whereunto Atabalipa answer , that he will glad be friend with the emperor , because he be so great a monarch , but in no case with the pope , because he give to another that which be none of his own . A . D . 1572 - 87 . now while they be thus in talk , the Spaniard discharge their two field piece , and their caliver , set upon the Indian , cry Sant Iago . the Indian hear the noise of the ordinance and small shot , and see the fire , think that flame of fire have be come down from heaven upon they : whereupon they flee , and leave their prince as a booty for the Spaniard . who they at the first entreat very gentle , wish he not to fear , for that their come be only to seek for gold and silver . during the time of Atabalipas imprisonment , his captains have slay his brother Guascar , and have subdue all the mountain and plain country . upon which news Atabalipa tell the Spaniard , that if they will release he , he will give they all that they shall demand . this communication have continue a whole day , at length a soldier name Soto say unto Atabalipa : what will thou give we to set thou free ? the prince answer , i will give whatsoever you will demand . whereunto the soldier reply , thou shall give we this house full of gold and silver thus high , lift up his sword , and make a stroke upon the wall . and Atabalipa say , that if they will grant he respite to send into his kingdom , he will fulfil their demand . whereat the Spaniard much marvelling , give he three month time , but he have fill the house in two month and a half , a matter scarce credible , yet most true : for i know above twenty man that be there at that time , who all aflirme , that it be above ten million of gold and silver . howbeit for all this they let not the prince go , but think that in kill of he they shall become lord of the whole land , and so the Spaniard on a night strangle he . but 283 God the righteous judge see this villainous act , suffer none of those Spaniard to dye by the course of nature , but bring they to evil and shameful end . upon the news of these great riches there come store of people out of Spain , and inhabit many place in this country . the king in recompense of the good service of the two foresay partner , appoint Diego de Almagro governor of half the land , and Francisco Pizarro of the other half , who also he make a mark . but these two consort in part of a land belong unto other man , fall at variance and sharp war between themselves : and at length Pizarro have slay Almagro get all the land into his own hand . howbeit this prosperity of Pizarro continue not long : for a bastard - sonne of Diego de Almagro , to be revenge of his father death , slay Pizarro , for which act he lose his head . in this controversy between these two partner be slay also two brother of Pizarro , and the three be carry prisoner into Spain and there die in prison ; but the four call Gonsalvo Pizarro rebel with the whole country and become a cruel tyrant , vanquish many of the emperor captain in battle , and possess the country in peace for two year : howbeit be in the end overcome he lose his head like a traitor . and thus die they all a evil death that be cause of the death