carry the name to be the best navigator wait ? ra - in all Spain , and that he have sail the further of legh bark all other . after all this the captain of the river of is86 - jenero send a small ship with victual for the straight , which be put back also in forty degree . and this be all the discovery of the strait of Magellan , make as well by Spaniards as other nation unto this present year 1586 . it be four year since these poor and blaster can - miserable Spaniard be leave in the strait , from which time there have no succour go unto they , so oftkem , 6 god he know whether they be dead or alive . thus accord to my promise i have declare unto you to the uttermost of my knowledge , all thing concern the India , as far as the very strait of Magellan ; think to have proceed along the coast , as at the first ; but that the do of captain Drake and other captain which attempt to pass the say strait have cause i to be the long in this my pretend work . howbeit now let we proceed on forward from the strait to the coast of Chili : the distance between which two place no man have travel by land , in regard of the huge mountain cover with snow that lie in the way : yea i may well say , that it have not often be travel by sea ; for that all the ship which have pass that way have at the least go thirty league off the shore , to avoid the shold and many little island that lie near the main land ; and therefore the inland of that coast remain as yet unknown . the first town after you have pass the strait stand on the coast of Chili , and be call Castro , Castro upon be situate upon the worst place of all the coast , for there be but small store of gold with scarcity of victual , * ’ and a sharp cold air . the harbour belong to this town be compass about with so many sholde , xi 273 s that it will serve but to receive small bark only . Baldivia . the next town to this be Baldivia . a description but before i pass any far i will here describe ' ‘ chili ’^^ unto you situati ° n and quality of Chili . this ' country stretch in length from north to south above two hundred league , contain in breadth but five and twenty league at the most . from the great ridge of mountain lie to the east of Chili run very many river into the sea , which river be the cause of diverse valley the fruitful in all the world , where bread , wine , and other victual river rich of mighty abound : and the say river also be very rich of gold . but to declare in few word the excellency of this province , i say that it may well be call a earthly paradise , save that it lack one only commodity , and that be peace . it be first discover on this manner : the Spaniard have conquer the kingdom of Peru , ( as i will hereafter show unto you ) find in the say kingdom great store of gold ; and ask the Indian from whence it come , they answer , from Chili . upon which news don Diego de Almagro be one of the principali captain that conquer Peru make a voyage with three hundred horseman towards Chili , be constrain in his way to go over part of the snowy mountain , which way his Indian guide conduct he , to the end that himself and all his company may die for cold . howbeit the Spaniard , though they lose some of their horse , Copiapo then come to the first town of Chili call Copiapo be next town of situate upon the first plain at the entrance of the say Peru province . but have news that the Indian be rise against the Spaniard of Peru and have enclose they , he return back without go any far . now this captain don Diego de Almagro be slay in the war of Peru , another call don Pedro de Baldivia march into Chili with four hundred horse , easy conquer that half of the country which be subject to the king of Peru . for know that Peru , be the chief country of their emperor , be over - 274 i572 - 87 - come by the Spaniard , they also immediate yield their land unto they . but the other half as it be Bl esta ^ Q the rich and the fruitful part , so God have people arauco - it with the most valiant and furious people in all America . the province which they inhabit call el Estado de PJ1 - 797 - ] arauco be but a small province about 20 league in ° length , and be govern by ten principali man of the country , out of which ten they choose the valiant man for the general in the war . the king of Peru in time past can never conquer this part of Chili , nor yet any other king of the Indian . the weapon use by these people of Arauco be long pike , halberd , bow and arrow : they also make they jack of seal - skin , and head - piece : in time past the head of their halberd and pike be of brass , but now they have get store of iron . they pitch their battle in manner like the Christians : for put their pikeman in rank , they place bowman among they , and marshal their troop with discretion and great valour . now the Spaniard come unto this province send word unto they by other Indian , say that they be the child of God , and come to teach they the word of God , and that therefore they ought to yield themselves unto they : if not , they will shoot fire among they and burn they . Theise people not fear the great word of the Spaniard , but desire to see that which they have hear report , meet they in the field , and fight a most cruel battle : but by reason of the Spaniard great ordinance and caliver , they be in the end put to flight . now these Indian think very that the Spaniard be the child of God , because of their great ordinance which make such a noise , and breathe out such flame of fire , yield themselves unto they . So the Spaniard have divide this province make the Indian to serve their turn for get of gold out of the mine , which they enjoy in such abundance , that he which have least have 20000 pezo , but captain Baldivia himself have 300000 pezo 275 villa neuva de la Serena , la Concepcion , Sant lag ) , la imperial , Baldivia , la villa rica , the first six town that wereinhdbit in Chili . a stratagem of the Indian of Chili against the Spaniard . the death of Baldivia . the english voyage by the year . the fame of these riches in the end be spread as far as Spain ; from whence soon after resort many Spaniards to the land of Chili , who captain Baldivia cause to inhabit six town : to wit , villa nueva de la Serena call in the Indian tongue coquimbo ; the second sant Iago which the Indian call Mapocha ; the three la Concepcion call by the Indian penco ; the four la Imperial ; the five Baldivia ; and the sixth la villa Rica . also he build a fort in the middle of all the land , wherein he put ordinance and soldier ; howbeit all this their good success continue not long : for the Indian in short time perceive that the Spaniard be but mortali man as well as they , determine to rebel against they : wherefore the first thing that they do , they carry grass into the say fort for the Spaniard horse , and wood also for they to burn , among which grass the Indian convey bow and arrow with great club . this do , fifty of the Indian enter the fort , betake themselves to their bow , arrow , and club , and stand in the gate of the say fort : from whence make a sign unto other of their nation for help , they win the fort , and slay all the Spaniard . the news of this overthrow come to the town of Concepcion where captain Baldivia be , he present set forth with two hundred horseman to seek the Indian , take no more man with he , because he be in haste . and in a plain he meet the Indian , who come of purpose also to seek he , and compass he about , slay most part of his company , the rest escape by the swiftness of their horse : but Baldivia have his horse slay under he be take alive . who the Indian wish to be of a good courage , and to fear nothing ; for the cause ( say they ) why we have take you , be to give you gold enough . and have make a great banquet for he , the last service of all be a cup full of melt gold , which the Indian force he to drink , say , now glut thy self with gold , and so they kill he . This Baldivia be a most valiant man , who have be a 276 old soldier in the war of Italy , and at the sack of Rome . upon this discomfiture the Spaniard choose for their captain one Pedro de Villa grande : who assemble Pedro de all the Spaniard in Chili , and take with he ten s " ande - peece of ordinance , march against those Indian ; but with so bid success , that he lose not only the field and many of his man , but also those ten piece of ordinance which he bring . the Indian have thus get the victory , go straightway against the town of Concepcion , from whence the Spaniard flee for fear , and leave the town desolate . and in this manner be the Spaniard chase by the Indian out of the country of Arauco . but news hereof be bring to the mark of Cannete viceroy of Peru , he send his sdnne don d ° n Garda de Garcia de Mendoza against those Indian , with a great power of horseman , and footman , and store of artillery . the nobleman have subdue Chili again , and slay in diverse battle above 40000 Indian , and bring they the second time under the Spaniard subjection , new erect the say fort that stand in the midst of the land , inhabit the town of Concepcion again , and build other town for the Spaniard : and so leave the land in peace , he return for Peru . but year he be clean depart out of the land the Indian rebel again , but can not do so much mischief as they do before , because the Spaniard take better heed unto they . from that time until this present there have be no peace at all : for notwithstanding many captain and soldier have do their uttermost , yet can they not bring that people whole in subjection . and although the Spaniard have in this province eleven town and two bishopric , yet have they little enough to maintain themselves , by reason of the war ; for they spend all the gold that the land yield in the maintenance of their soldier : which will not be so , if they have peace , for than they may work in all their mine . [ Iii . 798 . ] Eleventowns , andtwobishop - ricks in Chili . 277 description thus have speak somewhat of the situation of ^ ofchil ^ ™ Chili , and of the troublesome conquest thereof , i will Baldivia . return to my former discourse where i leave . Baldivia therefore be of 150 house have twice be burn and spoil by the Indian ; so that now it be wax poor , but before the Indian sack it , it be very rich : and it stand up a river four league from the tie province sea . pass from hence you come to the plain country insethe '* Arauco be situate over against the island la Mocha , island la on wbich island the Indian that inhabit belong to the Mocha situate main land . in 38 deg . and have pass this plain of Arauco , the next town a hayi . of the Spaniard that you come unto be la Concepcion which have be the great and the rich town in all Chui : but by reason that the Indian have burn the same four time , it be now grow very poor , and have small store of people : it contain about some two hundred house . and because it adjoin upon the plain of Arauco , where these valiant Indian be , therefore this town be environ about with a strong wall , and have a fort build hard by it : and here be 500 soldier continual in garrison . between this place Valparizo anJ Valparizo , the Indian call the coast by the name WortofS ^ Ia 0 Mapocha . Sant Iago it self stand 25 league up into the country , be the principali town of all Chili , deg . 40 min . and the seat of the governor : it consist of about 800 house . the port of Valparizo whither the good come from Lima by ship , have about twenty house stand by it . the next town near the sea side coquimbo beyond this be coquimbo , which stand two league standethtm ^ . up jnto janj ; anj contain about 200 house . next C %' iapo . mtn ' unt0 coquimbo stand a