southward the cold be more sharp , then in fifty degree to the north : experience do always show the same : for it be as cold even in the strait of Magellan , as it be in sixty degree of northerly latitude . howbeit the cold be not the cause why navigator frequent not the same , but the westerly and southerly wind , which blow most furious on that coast , and that oftentimes out of the very mouth of the straight , and so continue for the most part of the year . also there run sometime such a strong current , that if the wind and it go all one way , the cable can hold , neither can the ship withstand the force thereof . for which cause , and also for that there be no harbour , till you be pass 30 league into the say strait , most part of the ship that have go thither have endure many trouble before they can come to the strait , and be come to the mouth thereof they have be hinder by the current and wind , and so have be put back again . and to the end you may understand the truth , i will declare unto you all the ship that have pass through the say strait , since Magellan first find they , unto this present year of 1586 , when i have once end my discourse of Magellan his own voyage . now you be by the way to understand , that the north side of the entrance of these strait be plain land without any wood or tree : Patagpnes . here be likewise some Indian though not many , yet be they very mighty man of body of ten or eleven foot high , and good bowman , but no man - eater , neither have they any victual , but such as they get by hunt [ three . 790 . ] and fish ; they cover their body with the skin of beast that they kill , to defend they from the cold : neither be there ever to this day any silver or gold 256 find among they or in their country . Theise Streights the length of ( they say ) extend in length from east to west about the strait of a hundred and twenty league . at the middle of these mighty ridg strait on the north side be many mountain cover of mountain . with snow , which mountain stretch from thence along the frontier of Chili , Peru , and Nuevo reino de Granada , even unto the shore of the north sea at Santa Martha , as i have before signify . it be a wonder to behold the exceed heighth of these mountain , and the way which they continue cover with snow , for even under the equinoctial line they have as much snow upon their top as in 52 degree . also it be worthy the remembrance , that all this country toward the south sea be very fruitful , and the people very discreet and gentle : but all the coast towards Brasill upon the north sea be poor , whereas never yet be find any commodity of account , and the people themselves be very cruel and savage ; for the will of God be , that good and civil man shall inhabit fruitful country . and for the better understanding hereof you must note , that all the land lie between the say ridge of mountain and the south sea be call by the name of Chili , Peru , and Nuevo Chili , Peru , reino de Granada , which be the best and rich country an Nuevo in all the world : and most part of the land from the rQ %^ a say mountain to the north sea be call Brasill , be ' a mountainous country , * where as yet be never find * but of late either gold or silver . from the say mountain in there be find the middle of the strait the land rise high , till you d ' werse rich come to the end or the strait where you enter into the south sea , in which place next the south sea the strait be very dangerous , by reason of the sholde and rock that lie on the north side . thus Magellan after he have enter the south sea , within 60 day come to the isle of the Malucos , without touch at any land until he come thither : and so seek there to the death of lade his ship at a hand inhabit by Moores , he be Magellan . by they treacherous slay . now the Spaniard be too few for the manage of all three ship , because xi 257 r many of they be dead , partly with sickness , and partly with the hardness of the voyage , determine to abandon one of their say ship , and so man the other two : which two be lade with spice and other riches know not what course they be best to take : howbeit at length it be determine , that one of these two ship shall go for Nueva Espan na , and the other for the cape of buena esperanza , and so for Spain . the ship that go for Spain be call the victory , the pilot Sebastian deal whereof be a Biscain name Juan Sebastian deal canon , man thatever to w ^ om king gay great reward , and appoint sail about globe for his arm , whereon be write : the world . Primus omnium circunde disti i ; that be , thou be the first man that ever sail about i . and albeit this voyage be so long and troublesome as be before mention , yet many other have attempt the same . and the next that seek to pass the say two ship of strait of Magellan be two ship of Genoa , which Genoa . come as far as the mouth of the strait be by a mighty storm drive back again , and one of they , who master be call Pancaldo , put into the river of plate , and be cast away about Buenos Aeres , where to this day part of the say ship be to be see , and some of the man be yet live in the river among the Spaniard : and the other ship return to Genoa again . a three voyage also there be a bishop of Placencia in Spain , who to you strait . covetjng riches , set forth a fleet of four sail , to pass the strait , and so to go for the Malucos : and get licence of the emperor he send his say 4 ship towards the strait which have very fair wind till they come thither : but be enter 20 league within the strait , a storm of westerly wind take they , and drive 3 of they on shore , 8c the four back into the sea , which ( the storm be pass ) return into the strait to seek for his consort , 8c find many man go on the shore side , but the ship be beat all to piece . so they on land call unto the ship ; but 258 the captain thereof , consider that his ship be but little , and that he have but small store of victual , will not go to they on shore , but proceed on his voyage , and pass the strait . and because he be alone he will not sail to the Malucos , but go for the coast of Peru to the city of Lima , where the ship remain unto this day . the man of the other three ship , which be leave in the strait be to the number of two hundred and fifty ( who captain be kinsman to the bishop of Placencia be call * Queros ) be never hear of until this present day , it be forty year since they be leave there . a year after this , certain merchant of the groin in Galicia set forth other three ship , which ship also come to the strait mouth , where one of they be cast away with all the man , and the other two return for Spain . also i have have intelligence of certain Portugal ship , which be come to the mouth of the strait lose two of their pinnace which they send to discover the land , and then return back . and after these , two french ship be send from the river of Jenero by monsieur de Villegagnon , but be come to the latitude of 45 . degree , they be drive back by a storm of contrary wind . after all this the governor of Chili call don Garcia de Mendoza son to the mark of Cannette determine to discover the say strait from the south sea , send from Chili two ship under the conduct of a captain call Latherelio : but the danger to seek these strait by the south sea be more than by the north sea , because all the storm of the north sea come from the land , but in the south sea all the wind and storm come off the sea , and force the ship to run upon the leeshore , insomuch that the say two ship be cast away in fifty degree . the seek of these strait of Magellan be so dangerous , and the voyage so troublesome , that it seem a matter almost impossible to be perform , insomuch that for the space of thirty year no man make account 259 * Gonsalvo de Oviedo , part 2 . lib . 20 . call this captain Camargo . a four voyage to the strait . a fiftandsixt voyage to the strait of Magellan . two french ship send for the stir eight of Magellan . [ Iii . 791 . ] A . D . 1572 - 87 - sir Francis drake voyage aboutyeworld . the cause why m . Douty be behead . sir Francis Drake drive into degree of southerly latitude . la Mocha in 38 deg . 30 min . over against the province of Arauco . the english voyage thereof ; until of late one Francis Drake a Englishman ( of who i have before speak ) see he can do no good on the main land of the west Indies to benefit himself , because of the galley of Cartagena that keep the coast , determine to seek the strait of Magellan , and to pass into the south sea . and so have provide two ship and three pinnace in England , he proceed on his voyage , and come to the island of cape Verde take a Portugal ship lade with wine , the pilot whereof be a Portugal call Nuno da Sylva , he carry along with he , who be a great help and furtherance unto he in his voyage . and this which i shall here say , i have in write of the Portugal pilot himself . from the island of cape Verde the say Francis Drake sail unto port Sant Julian , where he winter : and there also he put to death a gentleman of his company , because he will have return home . this port i take to be accurse , for that Magellan likewise put some to death there for the like offence . This Francis Drake put out of the say port , enter the strait , and within twelve day get into the south sea . and two day after there arise such a storm of westerly wind ( which be usual in those part ) that he lose his pinnace , and his vice - admiral master John winter be drive back again into the strait , who pass many danger return home into England . but Francis Drake himself run with this storm into seven and fifty degree of southerly latitude , where he find a island with a good harbour , and fresh water , and stay at the same island two month to repair his ship : and then , the weather be fair , he proceed on his voyage , and come to the coast of Chili to a island call la Mocha ; where he go on shore , and talk with the Indian : but when he will have return unto his boat they shoot their arrow at he , and kill two of his man , and he himself be wound in the face . 260 go from thence he pass by the town of Con - town of cepcion not know the place , and so to Valparizo which be the port of Sant Iago , where he find a ship lade afanzo - with a kind of victual and wine , and have in she beside threescore thousand pezo of gold , every pezo be worth eight shilling sterling : and take this ship with he he go from thence to another port call coquimbo : the port of where see many cattle on the land , he send present some of his man with caliver to kill of the say cattle : mi „ , but be espy of the Spaniard that dwell in the town , they send twelve horseman to see what they be that kill their cattle , for they know they not : and come near unto they , the Englishman flee to their boat , but the horseman overtake one of they who have a halberd in his hand , who the Spaniard think to have take : but he with his halberd kill one of their horse be himself run through with a lance , and so the Spaniard carry he dead with they into the town . the next day the news come to Sant Iago , that they be Englishman , and how they have take the ship out of the harbour of Valparizo : whereupon they of Sant Iago send a post by land to give warning unto they of Peru . howbeit by reason that the country between this place and Peru be not inhabit for the space of two hundred league , and many huge and cold mountain cover with snow lie in the way , the post