be so long in performance of this journey , that captain Drake be upon the coast of Peru a month before the say post come thither : neither can they send any news by sea , because they be destitute of ship . captain Drake depart from coquimbo sail to another port not inhabit , where he set up a pinnace . And go from thence , the next place where he touch be a port upon the coast of Peru call los Pescadores : lospescadore . and there he land , and in one of the fishermen house find of a Spaniard three thousand pezo of silver in little bar . Arica in 18 from hence he go to another port call Arica , which deg . 261 be the next town to Chili that the Spaniard have in all Peru , contain a hundred house : and this be the port [ three . 792 . ] where they discharge their merchandise that pass from Lima to Potossi , and to all other city within the land , and likewise at this place they be wont to embark all the silver which they carry for Panama . at this port of Arica he find a ship that have in her thirteen thousand pezo of silver , which have take out , he burn the say ship , and after think to have land , but see both horseman and footman on shore he will not , but proceed on his voyage . since captain Drake be at this port they carry their silver by land to Lima , and lade no more treasure here , but only discharge the merchant good that come from Spain hither . also they have build a fort at this place for the better safety of the inhabitant , and have plant it with ten piece of ordinance , and every summer there lie in garrison a hundred soldier beside the townsman . * from hence Chuli . he sail to another port call Chuli : in which port be a ship that have three hundred thousand pezo of silver in bar : but they have send horseman from Arica to give advertizement of drake be on the coast , which news come but two hour to the town before his arrival at the say port : whereupon the master of the ship have no leisure to carry his silver on shore , be force to throw it into the sea in six fathom water , where his ship road , and so to run on shore in the ship boat . and captain Drake come aboard the ship be tell by a Indian , that the master have throw the silver overboard . wherefore see that news begin to run of he from town to town he stay not here , but run along the coast : and because he will have no let , he cast off the ship which he have take at Sant Iago , with never a man in she , which ship be never hear of after . and so without stay any where he shape his course el Callao de for Lima , and come to the harbour of Lima call £ » « < ? . pi Callao , be two league distant from Lima it self , ( for Lima stand up into the land ) he arrive there one 262 day , before the news of he be bring to Lima , and find the man in the ship without suspicion . and as he enter into the port , there come in also a ship from Panama lade with merchandise , and he send his pinnace to take she : but the man forsake the ship betake they to their boat , and go on shore : and as the Englishman follow the boat , a Spaniard that be therein shoot a piece , and slay one of captain drake man in the pinnace . wherefore he follow the boat no far , but go with his pinnace into the harbour among fourteen sail of ship that lie there , in all which ship there be not a man that have so much as a sword or a piece to molest he , wherefore he do with less fear go from ship to ship , ask they if there be any ship go for Panama ; for he know well , that the ship which go for Panama carry both silver and gold , neither seek he for any thing else , for there be marchan dize enough for he in those ship , if he have be desirous to have have the same . so they tell he that three day pass there be a ship go for Panama which carry all the merchant silver thither . whereupon he present set sail towards Panama ; for when he come into this port it be about midnight , so that the Spaniard can not see what ship he have . at last the news come to Lima unto the viceroy of Peru , that there be enemy in the harbour , but they know not what they be . wherefore the viceroy and all the people be in great fear , lest some Spaniards have make a mutiny , and put themselves in arm : and so the next morning himself accompany with 2000 horseman and footman come from the city down to the water side , and find some of the Englishman arrow that be shoot at the boat , out of which their man be slay , they know they to be Englishmen : and then they be all in quiet , see it be but one ship , for as yet the ship lie becalm 3 day before the town . whereupon they forthwith provide 2 ship with 200 man in they , to board captain Drake or else to burn his ship ; and after the ship go 2 small pinnace , because that if any of the 263 ship shall be sink , they may save the man . but it be a day and a half before these thing can be make ready , and in the end go forth they find the english ship still becalm , and the calm be such , that the Spaniard can not come at they . the same night , the wind blow a fresh gale , the Spaniard return into the harbour , and captain Drake set forward to Panama . the cause of the Spaniard return be , for that they have no ordinance , nor victual to tarry any long out . then the viceroy cause six piece of ordinance to be make , neither can he make any more , in regard of the shortness of time : so with these three ship piece of ordinance , and three ship , and two hundred send after anj ££ t man jn tjjgm he send after captain drake ; who captatne r . Drake . after he have wind stay no where , nor take any ship at all , notwithstanding he meet with many come from Panama lade with merchandise , but still he inquire after the ship that be go to Panama before he : of a rich prize which ship he have sight about the cape of Sant Francisco , eandsdrake master whereof be a biskaine , call Juan de Anton : at cape S . wh ° see this ship of the Englishman , think that Francisco the viceroy of Peru have send he some message , and situate one therefore strike all his sail : but so soon as he may ‘ north of the discern the ship somewhat better , he will then fain equinoctial . have go his way > f ° r he know that it be none of that coast , and then he begin to hoist his sail , but can by [ three . 793 . ] no mean get from captain drake because he be within the reach of his great ordinance , for the Spaniard not have so much as a rapier to defend themselves , read Nuno be soon constrain to yield . there be in this da Sylva con - ship above eight hundred and fifty thousand pezo ‘ treeuree of sdver , and forty thousand pezo of gold , all which silver and gold be custom ; but what store of treasure they have beside uncustomd i know not , for many time they carry almost as much more as they pay custom for ; otherwise the king will take it from they , if they shall be know to have any great sum ; wherefore every ship carry his bill of custom , that the king may 264 see it . all this treasure that captain Drake take be merchant and other man good , save one hundred and eighty thousand pezo of the king . he have also out of this ship good store of victual with other necessary , which be to be carry for Panama and be five day take out of such thing as he need . this do , he sail from hence to the coast of Nueva Espanna without go to Panama . Surely this be a great plague of God just inflict upon we for our sin : for the take of these ship be a especial cause of all the dangerous war that be likely to ensue between Spain and England . now the ship that be send by the viceroy of Peru from Lima after Francis drake , arrive at cape Sant Francisco twenty day after he have take the foresay ship , and have intelligence by a ship come from Panama , which they meet at the say cape , that Francis Drake have take the ship with silver , and be not go for Panama . whereupon the captain of the three ship think that captain Drake have be go for the strait of Magellan , direct his course that way to seek he . captain Drake carry from the coast of Peru eight hundred sixty six thousand pezo of silver , which be as much as eight hundred sixty six quintal , at 100 pound weight the quintal , every quintal be worth one thousand and two hundred ducat of Spain ; all which sum amount to a million and thirty nine thousand and two hundred ducat . beside this silver he carry away a hundred thousand pezo of gold , that be ten quintal , each quintal be value at a thousand five hundred Spanish ducat , which last sum amount to a hundred and fifty thousand ducat : over and beside the treasure in the say ship which be uncustomd ( the value whereof i can learn ) consist of pearl , precious stone , real of plate , and other thing of great worth . with all this purchase he sail towards Nueva Espanna ; and at a island lie before that coast 265 Pedro Sarmiento send from Lima to the streit of Magellan . 58 degree of southerly latitude discover . many island discover to the south of the strait . the english voyage call the island of canon he discharge all thing out of his ship and grave she , and remain there ten day . from thence he go along the coast of Nueva Espanna , where he take certain ship lade with spice , silk , and velvet , but no gold nor silver , for there be none to be have on this coast . and here at Guatulco he set on shore his portugal - pilot , which he take at one of the island of cape Verde . but what course he keep from this coast till he come into England i know not of certainty , and therefore i will not meddle therewithal ! . the foresay three ship which be send in pursuit of captain drake , return back again to Lima without do of aught . all which notwithstanding , the viceroy of Peru determine to send two ship to the strait of Magellan , either to meet with captain drake there , or else to see if they can fortify the say strait against such ship as may afterward attempt to pass through the same . and albeit this be think a most dangerous voyage , and impossible to be perform , by reason of the shold on that side of the strait , yet send he forth the two say ship . the admiral be a ship of a hundred ton , and the other of eighty ton , and have one hundred and twenty man in they both , sail from Lima under the conduct of Pedro Sarmiento , who be then account the best navigator in all Peru . Theise ship after their departure touch on the coast to take in victual , be nine month before they come to the latitude of the strait , and there be they encountered with a cruel storm : but Pedro Sarmiento be a man of good courage , bear in with the land in this storm , and in a night he be put into the streit , not know how nor which way ; and the other ship run far into the sea , sail to 58 degree of southerly latitude . the storm be pass , this other ship find many island near unto the main land , and so return with fair weather all along the shore , neither can they find any other way to enter the strait , but only that 266 which Magellan discover : notwithstanding that other affirm the contrary , say that the strait be full of island to the southward : but they may be deceive , for if there be any other strait , it be beyond 58 degree , and have never be see of any man : for this ship be far to the southward of all that ever i hear of : for Francis Drake be drive by tempest no far than 57 degree can not know so much as this other ; which ship from hence return back to Lima . but Pedro Sarmiento enter the strait , where his man fall - ing into a mutiny will have return to Lima ; where - [ three . 794 . ] upon hang one of they he proceed on his voyage for Spain . where be arrive , he tell the king that e ^ ro sarmi -