coast call as Ilhas , or the isle , be but a small town , contain not above 150 house , and but three ingenios for sugar . most of the inhabitant be labour man , which use to carry victual in their small bark unto Fernambuck : their lord be call Lucas Giraldo . Puerto seguro . the next place unto this be call Puerto seguro : it consist of 4 small town , which contain not in all above 300 house . the inhabitant of this town also live by carry of victual along the coast ; and the town it self belong to the duke de Avero . hard the sholde by this port begin the sholde which they call Abrolhos ; call Abrol - anj these sholde lie above 25 league into the sea . ’ the next habitation of Christians beyond these sholde Espirito Santo , be Espirito Santo which consist of two town , both of they contain about 300 house : and they belong to a gentleman call Vasques Fernandes de Coutinho . RiodeJenero . from hence you pass along the coast to the river of Jenero , which have about three hundred house . in 25 ° this place the Frenchman first inhabit , who captain be call Monsieur de Villegagnon . the say captain make here a fort , and plant good ordinance thereon , and jade every year great store of brasill - wood from hence , and have great friendship with the savage people , who do he good service , by reason whereof the Frenchman reap much benefit out of this country . but the king of Portugal send out a power against the Frenchman , who first take the french ship by sea , and then land and besiege the fort , and at length take it , and the captain thereof : unto who , because he be a gentle person , and never hurt the Portugal , they give thirty thousand ducat for his ordinance , and for all other thing that be in the fort , and so send he for France . since which time the Portugal have inhabit this river . there be at this present only two ingenios , but great store of brasill - wood , with plenty of victual . from this river of Jenero they pass along the coast four town to Sant Vincente , which have 4 town , the great whereof be call Santos , and consist of four hundred ymcente , i ’ house , there be also three ingenios . a few year these english pass there come two english ship into this harbour man be m . which be go for the strait of Magellan . who be in this port , there come thither three of the king ’ of Spain ship , and fight with the Englishman , but the Englishman sink one of their ship , and therefore the t111 - 788 - ] king command a fort to be make , to the end that - afirtbuilt no English ship that be bind for the strait of Magellan shall victuali there , the which fort stand on against the the mouth of the harbour . this country belong to a english . gentleman call Martin Alonso de Souza : this be the last inhabit place upon all the coast of Brasill . this coast of Brasill be very full of mountain , and have much rain fall upon it , for which cause they can go from town to town by land : all the habitation of this . country be by the sea side . from Sant Vincente the § anta qate 0 coast be all mountainous , till you come to the he of Santa Una . 251 Catelina , and from this hand till you come even to the straight of Magellan , the coast be very plain and without wood . Having proceed thus far , it will not be amiss to Rio de laPlata , speak somewhat of the river of plate , which be one of the great river in all the world : for at the mouth it be above five and twenty league from land to land : and the Spaniard have go up in it above six hundred league , and can not attain to the head thereof . the first Spaniard that enter this river , and inhabit the same be call Solis , who pass up 100 league into it , and call it by . the name of Rio de la plata , that be to say , the river of silver , because of the fine and clear water that be in it , for i have not hear of any silver that ever be find there . the say Solis return into Spain , without any further search into this river : howbeit another Sebastian ca - captain call Sebastian Cabota go up this river 150 b ° ia ' league , and build a fort , which fort stand until this present : where leave his ship , he go high up the river in small pinnace , and all along as he go he find many Indian : but find neither gold nor silver , nor ought else of any great value , he return to his ship , and sail for Spain . not many year after a certain gentleman call don Pedro de Mendoza furnish forth a great fleet of ship , wherein be ship a thousand man , forty mere , and twenty horse , with all other creature to inhabit this river : and come thither he go up into the country to see what riches he can there find , leave all his stuff , cattle , and provision Buenos at a place call Buenos ayere , so name in regard of the ayere . freshness of the air , and the healthfiilnesse of his man , during their abode there : this place be eighty league within the river , and here he land first : at this place the river be above seven league broad , and very low land on both side without tree . this river be very often subject to great and sudden storm , so that with a storm this don Pedro lose eight of his ship , and in the rest he return for Spain , say to his man , that he will go 252 seek victual , and so leave the great part of they behind . in his way homeward he die , and the poor man which he leave behind he , for the most part of they die for hunger also , because in that place there be very few Indian , and therefore but small store of victual , only they live by hunt of deer , and by fish . of all the man that don Pedro leave behind he there be but two hundred remain alive , who in the ship boat go high up the river , leave in the place call Buenos ayere their mere and horse : but it be a wonder the wonderful to see , that of thirty mere and seven horse which the Spaniard leave there , the increase in forty year be so jmares - great , that the country be 20 league up full of horse ; whereby a man may conjecture the goodness of the pasture , and the fruitfulness of the soil . the Spaniard that go up this river pass three hundred league , and find the country full of Indian : who have great plenty of victual , among who the Spaniard dwell as their friend , and the Indian bestow their daughter in marriage upon they , and so they dwell altogether in one town , which the Spaniard it call la ascension , and it la ascension stand on the north side of the river . the foresay Spaniard be twenty year in this place , before any pi ^ er news of their inhabit upon this river be bring into Spain : but wax old , and fear that when they be dead , their son which they have beget in this country be very many , shall live without the knowledge of any other Christians : they determine among themselves to build a ship , and to send news into Spain with letter unto the king of all thing that have pass among they , upon that river . Theise news be bring to the king , he send three ship , with a bishop and certain priest , and friar , and more man and woman to inhabit , with all kind of cattle , when this succour be come , they inhabit in two place more on the north side of the river , and travel three hundred league beyond the ascension ; but find neither gold nor silver , they return back again unto the ascension . the people be so 253 multiply in this city , that now it be one of the great in all the India , and contain above two thousand house . the country adjoin be exceed fruitful , abound with all kind of victual , and with sugar and cotton . from this city of ascension 150 league towards the mouth of the river stand another town which Santa Fe . they call Santa fe , on the south side of the say river , from which town there lie a open high way lead into the land of Peru , so that when i come to entreat of Peru i will speak of this way , and declare who first find it . also five year past they have inhabit anew the town of Buenos air on the south side of the river , to [ three . 789 . ] the end they may have trade from the coast of Brasill , but their fortune be such , that the very first time they go to Brasill , and will have return again two english to the river of plate , they be take by two ship of ^^ fenton ^ England that be go for the strait of Magellan . be general the coast along from this river to the strait of 1582 . Magellan have not be perfect discover , either by sea or land , save only certain port which they have find , sail to the strait . wherefore pass they over , i will here entreat of the say strait , and declare who be the first finder of they , as likewise what be the cause why they be seek for . the Portugal therefore have first find and conquer the east Indies , and discover the coast of China , with the hand of the Malucos , ( all which place abound with gold , precious stone , silk , and other rich commodity ) and bring home the foresay riches in their ship into Portugal : there grow by this mean great envy between the Portugal and their neighbour the Spaniard ; insomuch that the council of Spain say unto the emperor Charles the five be then their king , that the Portugal will be lord of all the riches of the world . upon which word begin a controversy between the emperor and the king of Portugal : but they be great friend before , and also kinsman , agree immediate to part the whole world between they , in such wise as i for 254 my part can never understand the certainty thereof . the world be thus divide , a portugal - gentleman call Fernando magellane bear in a place of Portugal call Fernando Punta de la barte , be of a good house , and very well masellanes - seene in cosmography , and a excellent pilot , as also be offend with don Emanuel his sovereign , depart out of Portugal into Spain , and affirm to the council of Spain , that the isle of the Malucos be in that part of the world which be allot to the king of Spain , and that he will find a short way thither then the Portugal take , and lay before they such infallible reason , that the council give credit unto his word , send he to sea with five ship and 400 man all very well appoint . with these five ship set sail from saint Lucar , he come to the coast of Brasill , where at that time two place be inhabit by Portugal , and so sail on along that coast he pass by the river of plate , which river be discover a little before by Solis . and notwithstanding many storm , and great mutiny among his company , he come at length unto 48 degree , to the southward of the river of plate : where he find a har - bour , which he name Puerto de Sant Julian , and port . Julian . winter there : and there also he hang 5 man , and put on shore a priest , because they will have make the company to stand against their captain , and so to have return back again . but in the end have pacify his man , he put to sea , and within 5 day after he find the discovery the strait , which by he be so much desire : but ^ f ^ r ^ r ‘ s before he enter the say strait there befall such a i it mutiny in one of his ship , that the same ship return back again . and so himself with the other four ship enter the strait , one of they say four with all the man therein be cast away at the very entrance : which loss notwithstanding he proceed on with the other three ship , and pass many trouble and danger in this long discovery , cease not to prosecute his intend voyage . this discovery be at the first think very profitable unto the Spaniard , but of late 255 it have prove very hurtful unto they by mean of certain coaster which have sail the self same course . the southerly these strait stand in 52 degree and a half of st ^ htfof1 southerly latitude . also here be to be note , that it Magellan . be cold to the southward of the line then to the northward : in such wise , that in forty degree to the