anchor , endure many more shot , after the gallion be further off a good way than she , and sometime the gallion have two or three . thus we end about two of the clock after noon : the rest of this day and part of the night , we spend in mend , fit , and put our ordinance and furniture in order for the next morning , think they will have be with we . the 26 day in the morning we can not see they , because they be go up the river : we man our boat and pinnace , and weigh two anchor and one cable , that they let slip the night before : as our man be weigh the three anchor , the bwoy - rope break , and so we lose that anchor . our admiral have a anchor of twelve hundred , and a good cable of eleven inch , and we have a anchor about six hundred , with a piece of a base cable , and bwoy - rope nothing worth . after dinner i go aboard the admiral , to confer with he , who determine to go off to sea , and thither i carry Senor Pinto to interpret the Indian language , with a Indian name Peter , which flee from the bay where we rid in a canoa , and bring with he a Spaniard caliver , flask , and touch box , to go with 196 we , who our admiral boat meet , and bring he aboard to the admiral . he tell we that the Spaniard have bring many dead man on land , and bury they , and also land many hurt man in their bay , and that there be certain Spaniard go over through the wood to look after we . then the general , captain Hawkins , and master Maddox come aboard of i to view my hurt man , and harm of my ship , both man , ship , and tackle ; and i also go aboard he to peruse his hurt , who have but one man , a sailer , slay . the 28 day in the morning die Lancelot Ashe , of a hurt ; who depart very godly . this day we stand to the northward : and in get in our anchor and skifie , we be put 3 league to leeward of fiddle I | will , but the gallion ride still . the 29 day in the morning , see my self put to where the sea from the admiral , i assemble master Walker , master Shawe , master jeflry , the master , the master mate , and venture werg the pilot , to who i show that i be desirous to sever , and go back to seek our admiral , whereunto the master , never meet pilot , and master mate answer direct , that we can afterward . not fetch the isle where we leave they , and to meet they [ three . 767 . ] in go back it be very unlikely and to we dangerous many way , aswell for fall into the lap of the Spaniard , as to be put on a lee shore : whereupon all the rest advise i to stand off into the sea , whereunto i assent , remember withal , that time spend consume victuali , and how long we have beat up and down in the same bay before , to get in with calm and contrary wind . thus we conclude that m . Walker shall set down each man opinion , and we set to our hand , and from henceforth he to keep a register of all our proceed , as m . Maddox do aboard the admiral . the first day of February , we go east by south , and east southeast with a stout gale : and go the same course the 3 . 4 . and 5 . day follow . 197 the english voyage the 5 . day about 10 . a clock in the forenoon m . Walker die , who have be weak and sick of the bloody flix 6 . day , we take a view of his thing , and prise they , and heave he over board , and shoot a piece for his knell . the 14 . day i call into my cabin the two merchant , the master and the pilot , show they our want of victual and other necessary : whereupon they and i conclude , that it be best for we to return to our country , with as little loss of time and expense of victual as may be , be without hope of relief upon this coast , and yet to keep the coast of Brasil to friend for fear of extremity . the 17 . day in the morning have much rain , we save above two ton of water , of which we be very glad . the 18 . day i observe the variation of the compass , which vary one point , and a half to the southward , by our ordinary compass of London . the second day of march the master , pilot , and i agree to fetch the isle of Fernando Loronha . from the 3 . day to the 10 . day we go west , and by south , and run in for the shore . the 10 . day we see the land , which be sandy hill with wood on it . the 11 . day seek to go a shore , we see four man , which weave to we with a white shirt , and we weave to they with a flag of truce : at length one of they swim to our boat side , and there lay in the sea talk with we , almost a hour : in the end , be partly persuade by Pinto , who talk with they in the Indian - tongue , and partly entice with such trifle as i show he , be come into our skiff , and call to his companion on shore , who come aboard swim : we deliver they certain barrico to fetch we the full of fresh water : after , there come down 40 . Indian , boy , woman , and man , and with they a french boy , but the former Indian deceive we of our barrico . whereupon 198 Pinto and Russell swim a shore to seek water , but find none . the same day we sail to a place where boat may land , and i go a land in my skiff , and find the Indian , and Frenchman which be with i the day before , and they bring our three barrico full of fresh water : for which i reward they with some trifle . in the mean time our boat go ashore , and our man with some of the Indian bring we twenty barrico more of fresh water , and i my self go to shore and bring 23 . hen of India . the 12 . day betimes in the morning , we man our boat and skiff , and take some trifle thing to shore , and barricos : at our first arrival the rude Indian flock together , wade to the skiff wherein i be , beg and wonder about we : first i cause they to fetch 27 . barrico of water , who i reward with small bell , etc in the mean time they bring hen to i , wade to the skiff , for i keep my self always afloat , and for their hen i give they a knife , and a small look glass . all this while m . Blackcoller our pilot , Thomas Russel , mark thawght be still on shore , and will not tarry aboard : in the end , fear some treachery , because all the Indian be slip on shore from i , i call our man away , and sudden they lay hand on our man ashore , and with their bow shoot thick at we in the boat , and wade into the water to we , lay hand on our skiff , yet God of his mercy deliver we from their hand , with the loss of five man slay , and other hurt . thus we get aboard with 40 . hen , duck , turkey , and parrot , and three hogshead of water : and i carry a Frenchman aboard with i , name Jaques Humphrey , who be by chance in the boat with i when this fray begin . the 17 . day we take three shark in the morning . from that day to the first of April , we go our course , sometime with rain , and sometime with variable 199 A . D . I583 - Treason of the Indian . Jaques Humphrey a Frenchman save . 1583 . wind , and so till the 4 . of April : which day we see 4 . bird with long tail , which hover about the ship , and in the afternoon we see and take up many weed which drive thick in the sea , which we judge to be drive with the east wind from the isle of cape verde . [ Iii . 768 . ] from this day till the 11 . day we go our course sometime Northeast , sometime northwest according to the wind : upon this 11 . day George Coxe one of our carpenter , have the night before break up the hold , and steal wine , and drunken himself drink , be a desperate act . take in the room , leap overbord out of the beak head and so drown himself . the 12 . day we spy our foremast to be perish in the howne , and dare not bear our foretop sail upon it , but go hence with our sail , next hand , north all day and night . from hence to the 20 . day we go Northeast and variation of the compass . by north . this day i observe the variation of the compass : and i note that the south point of the compass carry more than half a point to the westwards . the 25 . day of may we go between the east north - east , and the north - east with a small gale till five a clock in the afternoon : then have we sight of land , which rise ragged to the northward like break land , we be about five league off : that isle bare Northeast by north of we , and the northermost part bear north by east of we , with a rock a sea board : we then sound and have fifty and five fathom grey sand , and maze great store in it : so we stand in Northeast till eight a clock , and then behold it again be within four league of it , bear as before , but we can not make it , for some think it to be the foreland of Fontenay , some judge it the isle of ussant : than we sound again in 55 . fathom brown sand , and little maze in it : at eight a clock at night we go about , and stand off south southwest one watch , than the wind shrink to the southwest , that we can 200 lie but south southwest six glass , so that at three a clock we cast about , and lie northwest six glass , and north northwest a watch be then eight a clock the next day . the 26 . day we lie as nigh as we can between the north and the north north - east , and see the same land again , and make it to be the foreland of Fontenay , and the rag to be the seam , which bear now east north - east of we : and we stand on till ten a clock , then be within two league of the rock and less , we cast about and stand off Southwest , because we can not double the uttermost rock : when we be about we drive to the southward very fast , for the ebb set we west southwest , and be spring tide , it horse we a pace to leeward , for the space of one hour : then with the flood which be come , we drive again to windward : at twelve at noon it be calm till 6 . afternoon , than we stand about larboard tack , south southwest one watch , then at midnight we cast about and stand over north till four aforenoon . the 27 . day have bring the land east southeast of we , we make it to be silly be before deceive , and go hence east by north to double Grimsbie , leave the bishop and his clerk to the southwestwards , which we before take to be the seam . at 7 . a clock in the afternoon we see the land end of England , which bare east by north off we , and be 7 . league off from silly . the 29 . day at six a clock , beforenoone we have bring the Ramhead north of we , and be within a league of it , and go in Northeast next hand , be thick and foggy , and little wind : so that at eleven a clock we get in within the island , and there by mistake of a sound , our ship come aground between the isle and the main , and there sit till 4 . a clock in the afternoon that it be half flood . the 30 . day about 9 a clock , with much ado i furnish away P . Jeffries , m . symberbe , and William 201 A . D . 1583 . the isle of silly . we come to PUmmouth . towreson with letter , after dine at m . blaccoller , and make many salutation with diverse gentleman . 1583 . the 31 . i wrought aboard all day , and put our ship , and thing in order : afternoon i have pity of some poor man of Milbrooke , which be rob the night before by a pirate name Purser , which ride in Cawson bay , i consent to go out with the Edward in company of a small ship which they have furnish to be their master , so about five of the clock in the afternoon , come a hundred man of they aboard of i : about twelve a clock we set sail , and by three afore day we be get to the windward of he , than he set sail , and go hence to the eastwards , and outsail we , because our consort will not come near he : after a small chase which we give he to no effect , we return into our old road , and there moar the ship about nine of the clock in the forenoon , and hence go all the Milbrooke man again ashore from i . and thus i end a troublesome voyage .