bay . the 18 in the morning we have word from the ship , that they have find a safe harbour and we weigh and run in , the same day be Whitsunday . the Elizabeth weigh and put forth again to sea , the 20 day , to look for the prize , and not find she come in the next day . in the mean time our general discharge the flyboat , and run she upon the main , where we break she up for firewood . in the mean while there come about descrip - 30 of the country people down to the sea side : and fanofuriaine when they be within 100 pase of our man , they set * ’ J55 themselves in array very orderly cast their company into the form of a ring , every man have his bow and arrow : who ( when they have pight a staff on the ground , with certain glass , bead , and other trifle ) return back . then the country people come and take they and afterward approach near to our man , show themselves very pleasant , insomuch that m . winter dance with they . they be exceed delight with the sound of the trumpet , and vialy . they be of a mean stature , well lim , and of a duskish , tawny , or brown colour . some of they have their face spot with diverse colour , as red , white , and black . their apparel be a certain skin ( wherein they wrap themselves ) not reach so low as to cover their privy member , all the rest of their body be naked , save that they be certain roll upon their head , who end hang over their shoulder . every one bear his bow , be a ell in length , and arrow make of reed , have head , frame very strange and cunning of a flint stone . they be much give to mirth and jollity , and be very sly , and ready to steal any thing that come within their reach : for one of they snatch our general cap from his head ( as he stoop ) be of scarlet with a golden band : yet he will suffer no man to hurt any of they . they eat raw flesh , for we find seal bone , the raw flesh whereof they have gnaw with their tooth like dog . in this bay we water , and victual with seal : for there be such plenty that we slay above 200 in the space of one hour upon a little island . the 3 of June we depart from thence , and be at sea we be put back again to cape hope , where we discharge our canter and let she float in the sea . afterwards we run to the 50 degree of the south pole , where we meet with the wind southerly , and so turn back again to the northward . and as we run along the shore , we meet with our prize the 19 of June , which we lose the 13 of May . the day follow we find 156 a harbour , into the which we enter with all our fleet the same day . this port be 49 degree and a half in latitude , and i suppose it to be the same which Magellan name port S . Julian : for we find a gibbet on a the port of hill , whereupon they be execute that do conspire ant Julian . against Magellan , and certain bone also of their dead body . the 22 of this month our general go to shore upon the main with 7 or 8 of his man , meet with 3 of the patagon , have bow and arrow , who come near to our man make they sign to depart . where - two 0 ^ jur , upon a gentleman be there present , and have a bow p ^ g ^ and arrow , make a shot to the end to show they the force of our bow , with the which shoot his string break : whereupon the patagon presume to encounter they , direct their arrow first at our m . gunner , who have a caliver ready bend to shot at they but it will not take fire : and as he level his piece one of they shoot he through the breast , and out at the back , wherewith he fall down stark dead . also the gentleman that shoot the arrow be so wound that he die the 2 day after and with the other be bury in a little island lie in the say port . our man leave the slay man on shore till night , and then fetch he in a boat . in the mean time the patagon have strip he of all his clothes , and view his body lay his clothes under his head , and so leave he untouched , save that they have stick the english arrow in his left eye . Theise man be of no such stature as the Spaniard report , be but of the height of english man : for i have see man in England tall than i can see any of they . but peradventure the Spaniard do not think that any english man will have come thither so soon to have disprove they in this and diverse [ three . 752 . ] other of their notorious lie : wherefore they presume more bold to abuse the world . the last of June m . the execution Thomas Doughty be bring to his answer , be ° fM - Thomas accuse , and convict of certain article , and by m . ° ™ te ' drake condemn . he be behead the 2 of July J57 1578 , who body be bury in the say island , near to they which be slay . we winter in this port 2 month , during which time we have such weather as be common in England in the depth of winter , or rather cold . after we have trim up our ship , and make provision of fuel and fresh water , we depart thence with 3 ship the 17 of August about noon . and the 20 of the say month we seize cape victory , the entrance by the which cape be the way into the south sea , call the strait of Magellan , the first discoverer thereof . we find the mouth of the strait to be 52 degree southward of equinoctial . in this strait , we find the sea to have no such current as some do imagine , ( follow the course of the primum mobile from east ordinary to west ) but to ebb and flow as ordinary as upon other inthenrei ^ ht coast > rise 5 fathom upright . the flood rise out ’ of the east ocean , and stretch it self so far into the strait , that it meet the flood of the south sea near about the midst of the strait , where it bend like a elbow , tend to the westnorthwest into the south sea , whereas the east part from the mouth of the strait to this elbow lie south - west and by west , or south - west to 53 degree and j . 30 league within the strait there be 3 island . to the great our general give the name of Elizabeth : to the 2 Bartholomew , because we find it on saint bartholomews abundance of day : the 3 he name saint George island . here we ' go ^ s bland stay one day and victual our self with a kind of in the strait f ° ule which be plentiful in that isle , and who flesh be of Magellan , not far unlike a fat goose here in England : they have no wing , but short pinion which serve their turn in swim . their colour be somewhat black mix with white spot under their belly , and about their neck . they walk so upright , that a far off a man will take they to be little child . if a man approach any thing near they , they run into hole in the ground ( which be not very deep ) whereof the island be full . so that to take they we have staff with hook fast to 158 the end , wherewith some of our man pull they out and other being ready with cudgel do knock they on the head , for they bite so cruel with their crooked bill , that none of we be able to handle they alive . the land on both part be very high : but especial towards the south sea , monstrous high hill and craggy rock do exalt themselves , who top be all hoary with snow , in the month of August , September , and October . notwithstanding the low part of the hill be replenish and beautify with impenetrable thick wood of strange and unknown tree , flourish all the year long . here we make provision of fuel and fresh water , and pass by cape Deseado into the south sea the 6 of September . And run along towards the northwest about 70 league , the wind turn direct against we , with great extremity of foul weather , as rain , hail , snow , and thick fog which continue so more than 3 week , that we can bear no sail , at which time we be drive 57 degr . to the south pole . the 15 of September the moon be there eclipse , and begin to be darken present after the set of the sun , about 6 of the clock at night , be then equinoctial vernal in that country . the say eclipse happen the 16 day in the morning before one of the clock in England , which be about six hour difference , agree to one quarter of the world , from the meridian of England towards the west . the last of September be a very foul night , and the sea sore grow , we lose the marigold , the general ship and the Elizabeth run to the eastward to get the shore , whereof we have sight , the 7 of October , fall into a very dangerous bay full of rock : and there we lose company of m . Drake the same night . the next day very hardly escape the danger of the rock , we put into the strait again , where we anchor in a open bay for the space of 2 day , and make great fierce on the shore , to the end that if m . Drake shall come into the A . D . 1578 . high hill on both side of the strait . cape Deseado where they entered into the south sea . they be drive to degree southward . they loose m . drake company . strait , he may find we . after we go into a is9 they return out of the strait the 11 of November , have enter into the south sea the 6 of September . [ he . 753 - ] sant tineent in Brasil in 24 degree . sound , where we stay for the space of 3 week and name it the port of health , for the most part of our man be very sick with long watch , wet , cold , and evil diet , do hear ( God be thank ) wonderful recover their health in short space . here we have very great muscle ( some be 20 inch long ) very pleasant meat , and many of they full of seed - pearl . we come out of this harbour the first of November , give over our voyage by m . winter compulsion ( full sore against the mariner mind ) who allege , he stand in despair , as well to have wind to serve his turn for Peru , as also of m . drake safety . so we come back again through the strait to saint George island , where we take of the fowl before name , and after depart . and thus we pass by cape victory out of the strait the 11 of November , direct our course to the north - east , till the last of this month . what time we arrive at a island which lie at the mouth of the river of plate . upon this island there be such a infinite number of seal , as may seem incredible to any man that have not be there , some of they be 16 foot long , not fear the presence of man : for the most of our man be upon the island , for the space of 15 day to set up a pinnace , during which time the seal will come and sleep by they , and rather resist our man , then give place , unless mortali blow force they to yield . when our pinnace be build , we go to another island , where we do water , and afterward depart the first of Januarie 157 9 , and run towards the north till the 20 of the say month , and then we arrive at a island which lie on the coast of Brasil , near to a town call sant Vincent inhabit by the Portugal . the say town lie 24 degree southward , almost under the Tropic of Capricorn . here , by reason of foul weather we lose our pinnace , and 8 man in she , and never see they since . here also our ship be in great 160 danger , by the mean of a strong current , which have almost cast we upon the shore before we be aware , insomuch that we be constrain to anchor in the open sea , and break our cable and lose a anchor , and present let fall another anchor ; in weigh whereof our man be sore spoil . for the capstan run about so violent with the rise of the ship in the sea , that it throw the man from the bar , and break out the brain of one man : one other have his leg break , and diverse other be sore hurt . at last we goat up our anchor and set sail , and run into a place call Tanay , where we ride under a island and take in wood and water . and while we stay here , there come 3 Portugal aboard we in . a canoa , to know what we will have , or of what country we be . to who our captain make answer : that we be Englishman , and have bring commodity for their country , if they will traffic with we : whereat they great marveil . for they say that they never hear of any english ship to have be in that country before ; and so they go to land again , have one of our man with they to speak with the governor of the town , and we keep one of they for a pledge . Shortly after there come another canoa aboard we with one Portugal and all the rest naked man of the country : of who we have two small ox , one young hog , with certain hen : also pome - cytrons , limon , orange , and other fruit of the country . for the which our captain give to they , linen cloth , comb , knife , and other trifle . in the mean time the governor of the town send word that we shall have nothing , unless we will bring our ship into the haven . whereunto our captain will in no case consent : for all their practice be to have get we within their danger , nevertheless we come somewhat near the town with our ship , as though we will have go in ; but we never mean it . here we take in our man ; and set the Portugal xi 161 l A . D . I579 - a dangerous current . Tanay a ptace in Brasil . the isle of SantSebastian about the Tropic of Capricorn . cape Sant Augustine . the isle of Fernando de Loronha . the sea of weed , near the Tropic of Cancer . their arrival at ilfoord - combe in Devonshire . pledge on land . after that we go to a hand call the isle of Sant Sebastian ; where we take fish . here the Portugal have betray we , if a Brasillian one of their slave have not be . for he steal from they , and show unto we by sign , that the Portugal be come with their canoas to take we , as it fall out in deed : for the next morning they show themselves with 12 or 16 canoas , some of they have 40 man in they . the same night two of our man run away with our boat to the Portugal . and thus we come away from thence towards our own country the 17 of march : and have sight of the cape of sant Augustine , lie in 8 degree to the southward of the line . after that we have sight of a island lie within 3 degree of the equinoctial , call the isle of Fernando de Loronha . we cross the equinoctial the 13 of April , and have sight of the north star the 19 of the say month . the 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , and 5 of may , we sail through the sea of weed , about the space of 100 league , be under the Tropic of Cancer . from whence we keep our course towards the north - east , until we have the pole raise 47 degree . the 22 of may we run Eastnortheast . the 29 we sound and have 70 fathom with white oaze ; have the north pole raise 51 degree . the 30 of may we have sight of saint Ives on the north side of cornwall , and the 2 of June 1579 we arrive at ilfoord - combe in devonshire . and thus after our manifold trouble and great danger in have pass the strait of Magellan into the south sea with our general m . Francis Drake , and have be drive with he down to the southerly latitude of 57 degree , and afterward pass back by the same strait again , it please God to bring we safe into our own native country to enjoy the presence of our dear friend and kinsfolk , to who be praise , honour , and glory , for ever and ever . amen . Edward cliff , mariner .