afore noon m . Walker and i go aboard the admiral to dinner , where be determine to discharge the spanish bark , name our lady of pity , and all the man , except Richard carter the english man , and John Pinto a Portugal , which dwell at the river of plate . after dinner , the generail appoint i and captain Hawkins to see they all set aboard their ship , and to receive from they certain necessary , which willing they impart with we , and to leave they satisfy . which do , i return aboard . the 9 day , be Sunday , in the morning , i send m . Shaw and m . Geffries aboard the admiral , to peruse the Spaniard letter : wherein they find the estate of the 184 1582 . fleet which be in the strait of Magellan , as by the note thereof appear . about ten of the clock the generail , m . Maddox , captain Hawkins , and captain Parker , come aboard of i . the general begin to reprove my quarter master for grudge of victuali for the Francis . which be answer : and he well satisfy . then send i for the old friar and don Francisco ; who all dine with i : and after dinner , the Spaniard have receive the canoa , which be sink , aland , and stone to ballast they , which my boat carry they , and all other thing to their like and content , they depart from i . the general also depart , and his company , who be go , i divide the sugar and ginger among my people , which Spanish the Spaniards give we : and after spend the day in present . ordinary business . the 10 day in the morning , our skiff go a fish , whereof we eat as much to supper as serve the company : the rest we salt for store , and to prove if they will take salt or not . the 11 day , betimes in the morning , our skiff go again to fish , and take great plenty . about seven of the clock i go aland , take with i the master , and other of our best man , to the number of 22 person , and travel to the place where our people before have thing find find many great jar of earth , and decay habitation in the uland of the Indian , and tree , be dead and wither , of sweet wood . from that place we see over the top of a narrow wood , a fair plain , which at the request of the master and the rest , i go with they to see . we pass through a thick and perilous wood , before we come to the suppose plain : and when we come to it , we find the low part thereof high than any of our head , and so mossy under foot , that we slip to the knee many step , which so weary we , that for my part , i be very sick , and so haste aboard , leave the master with 15 man , which cut a tree of sweet wood , and bring many piece thereof aboard . 185 they leave the harbour in 27 degree and 50 . min . the english voyage about 3 afternoon , m . Walker and many of our man be ashore , the wind come fair , and we lay out a warp to the north - east , and begin to wind ahead . after we lay out another warp with a bend , and wound to the plat , and so rid by it with one anchor all night . the 12 day about five a clock in the morning , we set sail , and as we run out betwixt the ledge of rock and the main , in eight fathom water , as we be cat our anchor , the catt - rope , stopper , and all break ; so that we be glad to let slip all the cable , and cast off our boat and skiflfe to weigh the same . after we have stand out a good way , the admiral be under sail : then cast we about and go room with the admiral which weave we , who send in his pinnace and the Francis to help out our boat ; so by the help of the admiral pinnace , with her sail , we have our boat the soon , and about 12 a clock at noon have take in the anchor , cable , our long boat , skiflfe , and all , and put out all our sail bear after the admiral , which go hence south by east . about six a clock at night , be thick weather , we lose sight of the land , be four league off or thereabouts . all night it be but little wind : yet go we our course south by west . the 13 day about seven afore noon , the wind blow at southsoutheast , and be very foggy ; with which gale we stand in larboard tack west , till ten a clock the same forenoon . then have we sight of the land ahead , all along ( for it wax clear weather ) it show a far off like white cliff , but be all sandy hill , and bay along the sea side . at one a clock after noon we be in j 6 fathom water , and within half a league of the shore , where we see several fire make by the Indian to give warning to the other people within the land , as we suppose . than we cast about , and stand off southeast by east till midnight , that the wind come large : then go we our course south by west till next morning . the 14 day we go our course south by west , have sight of the land at six a clock in the morning 186 1582 . about seven league off : and so go till six at night , that we see land again seven league off west , and the wind shift to the south . than we cast about , and stand off eastsoutheast at seven at night for a while : then come up the wind at northwest , and blow agood . the 15 day in the morning , the admiral be ahead , as far as we can almost see she , by who default i know not ; and be little wind we can not get to she till four of the clock after noon : than we hail [ three . 763 . ] her , and stand in between the southsouthwest and the southwest till six at night , that the wind be variable , and foul weather . than we cast about , and sound in 23 fathom soft oaze , and stand off a while Northeast ; and present cast about again , and go south by east larboard tack , and southsoutheast , among all night : find at four in the morning 15 fathom sand . the 20 day , about ten a clock afore noon , we go aboard the admiral ; viz . m . Walker , the master , the pilot , the two merchant , and my self , be direct so to do by the general . upon our come the general be go to dinner , where we also dine with he . have dine , the general call we his assistant into his cabin , and there deliver to we in write two demand , to be by we consider upon , and he to have our opinion therein . the effect of the demand be these . 1 whether it be best for we to adventure our self to pass the strait of Magellan or not ; consider the force of the enemy , which we know to be there before we : and also that our determination be there to set up our pinnace , make iron hoop , carene our ship , and do all our necessary business for the full accomplishment of our voyage . 2 if that course be not think best , which way be meet for we to take . to the first we be of opinion , that it be good to hear the opinion of captain Hawkins , captain Drake , 187 Richard Carter the english man take in the prize , carry along with they . they retume in the latitude of 33 - the english voyage and the two pilot , which have pass the strait and know the harbour , and like place to be fortify , and inhabit or not , who be call , and the three master with they . their opinion be as diverse as their name ; and as much difier , as before this time they be wont usual to do : only they all agree in this one point , that it be impossible for we to pass the strait without see , and encounter with the ship , although the fortification of the land do not annoy we : which be long and thorough debate , and their opinion with the three master demand , which accord not scant any one with other , they be dismiss . then the general receive the opinion of we his assistant , begin with the young in authority first : which when he have hear they all over , and be set down in write under our hand , he take deliberation till after supper to give his determination . when we have all sup , than he send for we down into his cabin , and deliver in write his determination , ( which be ) to victuali , and furnish our self on this coast , before he proceed any further ; and name two place , the river of plate , or saint Vincent , to be choose . for the better decipher of the river of plate , and the commodity thereof , be call before we , Richard carter , which do dwell there ; who can not assure we of any wine , except we can stay four month for it : but other victual plenty . the river be shoal and dangerous , the road seven league from any town , or place of commodity : which consider with the treachery that may from thence be use , into the strait by sea , and into Peru by land , we all conclude to go to saint Vincent , which place be inhabit by Portugal , and where in honest sort we may convenient have all our business do . with this resolution we take our leaf about eight a clock at night , and be come aboard , present bear up , and go room , have all the day before beat up the 188 1583 . wind larboard - tacked eastsoutheast till at night : after it be a little wind all night we go north next hand . the 21 day , after service , i declare unto my company the intent of our return to the port of saint Vincent , wherewith they be well satisfy , be before doubtful that we shall not proceed , but return without performance of our voyage . it continue calm all day till six at night , than we go northwest by west till eight at night , and then we cast about , and stand off eastsoutheast , and east by south all night with a good gale . the 22 day in the morning we miss the Francis , John drake in which by all presumption go room in the begin of Francts .. a r r ° ° go to the .. river of plate , the 2 5 day , be Chnstmasse day , it be little wind wherein his inn the forenoon till ten a clock ; than it blow a fresh ship be cast gale , with which we go our course Northnortheast , bull they in the afternoon it be less wind : yet go we our ' ' landmdlived course north by east , and northnortheast , and north , and month north by west , till midnight . then be in shoal among the water , we cast about , and lie southsoutheast , and south - Savages . east by south , a hour ; and see our admiral come not after we , we cast about back again , and present meet he : so we go both together next hand southsoutheast all the rest of the night . this afternoon we see the infinite numskim of fish so thick in the sea , that it seem a water ber ° ffish . trouble with trample of horse ; which be thick , and slimy : for we have take up some of it . the 17 day of January , about seven a clock , the master , m . Blaccoller , and i go in our skiff , and row , and sound round about a isle , and find 16 fathom within a stone cast hard aboard the shore , and fair ground : after we land , and find nothing but wood and bush , and strange worm : we see a falcon , and [ three . 764 . ] one other small bird , and therefore name it falcon I | will : Asmalllsland it be a mile about , with a rock on the east side , which which our man lie close to it , and it be in sight without danger . after aucon we come aboard , and dine ; at two a clock we set sail , with wind southeast , and run in Northeast a while , till the 189 wind scant : than we go in Northnortheast , till we be in seven fathom and a half of water , within a league of shore : than we cast about , and stand off southsoutheast all night , till six a clock the next morning . the 18 day about three a clock , afore day , we see our admiral again , and keep her company till day . citron isle . the 19 day , be within a league of the citron I | will , about eight a clock afore noon , we go aboard the general , viz . m . Walker , the master , the pilot , and my self , rejoice of our good meeting , who tell i of their evil road , where they lose a anchor , a cable , and a hauls , and how the day before , their pinnace be ashore on the same hand , and find foul , and water there , whither now they have send their boat and pinnace for more water , where i know they have small store . i also take captain Parker , the master , and m . Wilks with i , go ashore , and travel to the top of the isle , which be wooded , and high grass , but evil water , and little on it , but