the voyage intend towards China , wherein m . Edward Fenton be appoint general : write by m . luke ward his viceadmiral , and captain of the Edward Bonaventure , begin anno Dom . 1582 . he second of April i depart with the Edward Bonaventure from Blackwall , and the 19 of the same arrive in Nettle ride at Hampton , where i find ride the Gallion Leicester : and so remain there till the first of May , we set sail thence in the forenoon , be of we in the whole fleet four sail . 1 the Gallion Leicester of 400 ton admiral , whereof be general captain Edward Fenton , and William Hawkins the young lieutenant general in she , and Christopher hall , master . 2 than Edward Bonaventure of 300 ton viceadmiral , whereof be captain luke ward , and Thomas Perrie master . 3 than Francis of forty ton , whereof be captain John Drake , and William Markam master . 4 than Elizabeth of fifty ton , whereof be captain Thomas Skevington and Ralph Crane master . we spend by mean partly of business , and partly of contrary wind , the month of may upon the coast , and then leave the land we put off to sea , and proceed on our voyage intend by the grace of God for China : until the month of August follow , nothing fall out much worthy the knowledge of the world , which be not common to all navigant , but about the begin of August aforesaid , be somewhat near the coast of guinie , upon the shoot off a piece and the put out of a flag in the admiral , i go on board , and m . Walker , m . Shaw , m . GefFreis , our master and Pilot 172 with i , where the general counsel be assemble to consider of two point , viz . the first , whether it be necessary to water present or not , which be think very needful of all man , and so conclude . the second , where the best and apt place be to water in , which be think of the great number to be at Sierra leona on the coast of guinie , which be also conclude , and by the master and pilot agree to go hence southeast , which determine , we return aboard . the 3 day we go southeast and eastsoutheast , till six a clock at night that we see the land of guinie , which bare north - east of we about 12 league off , which see , we sound , and have no ground : then go i and our master and pilot aboard the admiral , and after many debatement conclude to run in Northeast by east , and at eleven at night we come aboard again , and go all night Northeast by east . the 4 at eight a clock in the forenoon we be within 2 league of the land , which bear off we north - east , which rise like a hill full of wood , and on each side low land : we be persuade by our pilot that it be the entrance into Sierra leona , go in Northeast until we be within a half league of the shore , and have bring the south point southeast by east off we . at eleven a clock find it a bay and not Sierra leona , we bring our tack aboard , and stand along west by north and west larboard tack . in this time our admiral pinnace row in , and go on land upon the south side of the bay , and then Elizabeth boat with she . they find house of bough , and in one of the house the tongue of a beast , and a bullock tongue fresh kill ; also a lake with plenty of fresh water , and fresh - water - fish in it have by the sea side : they find dry pomegranate , and pease like nut , with other unknown fruit under the tree . the Elizabeth run in , and bring the south point south by west of she , and anchor within falcon shoot of the shore in 173 A . D . 1582 . [ Iii . 758 . ] they arrive in the river oj Sierra leona . Trees hang with oyster . the english voyage seven fathom oaze , where they take fish with hook , while he stay for the boat . the 4 all the afternoon we run along the coast ( which lie northwest and by north , and southeast by south ) west , and within a point one way or the other , see the land under our lee three or four league off , and all night likewise . the 9 at three a clock in the morning our admiral shoot off a piece , and at four we weigh and go hence Northeast . at five in the morning we see the land along , and the island which we see the night before , and diverse other island about it , and so run in Northeast until we have bring our self thwart of the river , and then run in east about six at night , be a league within the river . our admiral shoot off a piece , and there we anchor in eight fathom sand . be at anchor , i man our boat and will have go aboard the admiral , but can not , the flood be bend so strong , and she ride half a mile beneath we in the tide , but we have no tide . the 10 in the morning at five a clock i send our skiff with our pilot in she to find a road , and a water place : in the mean time at six a clock we set sail with our ship , and be calm we tow with our boat until ten , and then anchor a mile short of the water place . after dinner i go on land with my skiff to find timber to fish our mast , and search along the shore we find a good water place : and further seek in the wood , which all the country be full of , and of diverse sort , we find Limmon tree full of fruit : also tree grow by the water side with the stalk hang full of oyster and great periwinkle , and crab among they : we find dry pomegranate with many other fruit unknown to we . in the mean time our admiral and the Edward with the bark , have a gale at west , set sail , and run up and anchor in the road before the accustom water place . the 22 day certain Portugal which have be with 174 we before , come down and bring some other Portugal and negro with they in a ship - boat , wherein they bring we 80 mew of rice , 500 and odd weight of elephant tooth , and a negro boy , which boy they give the general , and the rice and tooth for the Elizabeth , their traffic which we sell they , with all her tackle and sail , the have need of the rice , because our meal which we wu & a ■ bring out of England be decay and nought , whereof we have into the Edward 30 bushel , which be a mew and a half : the Francis have 5 bushel , and the Gallion have the rest . and we have 200 weight of elephant tooth , and the Gallion 300 and a half , and six pound . during this time we send our skiff with the admiral pinnace up the river to meet with a Gundall , which the Portugal have send for fresh victual for we : who not find she , return at night : all this day i with m . Walker remain aboard with the admiral , and after their dinner and supper we end our business , and return aboard , have have many good speech with the Portugal . the 26 day be Sunday , captain Hawkins , m . Maddox , m . hall , m . Bannister , captain Drake , m . Evans , m . Hood , and other come aboard and hear the sermon , and dine with i : after dinner we go on shore to the low point where we follow the foot of a elephant , but see he not , and so spend the time to and fro till supper time , and then come aboard , and sup together , which do , each man depart to his abode . this night i be very sick , ( and so be all they sickness by that be on shore with i , ) with eat of a fruit eat seem in the country , which we find on tree , like nut : whereof some do eat four , some five , some six , and ’ more , but we vomit and scour upon it without reason . the 27 day in the afternoon the old greek Francisco come aboard to i , with request that he may have the Francis boat to go up for his own 175 boat which be not come down , with who i talk of this country and countrypeople , until five of the clock at night that the flood be come , and then i go aboard to the admiral , and get his consent , and send themselves in she : viz . Ferdinando the Portugal ! master , and his negro : in the mean time i send four of my man to watch in the Elizabeth all night . the 28 day in the morning at four a clock i send my skiff with the admiral pinnace down to the west point to fish , who come aboard again at one in the afternoon , and bring as much fish as all our company can eat . during the time that our boat be a fish , come down the river a canoa and the Portugal former boat , 7 ^ Portugal with hen , orange , plantan , which they present the present . general and i with : and also the rest of the rice due to we for the payment of the Elizabeth . for the parti - [ three . 759 . ] tion whereof i go aboard the admiral , where i dine . m . Evans after dinner m . Evans begin to barter away certain of one of our then ship commodity with the negro , without acquaint - merchant . jng the generaq or any other until he have do , whereof grow more word than profit , as by the book of merchandise appear . which do i come aboard , and have two of the Portugal to supper with i . about two of the clock in the morning we have a ternado , and much rain . they search the 29 about 4 a clock in the morning , i in my the country . skiff , and captain Parker in his pinnace , go down to the west point , and there we land with 11 man in all well furnish , and search the wood , plain and plash , after a elephant , find the haunt , foot , and soil of many new do , yet we see none of they . we see hog , goat or fawn , and diverse sort of fowl very wild : and have travail about 2 league , about noon we return to the point , where we land , and meet our boat which have be at sea , and take plenty of good fish : there we refresh our self with such victual as we have , and come 176 1582 . aboard our several ship , where i find the Portugal and negro , who have dine , and after sup aboard with i . the 2 of September we set sail at six of the clock in the morning , and go out west between 7 and 10 fathom , with a pretty gale at east till 8 , than it wax calm , we be shoot out of the harbour a league and a half . it continue calm this day till one in the afternoon , and then it blow up at Westsouthwest a good gale , so we stand off northnorthwest , and northwest till 5 in the afternoon , than we anchor in 12 fathom , be 6 league off the point west by north . the 3 day about eight a clock in the forenoon , than they return general come aboard to i , complain that his main t0 ^ rra ^ ona cross - tree be break , and therefore determine to a ^ aine - goe into Sierra leona again when the wind blow : at 12 at noon we set sail , and go in eastsoutheast , and southeast , and southsoutheast , be carry to the northward with the flood . and at 7 at night we anchor in eight fathom three league off the entrance , westnorthwest . the 12 day come down the river a boat with three traffic with other Portugal , with who the general bargain , to let 3 ° j her . Porlu they have 3 barrel of salt for 5 barrel of rice , and after s £ ewis that rate to exchange for 40 barrel , which he acquaint Henriques a i with : afterward i dine among the Portugal with dweller here he : after dinner i go on shore to the oven , and above 20 to the carpenter . after i have be on shore and see the work there , i return aboard , and there sup with Fernando i the general , m . Maddox , captain Hawkins , and captain . Portugal : after supper each man return to his ^ t ' dro Vaz place . ™ ’ the 13 in the afternoon , the Portugal come again aboard i , and break their fast with i : after i send by they up the river in my skiff 12 barrel of salt , and give they a bottle of wine for one of the savage queen . xi 177 m they enter up the 15 after dinner , the master , m . Walker , and i , to search the accompany with 12 other travel over a great deal country . ground to find some cattle , but find none : and come home through the oyster bay , i find of my company and of the admiral together roast of oyster : and go from they , Thomas Russell one of my com - pan ie see a strange fish name Utelif , which have fight with a crocodile , and be hurt come near the shore , where he wade in , and by the tail draw he a land , a swordfish and there slay he , and send the general the hinder hill . half of he : the head part i keep , in who nose be a bone of two foot long