Englishman call Abraham cock bear in Lee . we examine he and the rest concern the state of the river , and they tell we that there be in the river five town , some of 70 . households , and some of more . the first town be about 50 . league up the river call Buenos Ayres , the rest some 40 . some 50 . league one from another , so that the uppermost town call Tucaman be 230 . league from the entrance of the river . in these town be great store of corn , cattle , wine , and sundry fruit , but no money of gold or silver : they make a certain kind of slight cloth , which they give in truck of sugar , rice , marmalade , and sucket , which be the commodity that this ship have . they have aboard also 45 . Negros , whereof every one in Peru yield 400 . ducat a piece , and beside these , there be as passenger in she , two Portugal woman and a child . the 11 . day we espy another sail , which be the 208 consort of this Portugal , and to he also we give chase , another and take he the same day : he be of the burden PortHZ , als ^ p of the other , and have in he good store of sugar , Mar - take ' malade , and succat , with diverse other thing , which we note down our book . in this ship also we find about 35 . negro woman , and four or five friar , of which one be a irish man , of the age of three or a irish friar four and twenty year , and two Portugal woman ta ^ ew also , which be bear in the river of Jenero . both these ship be buy in Brasil , by a young man which be factor for the bishop of Tucaman , and bishop of the friar be send for by that bishop to possess a tixaman ™ new monastery , which the bishop be then a build - p ^ king . the book , bead , and picture in she , cost ( as one of the Portugal confess ) above 1000 ducat . of these ship we learn , that m . John Drake , who the news go in consort with m . Fenton , have his bark cast away a little short of the river of plate , where they ’ be take captive by the savage , all save they which be slay in the take : the savage keep they for a time , and use they very hardly , yet at the last John drake and Richard Faireweather , and two or three Richard moor of their company with they get a Canoa , and ^ aireweathei . escape , and come to the first town of the Spaniard . Faireweather be marry in one of the town , but John Drake be carry to Tucaman by the pilot of this ship , and be live , and in good health the last year . concern this voyage of the Portugal they tell we that it be the third voyage that be make into the river of plate these 30 . year . the 12 . of January we come to seal island , and the seale - fands 14 . day to the green island , where go in our find and green - hard aboard the main 8 . fathom , 7 . and 6 . and never less than five fathom . there lie a ledge of rock in the fair way , betwixt the island and the main , so that you must be sure to borrow hard aboard the main , and leave the ledge on the larboard side . xi 209 oh one of the Portugal which we cane along with we in our ship seem to be a man of experience , and i enter into speech with he concern the state of Buenos Ayres , the river : he tell i that the town of Buenos Ayres be from the green island about seventie league , stand on the southside of the river , and from thence Santa fee . to Santa fee be ioo . league , stand on the same side also . at which town their ship do discharge all their good into small bark , which row and tow up the river to another town call ascension , which [ three . 772 . ] be from Santa fee 150 . league , where the boat discharge on shore , and so pass all the good by cart and horse to Tucaman , which be in Peru . the town of ascension stand in a very fertile place , reap corn twice in the year , with abundance of wine , cattle , and fruit . in the town of ascension and tucaman a rapier of 20 . rial of plate be worth 30 . ducat , a box of marmalade 20 . ducat ; a look glass a foot over be worth 30 . livre . picture in table of 14 . inch , 30 . and 40 . livre . a piece . the 16 . day we go from green island to the water place , which be about a league to the westward , where we take in about 18 . ton of water , and the 22 . day come again to seal island to make provision of seal , where a storm arise , which put we in some danger , by the break of our anchor and cable , and the wind blow so cold , that we much marveil at it , consider the height of the place . i must needs in this place find fault with our self and the whole company , that ride in this river 16 . day , the channel be not sound , nor the way make perfect . the 29 . day we take into our ship one mile Philips , which be leave in the west Indies by m . Hawkins . the first of February i take the sun in 38 . degree . and the 3 . day of February i take it again and find it to be in 41 . degree . 210 the 7 . day of February our captain master Lister be in one of the prize , hoist over board his gondola , and go aboard the admiral , and be there they send their gondola aboard we , for our master , master Collins , and my self , and at our come we be call into the captain cabin , where be set in counsel for matter touch the state of our voyage , these man who name be under write . ' master Robert Withrington captain of the admiral . master Christopher Lister captain of the bark Clifford . John Anthony , master of the admiral . Thomas hood , pilot for the strait . William Anthony , master of the bark Clifford . David Collins . } { Tristan Gennings . master William Withrington . " master Beumond Withrington . master wasne . } { master Norton . master Wilkes . } { master Harris . Thomas Anthony . Nicholas porter . the master gunner : and Alexander Gundie , his mate . John Sarracol . this company be all assemble together , the master m . John an - of the admiral declare that the cause of our assembly t ^ onie . be to determine after good advice , what course or way be best and most likely to all man judgment to be take . first for the good preferment of my lord voyage , than the health of our man , and last the safeguard of our ship , and further show his mind to we all in these word , as near as i can carry they away . my master , my lord determination touch this our voyage be not unknown unto you all , have appoint it to be make , and by the grace of God to be perform by we for the south sea . but for as much 211 as we do all see the time of the year to be far spend , as also the wind to hang contrary , the weather draw on cold and cold , the night long and long , our bread so consume that we have not leave above two month biscuit , our drink in a manner all spend , so that we have nothing but water , which in so cold a country as the strait , if we shall get in , and be force there to winter , will no doubt be a great weaken to our man , and a hazard of the overthrow of the voyage : these thing consider , both our captain , master hood , and i do rather think it good for the wealth of our voyage , the health of our man , and safety of our ship , to go room with the coast of Brasill , where by God grace we shall well victuali our self , both with wine which be our great want , and other necessary . beside , it be give we here to understand by the Portugal which we have take , that there be no doubt but that by god help and our endeavour , we shall be able to take the town of Baya , at our pleasure , which if we do put in practice , and do not perform it , be somewhat advise by they , they offer to loose their life . and have by this mean victual our [ three . 773 . ] self , we may there spend upon the coast some three or four month , except in the mean time we may happen upon some good thing to content my lord , and to purchase our own credit : otherwise , we may take the spring of the year , and so proceed , accord to my lord direction . and assure your self ( by the assistance of God ) we will not return without such benefit by this voyage , as may redound to my lord profit , and the honour of our country . now if there be any of you that can give better course and advise , than this which i have deliver , let he speak , and we will not only hear he , but thank he for his a resolute and counseH ( anJ follow it . captain thi ® speech of m . Anthony , m . Lister our captain Lister . answer in this sort : m . Withrington , and m . Anthony , 212 both , you know , that the last word that my lord have with we in such a chamber be , that in any case we shall follow our voyage only for the south sea , except by the way , we may perchance meet with such a purchase , as that we may return with 6000 pound : and therefore i see no safety , how we may dare offer to go back again , be so near the strait as we be : for my part i neither dare nor will consent unto it , except we be further force , then yet we be . my account be this , that he that die for this year be excuse for the next , and i rather choose death , than to return in disgrace with my lord . hereunto both the captain and master of the admiral reply that they be all of that mind : yet notwithstanding , that in go room the voyage be in better possibility to be perform , then in winter either in the strait , or at port S . Julian , all thing consider and so agree , and conclude all in one , they be determine present to bear up . the next day be the 8 of February , there fall out many and diverse speech on each part concern the alter of our course , some will continue for the strait , and other some will not . whereupon a view be take in both ship of victual , and reasonable store be find for both company : and the wind withal come to the north , we determine to take out of the prize the best necessary that be in they , and so cast they off , and to ply for the strait . all this time we hold on our course , and the 15 day we find our self in the height of 44 degree , but then the wind come to the south , with much rain , wind , cold , and other untemperate weather , continue in that sort five or six day , in which time we hull back again into the height of 42 degree . Sunday be the 20 of February , our admiral be something to the leeward of we , and the storm somewhat cease , put aboard his flag in the mizzen shrowd , as a token that he will speak with we , and there - 213 they return be in the latitude of degree . upon we bear room with he , and have hail one another , captain Withrington show the disposition of all his company , which be rather to go room with the coast of Brasil , than to lie after that sort in the sea with foul weather and contrary wind . our captain on the other side show the contrary disposition of his man , and company , will notwithstanding to proceed : but in the end , both the ship fall asunder , and our captain say , see then there be no remedy , i must be content , though against my will . the 21 day the weather grow fair , and the wind good at the south for the strait , yet our admiral bare room still , we suppose he will have take the benefit of the time : whereupon our whole company begin to think of the inconvenience that will arise by divide our self , and lose our admiral , be very willing to continue their course , and yet not without the company of the admiral . and then we begin to cast about after he , and at the last bear with he , and he tell we , that upon a second view of the victual , he find their store so slender , and their want so great , that there be no remedy for they but to seek some mean to be relieve , which be the only cause that he bear northward . this speech make we of the bark to enter into a new consultation : and we find many of our man weak , and all our caliver not serviceable , and the smith that shall mend they to be in the admiral . we consider also , that by break of company , each ship shall be the more weaken : we continue in this consultation till the four and twenty day , and in all that time find master captain Lister more desirous to accomplish , and to fulfil the voyage , and not willing in any case to turn his ship , but that the desire which we all have to continue in consort with our admiral ,