there be two narrow place in the strait where he ent ^ ter ^ d - might build a fort , and that there be a very good s ^ ine to for - countrey abound with great store of riches and other tifie the necessary , and very well inhabit with Indian . upon strait of who word , and for that there be more ship make Magellan . ready in England to pass the say strait , the king send Diego flores de Valdez with 23 ship and 3500 man , and a new governor to Chili with five hundred old soldier new come out of Flanders . Theise ship have the hard hap of any that ever go out of Spain since the India be first discover : for that before they can get clear of the coast of Spain , a storm take they , and cast away five of they , and above eight hundred man , and the residue of the fleet put into Cadiz . notwithstanding which hard success , the king send they word that they shall proceed : and so they do with sixteen sail only , for two other of their ship be so shake with the storm , that they can not go forth . in these sixteen sail of ship Pedro Sarmiento be send to be governor in the strait : he carry with he all kind of artificer , to build fort , and other necessary , with great store of ordinance and munition . this fleet because it set late forth , winter on the coast of Brasil in the river of Jenero . Winter be pass , they set sail from hence , and about the height 267 two english ship under the conduct ofM . Fenton andm . Luke ward . the english voyage of 42 degree they have such a storm , that Diego Flores be fain to beat it up and down about 22 day ; in which storm be sink one of his best ship , and in her three hundred man and twenty woman that go to inhabit the strait , and most part of the munition that shall have be leave in the strait be all cast away . in the end the storm grow so intolerable , that the ship not be able to endure it any long be constrain to put back again unto a island call Santa Catelina : and there he find a bark wherein be certain friar go for the river of plate , which friar tell he of two great english ship and a pinnace that have take they , but take nothing from they , nor do they any harm , but only ask they for the king of Spain ship . now Diego Flores suppose that these english ship will go to the strait , be himself determine to go to the strait also , though it be in the month of February ; and choose ten ship of the fifteen that be leave , he send three of the residue that be old and shake with the storm ( wherein he put all the woman and sick man that be in the fleet ) back again to the river of Jenero ; leave the other two ship , which be not able to brook the sea , at the foresay island ; and so himself with the say ten ship return again for the strait . now the three ship wherein the sick man and the woman be embark , come to the port of Sant Vincent : where find the two foresaid english ship , and urge they to avoid the harbour , the english enter combat with they : and by reason that these three ship be weaken with former tempest , and be man with the refuse of all the spanish fleet , the Englishman easy put they to the worst , and sink one of they , and may also have sink another , if they have be so mind ; but they desire not the destruction of any man : and doubtless it be the great valour that any man can show , that when he may do hurt , he will not . hereupon the Englishman depart from this port unto 268 Espirito Santo , where they have victual for their mer - Espirito Santo . chandize : and so they return home to England without do any harm in the country . the cause why these english captain go not to the strait i know not : some say , that they be put back by foul weather , other suppose that it be for fear of the king ship : but the pinnace that belong to these ship wherein John Drake go as captain , depart from they : the cause why he do so , be unknown : but this pinnace John Drake . enter the river of plate , and within five league of seal - island , not far from the place where the earl of cumberland ship take in fresh water , it be cast away upon a ledge of rock ; but the man be all save in the boat . who be eighteen in number go on shore upon the northside of the island , and pass ten day journey up into the land , they meet with certain savage people , which be no man - eater , but take all the Christians that they can get , and make they their slave : howbeit the Englishman fight with they , and be too few in number , five of they be slay , and the other thirteen take prisoner , who remain with the savage about fifteen month . but the master of the pinnace call Richard fair - weather , be loath any long to induce that misery wherein he be , and have knowledge of a town of Christians on the other side of the river , call on a night John Drake , and another young man which be with they , and take a Canoa be very little , and have but two oar , and pass therewith on the other side of the river , which be full nine league broad ; and be three day before they can get over , they be much pine for lack of meat . but come to land , they hit upon a high way that go towards the Christians : and spy the foot of horse , they follow it , and at last come to a house , near unto [ he . 795 . ] the which corn be sow . and there they meet with Indian that be servant to the Spaniard , who give they food , and clothes to cover they withal , for they 269 the governor of Chili pass thither by the river of plate : the english voyage be all naked . and one of the say Indian go to the town , and carry news of the Englishman : whereupon the captain of the town send out four horseman , which bring they to the town behind they , and the say captain clothe they , and provide lodging for they , and John Drake sit at the captain own table , and he entreat they all very well , think to send they for Spain . but the viceroy of Peru hear this news send for they , and they send he John drake ; but the other two they keep , because they be marry in the country . thus much concern their affair . upon these news also there be prepare fifty horseman to go over the river , both to seek the rest of the Englishman , and certain Spaniard which be among those savage people ; but i be not assure whether they go forward or no . now let we return to Diego Flores : who pass from the island of Santa Catelina towards the strait of Magellan in the middle of February , and come to the height of the river of plate , send the governor of Chili with three ship up the river to Buenos air , that he may from thence pass overland to Chili . of these three ship two be lose , but the man and provision be save ; and the three return for Spain . then Diego Flores with the other seven ship proceed on to the latitude of 52 . degree , whereas the mouth of the strait begin : but because it be the end of march , which there be the latter end of summer , the country be so full of snow , and withal there arise such a sudden storm , that he can not set Sarmiento and his man on shore , but be constrain the second time to return unto the river of Jenero upon the coast of Brasil ; where he hear news of the english ship by the two spanish ship that escape from they . upon which news he leave his lieutenant Diego de Ribera , and Pedro Sarmiento , that they may the next year return for the strait . and so Diego Flores himself with four » 70 ship which be yet remain unto he , and other four which the king send to succour he , set forth to four ship seek the Englishman ; but have run along all the m & . e se ^ t0 coast of Brasil he can not find they , because they ° res ' be go direct for England . whereupon shape his course unto a port call Parajua , and find there french five french ship , he burn three and take two , and s & s ken at the tort also which the £ renchman have build , and put Spaniard therein , but the Frenchman flee into the mountain to the savage . this do he return for Spain . in the mean season his lieutenant Diego de Ribera , and Pedro Sarmiento have the next year so good fedr0 arm ^- fortune , that they arrive safe in the strait with all their ship , and set on shore four hundred man : but Magellan because the ship boat can not land , be once with 400 man lade , they run that ship , which have all the victual 3 ° woman . and munition in she , on shore in a bay , and as the water do ebb they take all thing out of she . This be do , Diego de Ribera leave Sarmiento with four hundred man , thirty woman , and a ship , with victual for eight month : and with the other three ship he return , have remain in the strait but eight day . now Pedro Sarmiento build a town hombre de at the mouth of the strait on the north side , place Jesus therein a hundred and fifty man : and from thence he go by land , and send the ship further into the strait , and fifty league within the strait , at the narrow place of all , where there be a very good port , he build another town , which he name the town Ciudad deal of king Philip ; and will also have make a fort , and plant ordinance for the defence of the strait : ’ but the snow and winter be so intolerable , that he can not bring it to perfection . whereupon take about 25 mariner with he into the foresay ship , he say he will go see how his other people do , and so he sail to the strait mouth , unto the town which be first build ; where have continue a day 271 or two , he say that a storm put he from the strait by force and break his cable ; but his man affirm the contrary , that himself cut his cable ( God know the truth ) and so he pass to the river of Jenero ; and not find there any succour come from the king , he sail to Fernambuck , crave aid of the captain to furnish he with victual . and so the captain present freight his ship with victual and clothes for his people leave in the strait , and so sail thitherward . but between cape S . Augustin and Baya the wind come off the sea with such violence , that it force the ship to run on shore ; where Sarmiento have three of his man drown , and he with the rest hardly escape : and so this ship be lose with all the provision in she . from thence he pass by land to Baya where the governor of Brasil buy he a bark that lie in the harbour , lade the same with victual and clothes for sarmientos colony . with this provision and diverse other necessary for his people he take his voyage for the strait , and come to the height of four and forty degree , he meet on the sudden with such a [ three . 796 . ] furious storm , that he be force to throw his fraught overboard , and also to return to the river of Jenero . where stay a whole year for succour from the king , there come not so much as a letter from he . for the king be sore displease at Pedro Sarmiento , because he make he believe that the narrow place of the strait be but a mile over : and that it may be fortify so that a boat can not pass : whereas Diego de Ribera , and other certify the king , that it be above a league broad , and that if a ship come with wind and current , all the ordinance in the world can not hurt it . wherefore the king think that Pedro Sarmiento have deceive he , in make he to lose so many man , and so much charge to no effect . and the governor of Baya see that the king write not unto he , will give he no more succour : so that Sarmiento be constrain to make a voyage for Spain 272 in the same ship , wherein he last sail towards the strait : and it be say that he be take in the sar - way by Englishman , and carry into England . This Sarmiento have