of that innocent king Atabalipa . and yet there be mutiny raise oftentimes by the Spaniard , but the Indian never rebel , after they have once peace grant unto they . the Indian people of this land be part among the Spaniard , some be slave unto the gentleman that conquer their land , other some to other , and the residue to the king : and these Indian pay each man for his tribute seven pezo of fine gold , which be about ten ducat and a half . there be in this ricks ^ and ’ one country above forty city and town inhabit by archbishopric Spaniards : also they have here erect nine bishopin Peru . rick and one archbishopric . 284 now after this country be full conquer and bring in good order , certain Spaniards be desirous to discover the land on the other side of the snowy mountain , find a very wholesome country and there inhabit . the say province situate behind the mountain be call the province of Tucuman , wherein the province be five town inhabit by the Spaniard , the last of ° ftucuman - them call Cordova , from which town unto Santa fee Cordova . situate upon the river of plate it be seventie league . this town of Santa fee be build in that place , to seek a way to Peru by the river of plate . and from hence down the say river to Buenos air be 120 league , and from Buenos air unto Sealisland you have 40 league . now have put down all that i know concern the country of Peru , and of the way from the river of plate unto Tucuman , i will return unto Atacama the Atacama . southermost town upon the coast of Peru , where i leave . from this town of Atacama till you come to Arica , all the coast be inhabit by Indian subject unto the Spaniard . but since captain Drake be here they [ three . 801 . ] have build tower by the sea side , whereon , see any sail that they do mistrust , they presently ' make smoke , and so from tower to tower they warn all the country . have before speak of Arica all that i can , i will now proceed to the next port call Camena be a Camena . town of Spaniards and contain about two hundred house . here they make store of wine , and have abundance of fig and reisin . the next town call Acari Acari . contain about three hundred house , and here be make the best and great store of wine in all Peru . from hence pass along the coast you come to el Calao el Calao . the port of Lima consist of about two hundred house : and here be a strong fort build since captain Drake be upon the coast . the city of Lima stand Lima . two league within the land , and contain two thousand house , be very rich , and of more trade than all the city of Peru beside : and this city be the seat of the viceroy , the archbishop , and the inquisition . 285 Paita . Guaiaquil . Tumbez . Salsaperilla . ship build at Guaiaquil . Puerto Viejo a place where emrald abound . la Buenaventura . la governacion de Popaian . Negros flee from their master . Panama . the english Voyages next unto this stand a small town of the Spaniard by the sea side call Santa : and next unto Santa be another small town of Christians call Cannete . from hence they sail unto a rich city call Truxillo , be one of the principali town of Peru , and contain about five hundred house . then follow Paita which have to the number of two hundred house . leave this town they pass to Guaiaquil which stand forty league up into a great bay or river , at the entrance of which river stand Tumbez a town of the Indian . all this coast along from Atacama to Tumbez it never rain , as i have before say : so that all the house in their town be not tile , but cover with bourd to keep off the heat of the sun , for they fear no rain at all . Guaiaquil be the first place where it rain , and here they gather Salsaperilla ; here be also great store of timber , and at this place they build many ship . hence they sail along the coast to a small and poor town call Puerto Viejo , which in time pass have be rich with emrald : but now since these stone in regard of their plenty be grow nothing worth , this town likewise be wax very poor . below this village stand another call la buena Ventura : but whosoever go thither must needs meet with evil fortune , the place it self be so waterish and unwholesome . here abide not above 20 man , who serve only to transport good unto a city stand fifty league within the main , in a province call la governacion de Popaian . from buena ventura and Popaian till you come to Panama there be no other town , by reason of the high mountain , the manifold river , and the unholesomenesse of the country . in this place do inhabit the negro that run from their master , and upon these mountain be Oxnam the english captain and his man take , as be before mention . beyond these mountain stand the city of Panama , be a rich place , by reason that all the treasure which come from Peru 286 be bring thither , and it consist of about four hundred house . the coast run along between this city and Nueva Espanna be call Costa rica . Costa rica . next unto Costa rica , which be a mountainous and the province desolate place , lie the coast of Nicaragua , be inhabit by the Spaniard , and have many good port belong to it , and be frequent with trade of merchandise ; but have no knowledge of the situation thereof , nor of the town therein contain , i surcease to speak any more of it . a certain viceroy of Nueva Espanna call don Luis de Velasco cause certain ship to be build for the discovery of the Malucos and of the coast of China : which ship in sail thitherward find certain the discovery island 80 league distant from the main land , which pmip - the Spaniards , accord to the name of their king , call * mass ' the philippinas : and have conquer one of these island call manilla , inhabit with a barbarous kind the isle of of people , they build a fort and a town thereupon , manilla . from whence they have trade with the people of China . unto these island they have four great ship that usual trade , two of they continual go , and two come : so that such spice and silk as the Portugal bring home out of the east Indies , the very same do the Spaniard bring from these island and from China , for Mexico the chief city of Nueva Espanna . the principali port - town of the coast of Nueva Espanna be Guatulco , and Acapulco . all the viceroy and governor that the king of Spain send for Peru and Nueva Espanna have a custom , for the obtain of his favour , to seek and discover new country . but the great and most notable discovery that have be from those part now of late , be that of the isle of Salomon , which be the discovery find in manner follow . the licenciate Castro be governor of Peru send forth a fleet of ship to ’ discover certain island in the south sea upon the coast of Peru , appoint as general of the same fleet 287 a kinsman of his call Alvares de Mendanio , and Pedro Sarmiento as lieutenant , and in the vice - admiral go Pedro the Ortega . this fleet depart forth of the haven of Lima , and sail 800 league westward [ three , 802 . ] off the coast of Peru , find certain island in eleven degree to the south of the equinoctial inhabit with a kind of people of a yellowish complexion , and all naked , who weapon be bow and arrow , and dart . the beast that they see here be hog and little dog , and they find some hen . here also they ckmes ^ ing / ir , find a muster of clove , ginger , and cinnamon , although andsinamon . the cinnamon be not of the best ; and here appear unto they likewise some show of gold . the first island that the Spaniard discover , they name Santa Izabella ; and here they build a small pinnace , with the which and with their ship boat they find out between nine and fifteen degree of southerly latitude eleven great island be one with another of 80 league in compass . the great island that they discover the isle of be according unto the first finder call Guadalcanal , Guadalcanal . on t ^ e coast whereof they sail 150 league , before they can know whither it be a island or part of the main land : and yet they know not perfect what to make of it , but think that it may be part of that continent which stretch to the strait of Magellan ; for they coast it to eighteen degree and can not find the end thereof . the gold that they find be upon this island or main land of Guadalcanal , whereas they land and take a town , find small grain of gold hang up in the house thereof . but because the Spaniard understand not the language of the country , and also for that the Indian be very stout man , and fight continual against they , they can never learn from whence that gold come , nor yet what store be in the land . Theise Indian use to go to sea in great canoas that will carry 100 man a piece , wherein they have many conflict one against another : howbeit unto the Christians 288 they can do no great hurt ; for that with a small pinnace and two falcon a few may overcome 100 of they . at this place fourteen man mistrust nothing , row to land , to take in fresh water , who on the sudden certain Indian in four canoas set upon , take the ship boat , and slay all the man therein : wherefore a man can go on shore too strong , nor yet be too wary in a strange land . hereupon the Spaniard go on shore in their pinnace , and burn the town , a town burn . and in this town they find the small grain of gold before mention . they be discover of these island from one to another about fourteen month , at the end of which time ( because that upon the coast where they be , the wind continue still in one place , may be a occasion of long tarry ) they consult which way to return . southward they dare not go for fear of great tempest which be that way usual : wherefore sail to the north of the line , they fall with the coast of Nueva Espanna ; on which coast they meet with such terrible storm , that they be force to cut their main mast over - bourd , and to lie nine month beat it up and down in the sea , before they can get into any harbour of the Christians . in which time by reason of evil government , and for lack of victual and fresh water , most of the man in their admiral die ; for five whole day together they have neither water nor meat : but in the other ship they behave themselves so well , that the great part of they come safe unto the land . he that pass the strait of Magellan , or sail from the coast of Chili direct for the Malucos must needs run in sight of some of these island before speak of . at which island lie so furnish 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 hen , excellent almond , potatos , sugar - cane , with diverse other sort fit for the sustenance of man in great abundance . also among these island you shall have some quantity of gold , which the Indian will give you in truck for xi 289 t abundance of good victual upon the isle of Salomon . convenient in the way to the Malucos you may your self with plenty of victual , as hog , A . D . 1572 - 87 . a new rich trade for gold , clove , ganger , and cinnamon . why these isle be call the isle of Salomon . [ in . 803 . ] other commodity . for the Spaniard in their discovery of these island not seek nor be desirous of gold , bring home notwithstanding 40000 pezo with they , beside great store of clove and ginger , and some cinnamon also which be not so good as in other place . the discoverer of these island name they the isle of Salomon , to the end that the Spaniard suppose they to be those isle from whence Salomon fetch gold to adorn the temple at Jerusalem , may be the more desirous to go and inhabit the same . now the same time when they think to have send colony unto these island , captain Drake enter the south sea : whereupon commandment be give , that they shall not be inhabit , to the end that such Englishman , and of other nation as pass the strait of Magellan to go to the Malucos may have no succour there , but such as they get of the Indian people .