and swim ashore to the town of saint Iago , to give they warning of our arrival . they of the town be not above 9 household , present flee away and abandon the town . Oure general the town of man his boat , and the spanish ship boat , and go saint Iago take . to t ^ e town , and be come to it , we rifle it , and come to a small chapel which we enter , and find therein a silver chalice , two cruet , and one altar - cloth , the spoil whereof our general give to m . Fletcher his minister . we find also in this town a warehouse store with WineofChiR . wine of Chili , and many board of cedarwood , all which wine we bring away with we , and certain of the board to burn for firewood : and so be come aboard , we depart the haven , have first set all the John Grieg > a Spaniard on land , save one John Griego a greek pilot take , bear , who our general carry with he for his pilot to bring he into the haven of Lima . when we be at sea , our general rifle the ship , and find in her good store of the wine of Chili , and 25000 . gold of Bal - pezoe of very pure and fine gold of Baldivia , amount divia . in vaiue to 37000 . ducat of spanish money , and above . So go on our course , we arrive next at a place call coquimbo in coquimbo , where our general send 14 . of his man on 29 . degree ianJ to fetch water : but they be espy by the Spaniard , 30 . mtnu es . who come with 300 . horseman and 200 footman , and slay one of our man with a piece , the rest come aboard in safety , and the Spaniard depart : we go on shore again , and bury our man , and the Spaniard come down again with a flag of truce , but we set sail and will not trust they . Tarapaza . from hence we go to a certain port call Tarapaza , where be land , we find by the sea side a Spaniard lie asleep , who have lie by he 13 . bar of silver , 114 which weigh 4000 ducat Spanish ; we take the silver , and leave the man . not far from hence go on land for fresh water , we meet with a Spaniard and a Indian boy drive 8 . Llamas or sheep of Peru which be as big as ass ; every of which sheep have on his back 2 . bag of leather , each bag contain 50 . livre . weight of fine silver : so that bring both the sheep and their burden to the ship , we find in all the bag 800 . weight of silver . here hence we sail to a place call Arica , and - Arica in 18 . be enter the port , we find there three small bark 3 ° > min - which we rifle , and find in one of they 57 wedge of silver , each of they weigh about 20 pound weight , and every of these wedge be of the fashion and bigness of a brickbat . in all these 3 . bark we find not one person : for they mistrust no stranger , be all go aland to the town , which consist of about twenty house , which we will have ransack if our company have be better and more in number . but our general content with the spoil of the ship , leave the town and put off again to sea and set sail for Lima , and by the way meet with a small bark , which he board , and find in her good store of linen cloth , whereof take some quantity . he let she go . to Lima we come the 13 . day of February , and be Lima in 11 . enter the haven , we find there about twelve sail of 5 ° - ship lie fast moor at a anchor , have all their sail ‘ carry on shore ; for the master and merchant be here most secure , have never be assault by enemy , and at this time fear the approach of none such as we be . Oure general rifle these ship , and find in one of they a chest full of royal of plate , and good store of silk and linen cloth , and take the chest into his own ship , and good store of the silk and linen . in which ship he have news of another ship call the cacafuego which be go towards Paita , and that the same ship be lade with treasure : whereupon we stay no long here , but cut all the cable of the ship in the 115 the rich ship call the cacafuego take . Cape de San Francisco in i , degree to the north . the english voyage haven , we let they drive whither they will , either to sea or to the shore , and with all speed we follow the cacafuego towards Paita , think there to have find she : but before we arrive there , she be go from thence towards Panama , who our general still pursue , and by the way meet with a bark lade with rope and tackle for ship , which he board and search , and find in she 8o . li . weight of gold , and a crucifix of gold with goodly great emerald set in it which he take , and some of the cordage also for his own ship . from hence we depart , still follow the cacafuego , and our general promise our company , that whosoever can first descry she , shall have his chain of gold for his good news . it fortune that John Drake go up into the top , descry she about three of the clock , and about six of the clock we come to she and board she , and shoot at her three piece of ordinance , and strike down her mizzen , and be enter , we find in her great riches , as jewel and precious stone , thirteen chest full of royal of plate , four score pound weight of gold , and six and twenty ton of silver . the place where we take this prize , be call cape de San Francisco , about 150 . league from Panama . the pilot name of this ship be Francisco , and among other plate that our general find in this ship , he find two very fair guilt bowl of silver , which be the pilot : to who our general say : senior pilot , you have here two silver cup , but i must needs have one of they : which the pilot because he can not otherwise choose , yield unto , and give the other to the steward of our general ship . when this pilot depart from we , his boy say thus unto our general : captain , our ship shall be call no more the cacafuego , but the Cacaplata , and your ship shall be call the cacafuego : which pretty speech of the pilot boy minister matter of laughter to we , both then and long after . 116 when our general have do what he will with this cacafuego , he cast she off , and we go on our course still towards the west , and not long after meet with a ship lade with linen cloth and fine chinadish of white earth , and great store of china - silk , of china - silk , all which thing we take as we list . andporceuan . the owner himself of this ship be in she , who be a spanish gentleman , from who our general take a falcon of gold , with a great Emeraud in the breast thereof , and the pilot of the ship he take also with he , and so cast the ship off . this pilot bring we to the haven of Guatulco , the Guatulco . town whereof , as he tell we , have but 17 . Spaniards in it . assoon as we be enter this haven , we land , and go present to the town , and to the town - house , where we find a judge sit in judgement , be associate with three other officer , upon three negro that have conspire the burn of the town : both which judge and prisoner we take , and bring they a shipboard , and cause the chief judge to write his letter to the town , to command all the townsman to avoid , that we may safe water there . which be do , and they depart , we ransack the town , and in one house we find a pot of the quantity of a bushel , full of real of plate , which we bring to our ship . and here one Thomas Moone one of our company , take a spanish gentleman as he be fly out of the town , and search he , he find a chain of gold about he , and other jewel , which he take , and so let he go . at this place our general among other Spaniards , set the Portugal ashore his Portugal pilot , which he take at the Pitot set on island of cape Verde , out of a ship of saint mary port lan ’ of Portugal : and have set they ashore , we depart hence , and sail to the island of can , where our the island of general land , and bring to shore his own ship , camk - and discharge she , mend , and grave she , and furnish our ship with water and wood sufficient . 117 a ship with a govemour fir the island of phirppinas . [ he . 737 - ] June . sir Francis Drake sail on the hackside of America to 43 - degree of northerly latitude . the english voyage and while we be here , we espy a ship , and set sail after she , and take she , and find in her two pilot , and a spanish governor , go for the island of the philippinas : we search the ship , and take some of her merchandize , and so let she go . Oure general at this place and time , think himself both in respect of his private injury receive from the Spaniard , as also of their contempt and indignity offer to our country and prince in generail , sufficient satisfy , and revenge : and suppose that her majesty at his return will rest content with this service , purpose to continue no long upon the spanish coast , but begin to consider and to consult of the best way for his country . he think it not good to return by the strait , for two speciali cause : the one , lest the Spaniard shall there wait , and attend for he in great number and strength , who hand , he be leave but one ship , can not possible escape . the other cause be the dangerous situation of the mouth of the strait in the south sea , where continual storm reign and bluster , as he find by experience , beside the shoald and sand upon the coast , he think it not a good course to adventure that way : he resolve therefore to avoid these hazard , to go forward to the island of the Malucos , and therehence to sail the course of the Portugal by the cape of buena esperanza . upon this resolution , he begin to think of his best way to the Malucos , and find himself where he now be becalm , he see that of necessity he must be force to take a spanish course , namely to sail somewhat northerly to get a wind . we therefore set sail , and sail 600 . league at the least for a good wind , and thus much we sail from the x6 . of April , till the 3 . of June . the 5 . day of June , be in 43 . degree towards the pole arctike , we find the air so cold , that our man be grievous pinch with the same , complain 118 of the extremity thereof , and the further we go , the I579 * moor the cold increase upon we . whereupon we think it best for that time to seek the land , and do so , find it not mountainous , but low plain land , till we come within 38 . degree towards the line . degree . in which height it please God to send we into a fair and good bay , with a good wind to enter the same . in this bay we anchor , and the people of the description country have their house close by the water side , of the people show themselves unto we , and send a present to our andpountrty general . when they come unto we , they great wonder at the thing that we bring , but our general ( accord to his natural and accustom humanity ) courteous entreat they , and liberal bestow on they necessarything to cover their nakedness , whereupon they suppose we to be god , and will not be persuade to the contrary : the present which they send to our general , be feather , and call of network . their house be dig round about with earth , and have from the uttermost brim of the circle , cliff of wood set upon they , join close together at the top like a spire steeple , which by reason of that closeness be very warm . their bed be the ground with rush strew on it , and lie about the house , have the fire in the midst . the man go naked , the woman take bulrush , and kemb they after the manner of hemp , and thereof make their loose garment , which be knit about their middle , hang down about their hip , have also about their shoulder a skin of deer , with the hair upon it . Theise woman be very obedient and serviceable to their husband . after they be depart from we , they come and visit we the second time , and bring with they feather and bag of tobacco for present : and when they come to the top of the hill ( at the bottom whereof we have pitch our tent ) they stay they - 119 the english voyage self : where one appoint for speaker weary himself with make a long oration , which do , they leave their bow upon the hill , and come down with their present . in the mean time the woman remain on the hill , torment themselves lamentable , tear their flesh from their cheek , whereby we perceive that they be about a sacrifice . in the mean time our general with his company go to prayer , and to read of the scripture , at