the captain and the two other man be execute , but the boy be yet live . the king of Spain have intelligence of these matter , Warn make send 300 man of war against those negro who have a £ a ™ sttlie assist the Englishman , which negro before be slave [ hl 781 . ] unto the Spaniard , and ( as be aforesaid ) flee from their master into those mountain , and so join themselves to the Englishman , think by that mean to be revenge of the Spaniard cruelty . at the first come of these three hundred soldier they take many of the negro , and do great justice on they accord to the quality of their offence . but after a season the negro grow wise and wary , and prevent the Spaniard so , that none of they can be take . whereof the king be advertise by his captain , as also how the country be full of mountain and river , and very unhealthfiill , insomuch that his soldier die , he write unto his say captain to make a agreement with those negro , to the end the country may be in quiet . and so they come to agreement with the captain of the negro , and all be appease . afterwards the negro inhabit two place which the Spaniard allot unto they , the king pardon be proclaim unto all those which before the day of the proclamation thereof have run from their master , 233 seven french ship take by the galley . sir Francis drake voyage to saint Iago , Sant Domingo , Cartagena , and saint Augustine . Cartagena . the english voyage upon condition that from that day forward , whatsoever other fugitive negro shall resort unto they , they shall return they home either dead or alive , if not , that they shall pay for they . upon these condition , and to make all quiet in the mountain , all thing be conclude and agree upon . so that now the negro dwell in great town , where they have Spaniard for their teacher , and a Spaniard for their judge , and with this they hold themselves very well content , and be obedient unto their ruler . the Spaniard since they conquer those part have see many Frenchman on that coast , but never any Englishman in that place , save those two only which i have before mention . and although the Frenchman have come strong , yet dare they never put foot on shore as the english do . but the king of Spain hear that Englishman as well as Frenchmen begin to haunt that coast , cause two galley to be make and well appoint , to keep the coast . the first year that they be make they take six or seven french ship . so soon as this be know there use few english or french man of war to come on the coast , until this year 1586 . when as the aforesaid Francis Drake come with a strong fleet of about four and twenty ship , and do such harm as be well know unto all Christendom . but ( God spare the king of Spain life ) he will sufficient provide to keep his subject from the invasion of other nation . now to go forward with our begin discourse , the next town upon this coast beyond number de Dios be Cartagena : it stand in a more healthful place , and be a great town than the other , border upon a better country , which abound with plenty of victual , and have a very good port for the harbour of ship : and it be call Cartagena , because it resemble very much the city of Cartagena in Spain . it contain above four hundred household . it be very rich by reason of the ship stay there , when they go or come from 234 Spain . and if the ship chance to winter before they go home into Spain , than they lie at Cartagena . also it be great enrich by the merchandise , which be there discharge to be carry to the new kingdom of Granada , from which kingdom much gold be bring unto Cartagena . this new kingdom of Granada be two hundred reyn0 league within the land : neither can they travel from Granada . Cartagena to this kingdom by land , because of the mountain and stand water , which lie in the way , so that they be fain to carry their good up a river call the great river of Magdalen . they can go with grande there bark but two hundred league up this river ; for magaa - although it be large and very deep , yet there run it so swift a current , that the bark be constrain to discharge their good at a place in the river call Branco Branco de de Malambo , into small canoas which row close by the Salambo . shore side . in this river be great abundance of crocodile , so huge and terrible to behold , that such as never see they before be very fearful at the first sight of they , for if a man chance to put his hand or foot into the water , they will straightway catch at they . in some place this river be very unhealthful and full of noisome worm ; but the first place thereupon which the Spaniard do inhabit call mompox be exceed healthful . the mompox . country adjoin upon this river they call the new kingdom of Granada , because the captain call Cesada which first conquer the same , and inhabit there , be bear at Granada in Spain : for it be the use of the spanish captain , when they have conquer any province of the Indies , to call it after the name of the place where they themselves be bear . this new kingdom of Granada be very fruitful , and bring forth much corn and other victual , and have many gold - mine , and great quantity of emerald , whereof they send so many into Spain , that now they be become little worth : but before these country be find , they be in great estimation . here be also dwell many of the Indian people so meek and gende of nature , that they be 235 call fly . this land be very plain and wholesome , and the inhabitant be give to peace . [ Iii . 782 . ] from this kingdom they travel to another country Popayan . call la governacion de Popayan ; it be rich of gold , and withal very fruitful , but full of mountain than the new kingdom of Granada , and have few Indian dwell in it , but those that be there be full of courage and very valiant , which cause the Spaniard to make great war before they can overcome they . in this province there be 13 town of Spaniards , and in the new kingdom of Granada there be nine town of Spaniards . from this country of Popayan they travel along till they come to the first inhabitant of Peru dwell in Quito . a town which join upon the south sea call Quito . this town i will leave any further to speak off till i come particular to entreat of Peru . only i have speak of the two foresay province , to the intent you a passage may know , that there be a passage by land from car - ove land from tagena to perUj which be about five hundred league Peru ^ ™ t0 through : so that beside the two hundred league which they go up the river , the other three hundred league be a country well inhabit and without danger to travel in , insomuch that oftentimes post be send too and fro . but because it be so long a journey , merchant use not to travel that way , but when they be enforce so to do . if any foreign nation shall become lord of the south sea , the king of Spain may have his treasure convey unto this town of Cartagena from Peru , and so into Spain . for in time pass there be a rebellion in Peru make by the Spaniard against their king , he send his power to suppress they through these province . this i write only for that i know some Englishman have think , that in take the south sea , or Panama or number de dios from the king of Spain , his treasure of Peru can not be convey unto he , and that the king can not succour Peru , if it want help . howbeit i do here most certain assure you , that there be many way to Peru . 236 but now i will return to my former discourse . upon the seacoast of Tierra firma eastward from Cartagena stand a little town call Santa Martha , between which town and Cartagena the mighty river of Magdalen before name fall into the sea with such a strong current , that by reason thereof it be know 20 league from the shore . Santa Martha be a very poor town , because it have often be rob by the Frenchman , and have no trade but with a few Indian that dwell thereabouts . here begin that wonderful long ridge of high mountain cover with snow , which stretch through many country , run along the kingdom of Peru and Chili , and continue to the very strait of Magellan . Theise mountain be see with snow upon their top above thirty league into the sea . at the foot of these wild mountain there be a valley call Tagrona , which be the rich place that be know thereabouts : but because the country adjoin be so mountainous , and the inhabitant so many and of so good a courage , shoot poison arrow which be present death to such as be wound with the same ; therefore it lie as yet unconquered , notwithstanding it have cost many spanish captain their life . pass along the coast of Tierra firma to the east of Santa Martha , where be a other small town of above a hundred house call Rio de Hacha . this town be somewhat rich by reason of the pearl which they get there . also they have a trade with the Indian for some small quantity of gold . from hence they go along the coast to Cabo de la Vela , which because it be of the same property with Rio de Hacha before mention , i omit to speak of it . upon this coast there be a lake or gulf which open into the sea , at the mouth whereof they gather great store of pearl . beyond this place there be another poor town , which have six or seven time be spoil by the Frenchman . from hence there lie a high way to the new kingdom of Granada , but it be above seven hundred league in length , A . D . 1572 - 87 . SantaMartha . a mighty ridge of mountain . the rich • valley of Tagrona . Rio de Hacha . Cabo de la Vela . great store of pearl . 237 A . D . 1572 - 87 . the english voyage this way be travel very seidome , because the Indian will usual set upon the traveller . moor up into the land the country lie plain , and there be some gold , and a few town inhabit with Spaniard , whereof i have have but small notice , and therefore i let they the lie of Margarita . pass . the next place of any account be the hand of Margarita , where there be but few Spaniard inhabitant . this island of Margarita be very small , and lie four league from the main land : it have heretofore be very rich of gold and pearl , and so will have continue till this present day , have it not be spoil by man of war , because it stand so far from the main land , notwithstanding they yet gather good store of excellent horse and mule . pearl . upon this island be breed better horse and mule then in any other part of the Indies , therefore they carry they from hence to Peru , albeit they have great store of horse in Peru , but not so good . and because we have begin to speak of the hand of Margarita , you be to understand , that to the north more than 70 . Hands . of the foresay coast of Tierra firma lie above seventie hand be all very little , except Cuba , Hispaniola , and boriquen , or Sant Juan de Puerto rico , which he [ hl 783 . ] of boriquen , although it be not very great , yet be it inhabit by the Spaniard . the other small hand have be inhabit by the Indian , and have have good store of gold , pearl , and emralde ; but the Spaniard have destroy most of those Indian from off the earth , and in many of those hand there be nothing of any value , wherefore i have small cause to entreat any Hispaniola . further of they . but Hispaniola be a hand of great bigness , and have be very full of people , and abound with mine of gold and with pearl , but now all be the Indian kill themselves , rather than they will serve the tyrannous Spaniards . waste away . it be at the Spaniard first come thither , as full of inhabitant as any place of that bigness in the whole world , yet now there be none left : for they be man of so hard a heart , that they murder themselves rather then they will serve the Spaniard : for be man under so small civil governe - 238 1572 - 87 . mean as they be , never be there any people know of so resolute and desperate mind : for oftentimes a great number of they be together over night , they shall be find all dead before the morning : such extreme hate