2 3 degree , and a half . the english voyage thirty man or there about , and go up to a town of Indian which be two league from the road , which town be call Acatlan : there be in it about 20 or 30 house and a church , which we deface and come aboard again the same night . all the people be flee out of the town at the sight of we . the four of September , we depart from the road of Malacca , and sail along the coast . the 8 we come to the road of Chaccalla , in which bay there be two little house by the water side . this bay be 18 league from the cape de los Corrientes . the 9 in the morning our general scent up captain Havers with forty man of we before day , and Michael Sancius be our guide , we go unto a place about two league up into the country in a most villainous desert path through the wood and wilderness : and in the end we come to a place where we take three householder with their wife and child and some Indian , one carpenter which be a Spaniard , and a Portugal , we bind they all and make they to come to the sea side with we . Oure general make their wife to fetch we plantan , lemon , and orange , pineapple and other fruit whereof they have abundance , and so let their husband depart , except Sembrano the spanish carpenter , and Diego the Portugal ; and the ten day we depart the road . the twelve day we arrive at a little island call the isle of Sant Andrew , on which there be great store of foul and wood : where we dry and salt as many of the fowl as we think good : we also kill there abundance of seal , and iguanos which be a kind of serpent , with four foot , and a long sharp tail , strange to they which have not see they ; but they be very good meat . we rid here until the seventeenth day , at which time we depart . the 24 day we arrive in the road of Massatlan , which stand in 23 degree just under the Tropic 322 of cancer : it be a very great river within , but it be bar at the mouth : and upon the north side of the bar without , be good fresh water : but there be very evil fill of it ; because at a low water it be shall half a mile off the shore . there be great store of fresh fish in that bay : and good fruit up into the country , whereof we have some , though not without danger . the seven and twenty day of September , we depart from the road of Massatlan and run to a island be ! aneia which be a league to the northward the say Massatlan , n ° rth - where we trim our ship and new build our Massatlan . pinnace : and there be a little island a quarter of a league from it , on which be seal : where a spanish prisoner , who name be Domingo , be send to wash shirt with one of our man to keep he , make a escape , and swim to the main , which be a english mile distant : at which place we have see 30 or 40 Spaniard and Indian , which be horseman , and keep watch there , which come from a town call Chiametla , which be 11 league up into the country , as Michael Sancius tell we . we find upon the island where we trim our pinnace , fresh water by the assistance of God in that our great need by dig two or three foot deep in the sand , where no water nor sign of water be before to be perceive . otherwise we have go back 20 or 30 league to water : which may have be occasion that we may have miss our prey we have long wait for . but God raise one Flores a Spaniard , which be also a prisoner with we , to make a motion to dig in the sand . now our general have have experience one before of the like , command to put his motion in practice , and in dig three foot deep we found very good and fresh water . so we water our ship , and may have fill a thousand ton more , if we have will . we stay in this island until the 9 day of October , at which time we depart at night for the cape of saint Lucar , which be on the west side of the point of California . 323 the escape of one Domingo , a Spaniard . fresh water at 2 or 3foote deep in the sand . the cape of S . the 14 of October we fall with the cape of saint Lucar , ucar on the which cape be very like the needle at the isle of wight ; fimia , and within the say cape be a great bay call by the Aguada Spaniards Aguada Segura : into which bay fall a fair Se & ira . fresh river , about which many Indian use to keep : we water in the river and lay off and on from the say cape of saint Lucar until the four of November , and have the wind hang still westerly . the 4 of November the desire and the content , wherein be the number of Englishmen only live , beat up and down upon the headland California inn of California , which stand in 23 degree and f to northward , between seven and 8 of the clock in ’ the morning one of the company of our admiral which be the trumpeter of the ship go up into the top espy a sail bear in from the sea with the cape , whereupon he cry out with no small joy to himself and the whole company , a sail , a sail , with which cheerful word the master of the ship and diverse other of the company go also up into the main top , who perceive the speech to be very true give information unto our general of these happy news , who be no less glad than the cause require : whereupon he give in charge present unto the whole company to put all thing in readiness , which be perform we give they chase some 3 or 4 hour , stand with the fight our best advantage and work for the wind . in the reat " Anna afternoon we get up unto they , give they the broad ^ andus . nm s ^ e our great ordinance and a volee of small shot , and present lay the ship aboard , whereof the king of Spain be owner , which be admiral of the south sea , call the saint Anna , and think to be 700 ton in burden . now as we be ready on their ship side to enter she , be not pass 50 or 60 man at the uttermost in our ship , we perceive that the captain of the say ship have make fight fore and after , and lay their sail close on their poop , their mid ship , with their fore castle , and have not one man to be see , stand 324 close under their fight , with lance , javelin , rapier , and target , and a innumerable sort of great stone , which they throw overboard upon our head and into our ship so fast and be so many of they , that they put we off the ship again , with the loss of 2 of our man which be slay , and with the hurt of 4 or 5 . but for all this we new trim our sail , and fit the second every man his furniture , and give they a fresh encounter encounter - with our great ordinance and also with our small shot , rake they through and through , to the kill and maim of many of their man . their captain still like a valiant man with his company stand very stout unto his close fight , not yield as yet : our general the three encourage his man a fresh with the whole noise of ennunter - trumpet give they the three encounter with our great ordinance and all our small shot to the great discomfort of our enemy rake they through in diverse place , kill and spoil many of their man . they be thus discomfort and spoil , and their ship be in hazard of sink by reason of the great shot which be make , whereof some be under water , within 5 or 6 hour fight set out a flag of truce and the great . parl for mercy , desire our general to save their life and to take their good , and that they will present yield . Oure general of his goodness promise they mercy , and will they to strike their sail , and to hoist out their boat and to come aboard : which news they be full glad to hear of , and present strike their sail , hoist their boat out , and one of their chief merchant come aboard unto our general : and fall down upon his knee , offer to have kiss our general foot , and crave mercy : our general most gracious pardon both he and the rest upon promise of their true deal with he and his company concern such riches as be in the ship : and send for the captain and their pilot , who at their come use the like duty and reverence as the former do . the general of his great mercy and humanity , promise 325 one hundred and two and twenty thousand pezo of gold . a pezo be 8x . the merchandise in the great ship . [ Iii . 817 . ] the Spaniard set on shore to the number of 190 . mutiny against the general . the english voyage their life and good usage . the say captain and pilot present certify the general what good they have within board , to wit , a hundred and 22 thousand pezo of gold : and the rest of the riches that the ship be lade with , be in silk , satin , damask , with musk and diverse other merchandise , and great store of all manner of victual with the choice of many conserves of all sort for to eat , and of sundry sort of very good wine . Theise thing be make know to the general by the aforesaid captain and pilot , they be command to stay aboard the desire , and on the 6 day of November follow we go into a harbour which be call by the Spaniard , Aguada Segura , or Puerto seguro . here the whole company of the Spaniard , both of man and woman to the number of 190 person be set on shore : where they have a fair river of fresh water , with great store of fresh fish , foul , and wood , and also many hare and cony upon the main land . our generail also give they great store of victual , of garuansos , peason , and some wine . also they have all the sail of their ship to make they tent on shore , with licence to take such store of plank as shall be sufficient to make they a bark . than we fall to hoist in of our good , share of the treasure , and allot to every man his portion . in division whereof the eight of this month , many of the company fall into a mutiny against our general , especial those which be in the content , which nevertheless be after a sort pacify for the time . on the 17 day of November , which be the day of the happy coronation of her majesty , our general command all his ordinance to be shoot off , with the small shot both in his own ship where himself go , and also in the content , which be our viceadmiral . This be do , the same night we have many firework and more ordinance discharge , to the great admiration of all the Spaniard which be there : for the most part of they have never see the like before . 326 this end , our general discharge the captain , give he a royal reward , with provision for his defence against the Indian and his company , both of sword , target , piece , shoot and powder to his great contentment : but before his departure , he take out of this great ship two young lad bear in japon , which can both wright and read their own language , the old be about 20 year old be name Christopher , the other be call Cosmus , about 17 year of age , both of very good capacity . he take also with he out of their ship , 3 boy bear in the isle of manilla , the one about 15 , the other about 13 , and the young about 9