: and from that cape unto the mouth of the strait the course lie northwest and by west , and northwest . between which place and the mouth of the strait to the southward we lay in harbour until the three and twenty of February , by reason of contrary wind and most vile and filthy foul weather , with such rain and vehement stormy wind which come down from the mountain and high hill , that they hazard the best cable and anchor that we have for to hold , which if they have fail , we have be in great danger to have be cast away , or at the least famish . for during this time , which be a full month , we feed almost altogether upon muscle and limpit , and bird , or such as we can get on shore , seek every day for they , as the fowl of the air do , where they can find food , in continual rainy weather . there be at every mile or two mile end a harbour on both side of the land . and there be between the river of saint Jerome and the mouth of the strait go into the south sea about 34 . league by estimation . so that the length of the whole strait be about 90 . league . and the say mouth of the strait stand in the same height that the entrance stand in when we pass out of the north sea , which be about 52 . degree and f to the southward of the line . the 24 . day of February we enter into the south sea : and on the south side of the go out of the strait be a fair high cape with a low point adjoin unto it : and on the north side be 4 . or 5 . Hands , which lie 6 . league off the main , and much break and sink ground about they : by noon the same day we have bring these hand east of we 5 . league off ; the wind be southerly . the first of march a storm take we at north , which night the ship lose the company of the huge gallant , be in 49 . i and 45 . league from the land . this storm continue 3 . or 4 . day , and for that time we in the huge gallant be separate from the other 2 . 301 A . D . 1587 . February 1587 . the strait of Magellan be about 90 league long . the western mouth of the strait be in 52 degree and 2 terce . theirentrance into the south sea the 24 of February . Hands in the southseacalled LasAnegadas . march 1 . extreme dan - gerofthehugh gallant by a great leak . ship , look every hour to sink , our bark be so leak , and our self so dilver and weaken with free it of water , that we sleep not in three day and three night . the 15 . of march in the morning the huge gallant come in between the hand of S . marry and the main , where she meet with the admiral and the content , which the lie of have rid at the hand call la Mocha 2 . day , which Mocha in and stand jn the southerly latitude of 38 degree : at subject to the which place some of our man go on shore with the Spaniard . viceadmiral boat , where the Indian fight with they with their bow and arrow , and be marvelous wary of their caliver . Theise Indian be enemy to the Spaniard , and belong to a great place call Arauco , and take we for Spaniards , as afterward we learn . Arauco be the this place which be call Arauco be wonderful rich , rich place m a ( j fuq of gold mine , and yet can it not be subdue for glide , and at any time by the Spaniard , but they always return be not subdue with the great loss of man . for these Indian be the marvelous desperate and careless of their life to live Spaniards as at their own liberty and freedom . ^ et ' the 15 . day aforesay in the afternoon we weigh saint marie anchor , and run under the west side of saint marry 3 i , hand , where we rid very well in 6 . fathom water , and terce , which be very fair ground all that night . subdue to the the 16 . day our general go on shore himself with Spaniards . 70 . or 80 . man every one with his furniture : there come down to we certain Indian with two which be the principal of the hand to welcome we on shore , think we have be Spaniards , for it be subdue by they : who bring we up to a place where the Spaniard have erect a church a church with cross and altar in it . and there be ™ and altar ? a ^ out church 2 . or 3 . store house , which be full ’ of wheat and barley ready thresh and make up in cade of straw to the quantity of a bushel of corn in every cade . the wheat and barley be as fair , as clean , and every way as good as any we have in England . there be also the like cade full of potato root , which be 302 very good to eat , ready make up in the store house for the Spaniard against they shall come for their tribute . this hand also yield many sort of fruit , hog , and hen . Theise Indian be hold in such slavery by they , that they dare not eat a hen or a hog themselves . [ he . 808 . ] but the Spaniard have make they all in that hand Christians . thus we fit our self here with corn ma ^ e asmuch as we will have , and as many hog as we have Christians . salt to powder they withal , and great store of hen , with a number of bag of potato root , and about 500 dry dogge - fish , and guinie wheat , which be call Maiz . and have take as much as we will have , yet we leave marvelous great store behind we . our general have the two principal of the hand aboard our ship , and provide great cheer for they , and make they merry with wine : and they in the end perceive we to be no Spaniards , make sign , as near as our general can perceive , that if we will go over unto the main land unto Arauco , that there be much gold , make we Arauco richin sign , that we shall have great store of riches . but e - because we can not understand they , our general make some haste , and within 2 . or three day we furnish our self . the 18 . day in the morning we depart from this place , and run all that day Northnortheast about io . league , and at night lie with a short sail off and on the coast . the 19 we run in east Northeast with the land , and bear in with a place call the conception , where the concep - wee anchor under a hand , and depart the next tion ‘ morning without go on land . the 20 . we depart from the conception , and go into a little bay which be sandy , where we see fresh water and cattle , but we stay not there . the 30 . day we come into the bay of Quintero , Quintero which stand in 33 . degree and 50 minute . stand m the say day present after we be come unto a 50 anchor in the bay , there be a neteherd or one that keep cattle which lie upon the point of the hill asleep , 303 which when he awake and have espy three ship which be come into the bay , before we can get on shore , he have catch a horse which be feed by , and ride his way as fast as ever he may : and our general with 30 . shot with he go on shore . he have not be on land one hour , but there come 3 . horseman with bright sword towards we so hard as they may ride , until they come within some twenty or thirty score of we , and so stay , and will come no near unto we : so our general scent unto they a couple of our man with their shot , and one Fernando , which be the Spaniard that we have take up at the mouth of the strait , which be one of the 400 . that be starve there . but the Spaniard will not suffer our man to come near with their shot , but make sign that one of our man shall come alone unto they : so the say Fernando the Spaniard go unto they , and our two man stand not far from they . they have great conference , and in the end Fernando come back from they , and tell our general that he have parl with they for some victual , who have promise as much as we will have . our general send he back again with another message and another shot with he : and be come near unto they , they will not suffer any more than one to approach they , whereupon our man let the Spaniard go unto they alone himself : who be some good distance from they , they stay but a theperjurleof small time together , but that the say Fernando leap a Spaniard . up behind one of they and rid away with they , for all his deep and damnable oath which he have make continual to our general and all his company never to forsake he , but to die on his side before he will be false . Oure general see how he be deal withal , fill water all that day with good watch , and carry it aboard : and night be come , he determine the next day to send into the country to find their town , and to have take the spoil of it , and to have fire it if they can have find it . 304 the last of march captain Havers go up into the country with 50 . or 60 . man with their shot and furniture with they , and we travail 7 . or 8 . mile into the land : and as we be march along , we espy a number of herd of cattle , of cow and bullock which be wonderful wild : we see also great store of horse , mere and colt which be very wild and unhandled : there be also great store of hare and cony , and plenty of partridge and other wild fowl . the country be very fruitful with fair fresh river all along full of wild foul of all sort . have travail so far that we can go no further for the monstrous high mountain , we rest our self at a very fair fresh river run in and alongst fair low meadow at the foot of the mountain , where every man drink of the river , and refresh themselves . have so do , we return to our ship the like way that we think their town shall be : so we travail all the day long , not see any man , but we meet with many wild dog : yet there be two hundred horseman abroad that same day by mean of the Spaniard which they have take the day before from we , who have tell they that our force , be but small , and that we be wonderful weak ; who though they do espy we that day , yet dare they not give the onset upon we . for we march along in array , and observe good order , whereby we seem a great number more than we be , until we come unto our ship that night again . the next day be the first of April 1587 , our man go on shore to fill water at a pit which be a quarter of a mile from the water side : and be early hard at their business be in no readiness . in which mean while there come pour down from the hill almost 200 horseman , and before our people can return to the rock from the water place , twelve of they be cut off , part kill , and part take prisoner , the rest be rescue by our soldier xi 305 u A . D . I587 . our man march 7 or 8 mile into their enemy land . [ Iii . 809 . ] which come from the rock to meet with they , who be but fifteen of we that have any weapon on shore , yet we make the enemy retire in the end with loss of Spaniards some four and twenty of their man , after we have > latne ’ skirmish with they a