the admirable and prosperous voyage of the worshipful master Thomas candish of trimley in the county of Suffolk esquire , into the south sea , and from thence round about the circumference of the whole earth , begin in the year of our lord 1586 , and finish 1588 . write by master Francis pretty late of ey in Suffolk , a gentleman employ in the same action . i depart out of Plymouth on Thursday the 21 . of July 1586 . with 3 . sail , to wit , the desire a ship of 120 . ton , the content of 60 tun , and the huge gallant a bark of 40 . ton : in which small fleet be 123 . person of all sort with all kind of furniture and victual sufficient for the space of two year , at the charge of the worshipful master Thomas candish of Trimley in the county of Suffolk esquire , be our general . 290 on Tuesday the 26 . of the same month , we be 45 . league from cape finis terrae where we meet with 5 . sail of biskayne come from the Grande 3 . greatbis - bay in newfoundland , as we suppose , which our , admiral shoot at , and fight with they 3 . hour , but m of we take none of they by reason the night grow on . the first of August we come in sight of Forteven - August . tura , one of the isle of the canary , about ten of the clock in the morning . on Sunday be the 7 . of August , we be get as high as Rio del oro on the coast of Barbary . Bio deal oro . on Monday the 19 we fall with cape Blanco : but cape Blanco . the wind blow so much at the north , that we can not get up where the canter do use to ride and fish : therefore we lie off 6 . hour west Southwest , because of the sand which lie off the cape Southwest and by dangerous south . sand the 15 . day of the same month we be in the height of cape Verde by estimation 50 . league off " the same . the 18 . Sierra leona do bear east off we , be 45 . league from we : and the same day the wind shift to the northwest , so that by the 20 . day of the say month we be in 6 . degree to the northward , from the equinoctial line . the 23 . we put room for Sierra leona , and the 25 . day we fall with the point on the south side of Sierra Sierra leona . leona , which master Brewer know very well , and go in before with the content which be viceadmiral : and we have no less than 5 . fathom water when we have least , and have for 14 . league in Southwest all the way run into the harbour of Sierra leona 16 . 14 . 12 . 10 and 8 . fathom of water . the 26 . of the say month we put into the harbour , and in go in we have by the southermost point when we have least 5 . fathom water fair by the rock as it lie at the say point , and after we come , 2 or 3 . cable length within the say rock , we never have less than 10 . fathom , until we come up to the 291 road , which be about a league from the point , borrow always on the south side until you come up to the water place , in which bay be the best road ; but you must ride far into the bay , because there run marvellous great tide in the offin , and it flow into the road next of any thing at a southeast and by east moon . it be out of England to this place 930 . league : which we run from the 21 . of July to the 26 . of this month of August . on Saturday be the 27 . day there come 2 . Negros aboard our admiral from the shore , and make sign unto our general that there be a Portugal ship up within the harbour ; so the huge gallant be the rear - admiral go up 3 . or 4 . league , but for want of a pilot they seek no far : for the harbour run 3 . or 4 . league up more , and be of a marvellous breadth and very dangerous , as we learn afterward by a Portugal . on Sunday the 28 . the general send some of his company on shore , and there as they play and dance all the forenoon among the negro , to the end to have hear some good news of the Portugal ship , a Portugal towards their come aboard they espy a Portugal take . which lie hide among the bush , who we take and bring away with we then same night : and he tell we it be very dangerous go up with our boat for to seek the ship that be at the town . whereupon we go not to seek she , because we know he tell we the truth : for we bind he and make he fast , and so examine he . also he tell we that his ship be there cast away , and that there be two more of his company among the negro : the Portugal name be Emmanuel , and be by his occupation a calker , belong to the port of Portugal . on Monday morning be the 29 . day , our general [ three . 804 . ] land with 70 . man or thereabouts , and go up to their town , where we burn 2 . or 3 . house , and take what 292 spoil we will , which be but iide , but all the people flee : and in our retire aboard in a very little plain at their town end they shoot their arrow at we out of the wood , and hurt 3 . or 4 . of our man ; their arrow be poison poison , but yet none of our man miscarry at that time , arrowes - thanked be God . their town be marvelous artificial descrip - builded with mud wall , and build round , with their yard pale in and keep very clean as well in their ’ street as in their house . Theise negro use good obedience to their king , as one of our man say , which be with they in pawn for the negro which come first . there be in their town by estimation about one hundred house . the first of September there go many of our man on shore at the water place , and do wash shirt very quiet all the day : and the second day they go again , and the negro be in ambush round about the place : and the carpenter of the admiral go into the wood to do some speciali business , espy they by good fortune . but the negro rush out upon our man so sudden , that in retire to our boat , many of they be hurt : among who one William Pickman a soldier be shoot into the thigh , who pluck the arrow out , break it , and leave the head behind ; and he tell the chirurgeon that he pluck out all the arrow , because he will not have they lance his thigh : whereupon the poison wrought so that night , that he be marvelous swell , and all his belly and privy part be as black as ink , and the next morning he die , the piece of the arrow with the poison be pluck out of his thigh . the three day of the say month , diverse of our fleet go up 4 mile within the harbour with our boat , and catch great store of fish , and go on shore and take Limmons from the tree , and come aboard again , see two Bufles . the 6 . day we depart from Sierra leona , and go out of the harbour , and stay one tide 3 . league from the September . many of our man hurt by Negros . William Pickman die of a poison arrow . this poison be the juice of a herb . 2 buffet . their departure from Sierra leona . 293 A . D . 1586 . the english voyage point of the mouth of the harbour in 6 . fathom , and it flow south Southwest . on Wednesday be the 7 . of the same month the isle of Madrabumba inhabit by ' Negros . we depart from one of the isle of cape Verde , alias the isle of Madrabumba , which be 10 . league distant from the point of Sierra leona : and about five of the clock the same night we anchor 2 . mile off the hand in 6 . fathom water , and land the same night , and find plantan only upon the island . the 8 . day one of our boat go out and sound round about the hand , 8c they pass through a sound at the west end of the hand , where they find 5 . fathom round about the hand , until they come unto the very gut of the sound , and then for a cast or two they have but two fathom , and present after , 6 . fathom , and so deep and deep . and at the east end of the hand a town . there be a town , where negro do use at sometime , as we perceive by their provision . there be no fresh water on all the south side , as we can perceive , but on the north side three or four very fresh water . good place of fresh water : and all the whole hand be a wood , save certain little place where their house stand , which be environ round about with plantan - tree , whereof the fruit be excellent meat . this place be subject marvelous much to thunder , rain , and lightning in this month . i think the reason be , because the sun ne be so near the line equinoctial . on Saturday the ten we depart from the say hand about 3 . of the clock in the afternoon , the wind be at the southwest . October . cape Frio in Brasil . the last of October run west Southwest about 24 . league from cape Frio in Brasile , we fall with a great mountain which have a high round knop on the top of it stand from it like a town , with two little hand from it . November . S . Sebastian hand . the first of November we go in between the hand of saint Sebastian and the main land , and have our thing on shore , and set up a forge , and have our 294 cask on shore : our cooper make hoop , and so we remain there until the 23 . day of the same month : in which time we fit our thing , build our pinnace , and fill our fresh water . and while our pinnace be in building , there come a Canoa from the river of Jenero , the river of meaning to go to saint Vincent , wherein be six naked jenero - slave of the country people , which do row the Canoa , and one Portugal . and the Portugal know Christopher hare master of the admiral , for that master hare have be at saint Vincent in the minion of London in the year 1581 . And think to have John whithal the Englishman which dwell at saint Vincent come unto we , which be twenty league from this harbour with some other , thereby to have have some fresh victual , we suffer the Portugal to go with a letter unto he , who promise to return or send some answer within ten day , for that we tell he we be merchant , and will traffic with they : but we never receive answer from he any more ; and see that he come not accord to appointment , our business be dispatch we weigh anchor , and set sail from saint Sebastian on the 23 . of November . the 16 . day of December we fall with the coast of [ he . 805 . ] America in 47 . degree the land bear west from we ® ecemter - about 6 . league off : from which place we run along the shore , until we come into 48 . degree . it be a steep 48 degree . beach all along . the 17 . day of December in the afternoon we enter into a harbour , where our admiral go in first : wherefore our general name the say harbour port port desire . desire : in which harbour be a hand or two , where there be wonderful great store of seal , and another hand of bird which be grey gull . Theise seal be of a seal strange wonderful great bigness , huge ,