and monstrous of ™ d0 ? 6 antl shape , and for the forepart of their body can be come - * ' pare to any thing better than to a lion : their head , and neck , and forepart of their body be full of rough hair : their foot be in manner of a fin , and in form like 295 unto a man hand : they breed and cast every month , give their young milk , yet continual get they their rmg seal live in the sea , and live altogether upon fish : their young be very good be marvelous good meat , and be boil or roast , ‘ be hardly to be know from lamb or mutton . the old one be of such bigness and force , that it be as much as 4 . man be able to do to kill one of they with great cowl - stave : and he must be beat down with strike on the head of he : for his body be of that bigness that four man can never kill he , but only on the head . for be shot through the body withan harquebus or a musket , yet he will go his way into the sea , and never fowl breed - care for it at the present . also the fowl that be in there , be very good meat , and great store of they : canted * baptize they have burrow in the ground like cony , for they we call these can fly . they have nothing but down upon their fowl pen - pinion : they also fish and feed in the sea for their live , and breed on shore . this harbour be a very good place to trim ship in , and to bring they on ground , and grave they in : for they grave there eb and flow much water : therefore we and trim gravecl and trim all our ship there . t etr s tp . the of p ) ecem ^ er be Christmas even , a man and a boy of the rear - admiral go some forty score from our ship into a very fair green valley at the foot of the mountain , where be a little pit or well which our man have dig and make some 2 . or 3 . day before to get fresh water : for there be none in all the harbour ; and this be but brackish : therefore this man and boy come thither to wash their linen : and be in wash at the say well , there be great store of Indian which be come down , and find the say man and boy in wash . Theise Indian be divide on each side i man and a of the rock , shoot at they with their arrow and hurt ne ence ^ they both , but they flee present , be about fifty or negigence . threescore , though our general follow they but with 16 . or 20 . man . the man name which be hurt be John Garge , the boy name be lutch : the man be shoot 296 clean through the knee , the boy into the shoulder : either of they have very sore wound . their arrow be make of little cane , and their head be of a flint stone , set into the cane very artificial : they seidome or never see any Christians : they be as wild as ever be a buck or any other wild beast : for we follow they , and they run from we as it have be the wild thing in the world . we take the measure of one of their foot , kind ° f and it be 18 . inch long . their use be when any of synthem dye , to bring he or they to the cliff by the seaside , and upon the top of they they bury they , and in their grave be bury with they their bow and arrow , and all their jewel which they have in their life time , which be fine shell which they find by the sea side , which they cut and square after a artificiali manner : and all be lay under their head . the grave be make all with great stone of great length and bigness , be set all along full of the dead man dart which he use when he be live . and they colour both their dart and their grave with a red colour which they use in colour of themselves . the 28 of December we depart out of the port of their depardesire , and go to a hand which lie 3 . league to the southward of it ; where we trim our save ’ penguin with salt for victual all that and the next day , and depart along the coast Southwest and by south . the 30 . day we fall with a rock which lie about 5 . league from the land , much like unto Ediestone , which lie off the sound of Plymouth , and we sound , and have 8 . fathom rocky ground , within a mile thereof : the rock bear west Southwest . we go coast along south Southwest , and find great store of seal all along the coast . this rock stand in 48 . degree to the southward of the line . the 2 . day of Januarie we fall with a very fair white January cape , which stand in 51 . degree , and have 7 . fathom r587 - water a league off the land . 297 they enter the strait the 6 . rf Januarie . a Spaniard take in the strait of Magellan . the bark John Thomas one of sir Francis drake consort . king Philips city leave desolate in the strait of Magellan , which our general call port famine . the english voyage the three day of the foresay month we fall with another great white cape , which stand in 52 . degree and 4 5 . minute : from which cape there run a low beach about a league to the southward , and this beach reach to the open of the dangerous straight of Magellan , which be in diverse place 5 . or 6 . league wide , and in two several place more narrow . under this cape we anchor and lose a anchor , for it be a great storm of foul weather , and last three day very dangerous . the 6 . day we put in for the strait . the 7 . day between the mouth of the strait and the narrow place thereof , we take a Spaniard who name be Hernando , who be there with 23 Spaniard more , which be all that remain of four hundred , which be leave there three year before in these strait of Magellan , all the rest be dead with famine . and the same day we pass through the narrow of the strait , where the aforesaid Spaniard show we the hull of a small bark , which we judge to be a bark call the John Thomas . it be from the mouth of the strait unto the narrow of the strait 14 . league , and the course lie west and by north . the mouth of the strait stand in 52 . degree . from the narrow of the strait unto Pengwin hand be 10 . league , and lie west Southwest somewhat to the southward , where we anchor the 8 . day , and kill and salt great store of penguin for victual . the nine day we depart from Pengwin island , and run south Southwest to king fillip city which the Spaniard have build : which town or ci tie have four fort , and every fort have in it one cast piece , which piece be bury in the ground , the carriage be stand in their place unbury : we dig for they and have they all . they have contrive their city very well , and seat it in the best place of the strait for wood and water : they have build up their church by themselves : they have law very severe among them - 298 self , for they have erect a gibbet , whereon they have do execution upon some of their company . it seem unto we that their whole live for a great space be altogether upon muscle and lympit : for there be not any thing else to be have , except some deer which come out of the mountain down to the fresh river to drink . Theise Spaniards which be there , be only come to fortify the strait , to the end that no other nation shall have passage through into the south sea save only their own : but as it appear , it be not god will so to have it . for during the God enemy to time that they be there , which be two year at they the paniards - least , they can never - have any thing to grow or in any wise prosper . and on the other side the Indian oftentimes prey upon they , until their victual grow so short , ( their store be spend which they have bring with they out of Spain , and have no mean to renew the same ) that they die like dog in their house , and in their clothes , wherein we find they still at our come , until that in the end the town be wonderful taint with the smell and the savour of the dead people , the rest which remain alive be drive to bury such thing as they have there in their town either for provision or for furniture , and so to forsake the town , and to go along the seaside , and seek their victual to preserve they from starve , take nothing with they , but every man his harquebus and his furniture that be able to carry it ( for some be not able to carry they for weakness ) and so live for the space of a year and more with root , leaf , and sometime a foul which they may kill with their piece . to conclude , they be determine to have travail towards the river of plate , only be leave alive 23 . person , whereof two be woman , which be the remainder of 4 . hundred . in this place we water and wooded well and quiet . Oure general name this town port famine : it stand in 53 . degree by obser - port famine vation to the southward . tn degree . 299 the 14 . day we depart from this place , and run south southwest , and from thence southwest unto cape cape froward froward 5 . league west Southwest , which cape be the wonderful ^ 8 ™ ' southermost part of all the strait , and stand in the latitude of 54 . degree . from which cape we run west and by north 5 . league , and put into a bay or muscle Cove . Cove on the south side , which we call muscle - cove , because there be great store of they : we rid therein 6 . day , the wind be still westerly . the 21 . day of Januarie we depart from muscle - cove , and go northwest and by west 10 . league to a very fair sandy bay on the north side , which our Elizabeth general call Elizabeth bay , and as we rid there ba > that night , one of our man dye which go in the huge gallant , who name be grey , a carpenter by his occupation , and be bury there in that bay . the 22 . we depart from Elizabeth bay in the afternoon , and go about 2 . league from that place , where there be a fresh water river , where our general go up with the ship - boat about three mile , which river have very good and pleasant ground about it , and it be low and champion soil , and so we see none other ground else in all the strait but that be craggy rock and monstrous high hill and mountain . in this river [ three . 807 . ] be great store of savage which we see , and have con -^ ruti ^ h1 ference with they : they be men - eater , and feed savage that altogether upon raw flesh , and other filthy food : which ever be people have prey upon some of the Spaniard before teen . speak of . for they have get knife and piece of rapier to make dart of . they use all the mean they can possible to have allure we up far into the river , of purpose to have betray we , which be espy by our general , he cause we to shoot at they with our harquebus , whereby we kill many of they . the chanel of so we sail from this river to the channel of saint saint Jerome . Jeromej which be 2 league off . from the river of saint Jerome about three or four league , we run ne west unto a cape which be on the 300 north side