certain rare and special note most proper belong to the voyage of m . Thomas can dish next before describe ; concern the height , sounding , lying of land , distance of place , the variation of the compass , the just length of time spend in sail between diverse place , and their abode in they , as also the place of their harbour and ancker , and the depth of the same , with the observation of the wind on several coast : write by m . Thomas Fuller of Ipswich , who be master in the desire of m . Thomas candish in his foresay prosperous voyage about the world . a note of the height of certain place on the coast of Barbary . nprimis cape Cantin stand in the latitude of item the island of mogador stand in item Cape d ’ oro stand in item the island of the canary about item cape bojador stand in item cape Verde stand in item the cape of Sierra Liona in item a island call ilha Verde in 348 32 . degr . 4 . min . 31 . degr . 30 . min . 30 . degr . 20 . min . 28 . degr . 27 . degr . 30 . min . 14 . degr . 30 . min . 8 . degr . 7 . degr . 30 . min . a note of the height of certain place from the coast of Brasill to the south sea . inprimis cape Frio stand in the latitude of item the island of saint Sebastian in item port desire stand in item seal bay stand in item port S . Julian stand in item the white river stand in item cape joy stand in item port famine within the strait of Magellan stand in item cape froward within the strait of Magellan stand in item . Cape desire in the enter into the south sea stand in 23 . degr . 30 . min . 24 . degr . 47 . degr . 50 . min . 48 . degr . 20 . min . 50 . degr . 50 . degr . 30 . min . 52 . degr . 40 . min . 53 . degr . 50 . min . 54 . degr . 15 . min . 53 . degr . 10 . min . a note of the height of certain place on the coast of Chili and Peru in the south sea . inprimis the island of Mocha stand in the latitude of item the island of saint marry in item the bay of * valpare in item the bay of Quintero in item coquimbo in item Morro moreno in item Arica stand in item the bay of Pisca stand in item the bay of Lima stand in item Santos stand in item the bay of cherrepe in item the bay of Paita , in item the island of Puna , in item cape Sant Francisco to the north of the equinoctial , in 349 38 . degr . 30 . min . 37 . degr . 15 . min . 33 . degr . 40 . min . * ra ^ arizo . 33 . degr . 20 . min . 29 . degr . 30 . min . 23 . degr . 20 . min . 18 . degr . 30 . min . 13 . degr . 30 . min . 11 . degr . 50 . min . 9 degr . 20 . min . [ three . 826 . ] 6 . degr . 30 . min . 5 . degr . 4 . min . 2 . degr . 50 . min . i . degr a note of the height of certain place to the northward of the equinoctial line , on the coast of new Spain . * or , Guatuko . * las tres Maria . or Panama . inprimis Panama stand in the latitude of item the island call Isla de canoas , in item cape Blanco , in item Rio Lexo , in item * Aguatulco , in item Acapulco , in item sant Iago , in item Cape de los Corrientes , in item the bay of Xalisco , in item the island of the * mary , in item the island of saint Andrew , in item the island of Ciametlan , in item , that the cape of Santa Clara on the point of California be in 9 degree . 9 degr . 10 . min . 10 . degr . 10 . min . 12 . degr . 40 . min . 15 . degr . 50 . min . 17 . degr . 20 . min . 18 . degr . 50 . min . 20 . degr . 30 . min . 21 . degr . 30 . min . 21 . degr . 20 . min . 22 . degr . 23 . degr . 40 . min . 23 . degree . a note of the height of certain place begin from the island of the ladrone and pass by the philippinas , the Malucos , Java minor , Java major , the cape of Bona Speranza , and the isle of Santa Helena . INprim . one of the island of the ladrone call guana stand in item Cape de Spirito Santo on the isle of Luzon stand in item the island of Capul in item that the island of Seboyon stand in item that the easterly end of the island of * Pannay be in item that the open between the south head of Pannay and the south head of Isla de los negro be in 35 ° 13 . degr . 50 . min . 13 . degr . 12 . degr . 30 . min . 12 . degr . 11 . degr . 10 . degr . 10 . min . item that the southhead of Isla de los negro be in item that the northhead of the island Mindanao be in item the southhead of Mindanao call cape cannel be in item the cape of Batochina be in * item that 12 . small island stand in item the latitude of two other island be in item the westerly head of Java minor be towards the south in item the easterly head of Java major be towards the south in item Malaca stand to the northward in item cape Falso on the promontory of Africa , stand in item the cape of Bona Speranza stand in item the island of Santa Helena stand in item the cape of S . Augustine stand southward in note a . d . 1588 . 9 degr . 10 . min . 7 . degr . 50 . min . 6 . degr . 40 . min . 10 . min . 3 . degr . to the south - ward of the j „ • line . 4 . degr . 10 . min . 8 . degr . 30 . min . 8 . degr . 20 . min . 2 . degr . 34 . degr . 20 . min . 34 . degr . 40 . min . 15 . degr . 40 . min . 8 . degr . 40 . min . sounding on the coast of Barbary from Rio del oro unto cape Blanco . nprimis about 3 . league off Rio del oro you shall have very fair should , fine white sand 18 . fathom , and so alongst unto cape Blanco two or three league off the shore you shall have 18 . and 20 . fathom . and when you come within one league of the cape you shall have twelve or thirteen fathom , brown sand , very fair should . and if you will hall in with cape Blanco , beware you come not within seven or eight fathom of the cape : for there lie a sand off the cape . 351 also about 7 . or eight league off the cape lie a long shall next hand Southwest and by south off the cape . sounding on the coast of guiny . i tern , go unto Sierra Leona , have the cape Eastnortheast off you , 7 . league off , you shall have 22 fathom brown sand . And hail in you shall find very fair shoald . you may be bold to borrow on the southermost shore : but take heed of a rock that lie in the fair way a good birth off the shore , but there be no fear of it : for it lie above the water , and be distant two mile off the south shore . item , you may be bold to borrow hard by the rock ; for on the north side go in there lie one long sand which run southeast and northwest , and lie distant from the south shore 2 league . and you shall anchor in 14 or 15 fathom hard by the shore . also go unto the island call illha Verde , the which island lie 10 league to the southward of Sierra Leona , the course be southsouthwest , and northnortheast : and you shall have between they 9 or 10 fathom . and if you will anchor at the say island , you shall have 5 or 6 fathom hard by the shore . also you must have especial care of a great current that set alongst the coast of guiny to the eastward . item , and if you be bind unto the southward , you must go westsouth west off , for fear of they shall that be call Madera Bomba , the which shall be to the southward of the island . sounding on the coast of Brasil . i tern , unto the northward of cape Frio , the cape bear southwest off you , about 17 or 18 league off , you shall have 45 fathom streamy ground : and run Southwest , you shall find 32 fathom black sand : and then run westsouthwest into a deep bay , which lie ten league to the northward of the 352 cape , you shall have 22 fathom oaze : that depth you shall have all alongst , except you be far into the bay ; and than you shall have 16 fathom all oazy . item , to the northward of cape Frio , about 6 or 7 league , you shall have many small island . item , to the northward of the cape 6 . league , you shall have two small island one mile distant the one from the other , and they be distant from the main five league . and between those island and the cape you shall have very many island hard aboard the main . item , the cape bear west of you two league off , you shall have 55 fathom oaze . also you shall know when you be shoot about the cape unto the southward , by deep of the water . also if you will go for saint Sebastian from the cape , you must go west and south , and westsouthwest among . and the distance from the cape unto saint Sebastian be 50 league . And be shoot into the bay any thing near the shore , you shall have 24 fathom all oazy . And hail in for s . Sebastian , you shall know it by two little island which be round : and those island lie from the hand of S . Sebastian next hand east and by south ; and be distant the one from the other about four league . also off the southermost end of saint Sebastian , there lie one island about 6 league off ; which island be call the Alcatrarza , and there lie four little island about it . also you may know it by the trending of the land unto the southward . item , if you will go in at the northermost end of saint Sebastian , you must take heed of a sand that lie on the north - east part of the island : but you may be bold to borrow on the island : for the sand lie off the main side . also you may anchor on the northermost part of the island in ten fathom ; and the main be distant from you where you shall ride two league off . xi 353 z item , if you will come in at the southermost end of the island of saint Sebastian , your course from the Alcatrarza be southwest and Northeast , and their distance be 6 league the one from the other . item , unto the southward of the river of plate , be in the latitude of 45 degree and 60 league off the main , you shall have shoald in 60 fathom or 65 fathom oazy sand : and then hail in for the shore Westsouthwest 16 league , you shall have 50 fathom oaze , and you shall have fair shoald all along . item , in the latitude of 47J you shall see about one mile in length , not pass one league off the shore , a ledge of break ground , but no danger . also you shall have very fair shoald all along the coast ; and the land lie south and north until you come unto port desire , which stand in 48 degree . item , if you will go into port desire , on the north side there lie one ledge of rock about a league distant from the shore . also on the north side at the mouth of the harbour , there lie a couple of rock , which be at half flood under water : but be bold to borrow on the southermost shore ; for there be no danger ; and you shall have no less than 6 fathom water at a low water , the harbour lie east and west . also you may know the harbour by one little island that lie southeast off the mouth of the harbour , and it be distant 4 league . Furthermore , you may know the harbour by a high rock that stand on the south side ; and this rock be very much like a watch tower . also if you be any thing in , you may anchor in 5 fathom at a low water . item , it flow there south and north , and high at spring tide 3 fathom and a half water ; and in the off the flood set to the northward . item , in the latitude of 48 degree 50 minute you shall have 44 fathom black sand about 5 league off : and about 3 league off you shall have 25 fathom , and great shingle stone . 354 item , in the latitude of 49 degree you shall have sound in 38 fathom oazy sand . item , in the latitude of 51 degree 10 minute you shall have sounding 4 league from the shore in 44 fathom small black stone . sounding within the entrance of the strait . item , about two league from the northermost shore you shall have 38 fathom black sand , and all along you shall have deep water , not less than 18 or 20 fathom in the fair way . sounding on the coast of Chili in the south sea . item , in the latitude of 36 degree you shall have sounding in 12 fathom , 2 mile from the land , brown sand . item , in the latitude of 35 degree , you shall have sounding one league off from the land in 10 fathom white sand . sounding on the coast of new Spain in the south sea .