hour . the name of our man that be slay be these . Killed out of the huge gallant . Thomas Lucas of London , soldier . it Richard Wheeler of London . Robert pitcher of Norffolke , soldier . out of the John Langston of Glocestershire . [ admiral . William Kingman of Dorsetshire , soldier . William hill of Cornwall . 1 William byet of Weymouth . 1 kill out of 2 Laurence Gamesby , of Newcastle . j the vice adm . 1 Henry blackenal of Weymouth . 2 William Stevens of Plymmouth , gunner . 3 William pit of shereborne in Dorsetshire . 4 Humphrey Derrick of London . after the loss of these man , we rid in the road , and water in despite of they with good watch and ward , until the five of the say month . the five day we depart out of this bay of Quintero : a little hand and off from the bay there lie a little hand about a full of pen - league distant , whereon there be great store of penguin and other fowl ; whereof we take to serve our turn , and sail away north and north and by west : for so lie the coast along in this place . Mom ' the fifteen we come thwart of a place which be call de ^ es ’ anda Morro moreno , which stand in 23 degree % , and be a i ^ e . 1 a excellent good harbour : and there be a island which make it a harbour : and a ship may go in at either end of the island : here we go with our general on shore to the number of 30 man : and at our go on shore upon our land , the Indian of the place come down from the rock to meet with we , with fresh water and wood on their back . they be in marvellous awe 306 of the Spaniard , and very simple people , and live marvellous savage : for they bring we to their biding about two mile from the harbour , where we see their woman and lodging , which be nothing but the skin of some beast lay upon the ground : and over they in stead of house , be nothing but five or six stick lay across , which stand upon two fork with stick on the ground and a few bough lay on it . their diet be raw fish , which stink most vile . and when any of they die , they bury their bow and arrow ‘ with they , with their canoa and all that they have : for we open one of their grave , and see the order of they . their canoas or boat be marvellous artificial make of two skin mostarti - like unto bladder , and be blow full at one end with butt . quill : they have two of these bladder blow full , which be sow together and make fast with a sinew of some wild beast ; which when they be in the water swell , so that they be as tight as may be . they go to sea in these boat , and catch very much fish with they , and pay much of it for tribute unto the Spaniard : but tribute pay they use it marvellous beastly . in fish . the 23 in the morning we take a small bark which bark . come out of Arica ride , which we keep and call the George : the man rorsooke it , and go away with their 7 ^ George . boat . our admiral pinnace follow the boat , and the huge gallant boat take the bark : our admiral pinnace can not recover the boat before it get on shore , but go along into the road of Arica , and lay aboard a aricastand great ship of a hundred ton ride in the road in right afore the town , but all the man and good be take . go out of it , only the bare ship be leave alone . they make three or four very fair shot at the pinnace as she be come in , but miss she very narrow with a minion shoot which they have in the fort . whereupon we come into the road with the admiral and the huge gallant : but the content which be viceadmiral be behind out of sight : by mean whereof , and for want of [ three . 810 . ] her boat to land man withal we land not : otherwise 307 if we have be together , our general with the company will resolute have land to take the town , whatsoever have come of it . the cause why the content stay behind be , that she have find about 14 league to the southward of Arica , in a place where the Spaniard gnat store of have land , a whole ship lade of botija of wine of wine find . Castillia , whereof the say content take into she as many as she can convenient carry , and come after we into the road of Arica the same day . by this time we perceive that the town have gather all their power together , and also convey all their treasure away , and bury it before we be come near the town : for they have hear of Us . now because it be very populous with the aid of one or two place up in the land , our general see there be no land without loss of many man : wherefore he give over that enterprise . while we rid in the road they shoot at we , and our ship shoot at they again for every shot two . Moreover , our pinnace go in hard almost to the shore , and fetch out another bark another bark which ride there in despite of all their fort oad t > ie though they shoot still at the pinnace , which they can ‘ never hit . after these thing our general send a boat on shore with a flag of truce to know if they will redeem their great ship or no ; but they will not : for they have receive speciali commandement from the viceroy from Lima , not to buy any ship , nor to ransom any man upon pain of death . Oure general do this in hope to have redeem some of our man , which be take prisoner on shore by the horseman at Quintero , otherwise he will have make they no offer of parley . the four the 25 ride still in the say road , we spy a sail bark take . come from the southward , and our general scent out his pinnace to meet she , with all our boat ; but the town make such sign from the hill with fire a watchhouse , and token out of the watchhouse , that before our pinnace can get to they , they run the bark on shore two mile to the southward of the town ; but they 308 have small leisure to carry any thing with they ; but all the man ; scape , among who there be certain friar : for we see they in their friar weed as they run on shore : many horseman come from the town to rescue they , and to carry they away , otherwise we have land and take or kill they . so we go aboard the bark as she lie sink , and fetch out the pillage : but there be nothing in it of any value , and come aboard our ship again the same night : and the next morning we set the great ship on fire in the road , and sink one of the bark , and carry the other along with we , and so depart from thence , and go away northwest . the 27 day we take a small bark , which come from the first saint Iago near unto Quintero , where we lose our man b ^ en °^ ad ^ se first . in this bark be one George a greek , a reason - ‘ able pilot for all the coast of Chili . they be send to the city of Lima with letter of adviso of we , and of the loss of our man . there be also in the say bark one Fleming and three Spaniards : and they be all swear and receive the sacrament before they come to sea by three or four friar , that if we shall chance to meet they , they shall throw those letter over board : which ( as we be give they chase with our pinnace ) before we can fetch they up , they have accord through wen away . yet our general wrought so with they , that they do confess it : but he be fain to cause they to be torment with their thumb in a wrinch , and to continue they at several time with extreme pain . also he make the old Fleming believe that he will hang he ; and the rope be about his neck he be pull up a little from the hatch , and yet he will not confess , choose rather a good mind if to die , than he will be perjure . in the end it be confess by one of the Spaniard , whereupon we burn s ' the bark , and carry the man with we . the three of May we come into a bay where be three little town , which be call Paracca , Chincha , and 309 the huge gallant lose company of the fleet , and meet not until the seventeenth . [ Iii . 811 . ] 400 bag of meal find . the english voyage Pisca , where some of we land and take certain house , wherein be bread , wine , fig and hen : but the sea go so high , that we can not land at the best of the town without sink of our boat , and great hazard of we all . this place stand in thirteen degree and f to the southward of the line . the five of May we depart from this harbour , leave the content our viceadmiral within at a island of seal , by which mean at that time we lose she company . the nine we give chase to a sail , namely , our admiral , the huge gallant , and the George which we have take before come out of the road of Arica ; the content which be our viceadmiral be still lose : but we can not fetch it . the George make after it , but lose it that night . the ten day the huge gallant ( in which bark i Francis pretty be ) lose company of our admiral . the eleven we which be in the huge gallant put into a bay which stand in 12 degree f , in which bay we find a river of fresh water about eight of the clock at night ; and though we be but of small force , and no more but one bark and 18 man in it , yet we go on shore to fill water ; where have fill one boat lade , while our boat be in go aboard , two or three of our company which be on shore , as they be go a little from the water place with their furniture about they , espy where there be four or five hundred bag of meal on a heap cover with a few reed . so that night we fill water and take as much meal as we think good : which fall out well for we that be then lose and stand in need of victual : and by break of day in the morning we come aboard , and there stay and ride until the afternoon . in which mean time the town see we ride there still , bring down much cattle to the sea side to have entice we to come on shore : but we see their intent , and weigh anchor and depart the twelve day . 310 the 13 day at night we put into a bay which « 9 - standeth in 9 degree and where we see horseman : and that night we land , namely , m . Bruer captain , my self Francis pretty , Arthur Warford , John way join way a preacher , John Newman , Andrew wight , William preacher - gargefield , and Henry Hilliard . and we 8 only , have every man his harquebus and his furniture about he , march three quarter of a mile along the sea side , where we find a boat of five or six ton hale up dry on the shore about a cable length from the water : and with extreme labour we launch the bark ; when it be on float , captain Bruer and i go in , while the rest of our company be fetch their thing : but sudden it be ready to sink : and the captain and i stand up to the knee lade out water with our target ; but it sink down fast than we be able to free it , insomuch as in the end we have much ado to save our