commendation both of he , and of other captain his associate , as if but the ten part of his fair promise come to effect , they shall be far great than they be , and Augustine ( next unto himself ) shall be the principali person in all Japan . and now he be become so famous in the court , and throughout the whole kingdom of Japan , that at all their meeting and assembly there be no talk but only of the valour and fortitude of Augustine , who in twenty day space have subdue so mighty a kingdom to the crown of Japan . and all the noble account he a 434 most happy man , be astonish at the immortali renown which he have attain unto by this exploit : yea , and quabacondono send forthwith unto he , as unto the conqueror and vanquisher of the corayans , in token of great honour , a two - edged sword and a horse , which among the japonians be a pledge of the most peerless honour that can possible be do to a man : and this very gift do Nabunanga in time past send unto quabacondono , when he have in any battle win any kingdom from morindono . and by this great event the power of the christian god , and his providence towards his child be know not only to the christian , but even to the very ethnic themselves , for that in the heat of such extreme persecution it have please his divine majestic to lay the honour of all this war upon christian lord . wherefore we doubt not , but they will prove more mighty and famous then ever they be . hence it come to pass that the Portugal ship come from China , have winter in Japan : by which occasion the presence of the father visitor have be a great comfort not only to we , but to all the other Christians , who in regard of the departure of so many man with quabacondono and his captain to the war , think they shall have be leave utter forsake and destitute , have not the father visitor , in who they repose all their confidence , remain here . but the singular providence and love of God towards we appear in this , that he will have the say ship , contrary to their usual custom , to winter in Japan . for when quabacondono have obtain that victory , be determine to return unto Ximo , they be all shroud under the protection of the foresay father ; who hear that he be enter into Nangoia , cause Frier John Rodorigues and the governor of the Portugal ship to salute and welcome he . for the Christians of Miaco , which succeed in their room that go for Coray , advise he in their letter so to do . and it be very acceptable to quabacondono to see the 435 Portugal captain general attend upon by so many Portugal sumptuous attire , and come with so many ship in the company of friar John Rodoriguez : and he ask the friar how the father visitor do ? and whether the present to the viceroy like he ? as also , that he take it in very good part that the father have winter in Japan , and that the friar shall stay with he . afterwards write a answer to the father , he declare therein the great favour which he bear to the captain of the ship . who , have familiar entertain he for the space of 2 . hour , he dismiss with evident token of good will . after the captain return , friar Rodoriguez stay behind above a month , attempt very often to speak with quabacondono , of who he be always most kind use . afterwards by reason of sickness he return to nangasaque ; whereupon quabacondono demand why he be not cure at the same place where himself remain ? jacuino answer , that be a stranger , he be to be cure with such diet and medicine , as be not there to be have : with which answer he be satisfy . hence it be , that by often conference which be make by reason of the ambassage , quabacondono wax every day more courteous and affable . and yet for all this , new occasion of trouble and affliction be not cut off : for certain it be , that quabacondono have give out , that if he have good success with his war against China , he will make great alteration of estate , in assign the kingdom of Coray and China to the christian prince , and place in their room ethnic lord throughout Japan : which thing may redound to the ruin and destruction of all christianity here , neither shall the christian find in Japan any place of refuge . and albeit Augustine have certain inform the father visitor ’ of the say alteration of [ three . 860 . ] estate , and jacuine have write unto Augustine , that quabacondono have full determine to alter the state or government of Ximo , and so consequent the state of Augustine , and of the christian prince of Arima and 436 Omura ; yea , and that the say two prince have notice thereof : yet almighty God with the eye of his infinite mercy have vouchsafe to regard the prayer of his faithful servant ( who for this cause be most perplex and sorrowful ) and to provide this remedy follow . the corayans have intelligence , that their king and the force which he carry with he be in safety , go the great part of they , with as much victual as they can get , and hide themselves in the mountain and wood , remain there with such hate and indignation against the japonians , that with promise of safe conduct they can by no mean be draw out of their start hole . wherefore albeit the japonians have all the castle and place of defence in their own possession , yet because they want people to till the ground , and to do they other necessary service , they can choose but forgo all that which they have win . Moreover , the common high way be so pester with thief and murderer , that unless the japonians march in whole troop all together , they be sudden oppress with swarm of Corayans issue forth of the wood . many of the corayans also have retire themselves unto the neighbour - island , from whence with number of great hand near ship , to the mighty loss of the japonians , they assail unt0 coray - their small and weak one , and have already sink many of they . wherefore all the japonian lord why he remain in Coray have write unto quabacondono , that his army must for a certain time in no wise remove from the place where it be , for avoid of such imminent danger as in proceed further it may incur . upon these advertisement quabacondono be ready to take his journey to Coray , to divide the whole kingdom , be hinder from his purpose , and send most friendly letter to all his noble , will they to be of good cheer , for that he will not deal about alter of their estate , till 3 . year be expire : whereupon they be ease of exceed great care and grief . for albeit there be no great trust to be give to his word , yet we hope that 437 this year he will not meddle : what he will do afterward , God know . in Coray at this present there be above 200000 . japonian soldier , who at the commandment of quabacondono be divide throughout the whole kingdom . Augustine lie upon the very extreme frontier of China : but because the chinians be separate from the kingdom of Coray with a mighty river of 3 . league broad , and abound with great ship , and have plant innumerable troop of man upon the shore , the success of the war remain most doubtful and uncertain . neither do we know whither the japonians will proceed any far this year or no . the three testimony of Coray , signify ( among other notable and political observation ) the late success of the war of Japan against Coray ; and to what end quabacondono still maintain garrison in that kingdom . out of the epistle of father Organtino Brixiano , bear date from Japan anno 1594 . the whole empire of Japan be now in the hand of this king quabacondono : and ( which have not be know since the first creation thereof ) there be not the breadth of one foot throughout all the whole island , which be not absolute subject unto he . and he reign in so great peace and tranquillity , that if his successor follow the same course of government , there be no likelihood of future sedition or perturbation in any of the kingdom . and doubtless the mean which he use to establish continual ! peace and concord among the japonians , be very great and effectual ! . one be , that after he have pass his public promise , he never put any of his adversary to death , which his predecessor Nabunanga perform not : for he have subdue any kingdom , will put all the lord and governor to the sword . but this king grant unto they not only life , but also yearly revenue , whereby to 438 maintain themselves in a honest and mean estate : in which regard they all rest content , and willing submit themselves . another be , in that he have bring the husbandman and peasant ( by who assistance and wealth all the pety - king - doms be after a sort sustain ) unto such extreme poverty , that they have scarce wherewithal ! to keep life and soul together : as likewise he have bereave they of all kind of weapon . the three be , because he have most straight forbid all contention , sedition , fray , and skirmish . for whosoever be find culpable of this crime , they die every man of they on both party . if any escape by flight , their kinsfolk be punish in their stead ; and for lack of they , their servant ; and for default of both their next neighbour . if many be guilty , many be punish and suffer death : but hence it come to [ three . 861 . ] pass , that many innocent person be constrain to die . and this severity be the cause , why there be at this present so seidome fray and contention in Japan . the four be , that in administer of justice he be most upright , without all respect either to his own kindred , or to his ancient captain , or the blood royal , or any of the Bonzii , be they never so famous : and be once advertise of a crime , he pardon no man . and albeit himself be exceed addict to woman , yet will he permit none of his subject to have any concubine . for which cause not many day ago , he banish a Bonzio of great wealth , be in alliance and dignity most near unto himself . And be inform that all the Bonzii of Miac6 keep concubine , he will have put they all to death , have not the governor of Miac6 promise , that he will undertake to keep they from offend any more in that kind . wherefore he cause all the Bonzii every month to be swear , that they shall live honest upon pain of death : as also he have swear the head or superior of all their 439 the war of Japan against Coray and China . the english voyage religious house under pain of death , to give up their name who they most suspect of the foresay crime . hence it be , that all of they ( if you regard their outward estate ) live in extreme fear ... the five be , for that he suffer none of his soldier , nor his great lord to live in idleness . if there be no war for their employment , he occupi they in building of stately palace , and in raise new fortress , or in repair and strengthen of old , and also in perform other notable work , to the ornament of Japan , and to his own last honour . so that at this present near unto Miac6 there be thirty thousand man employ about the build of one castle ; and in the city of Bozacca above a hundred thousand : which employments afford they neither place nor time to practise any rebellion . the sixth be he alter of government : for he removeth his governor from one extreme part of Japan to another . the seven , for that unto his soldier ( beside the ordinary pay continual allot unto they for their service ) in time of war he allow victual at his own cost . whereof it come to pass , that he effect whatsoever he think good by their mean . neither have he hitherto wage any war , wherein his enemy be not vanquish , accord to his own desire : this late war of China only except , which far surmount all his force . howbeit in the kingdom of Coray he maintain as yet great garrison , as well to keep his honour , as to constrain the chinians to sue for peace . the eight be , in that he curb and restrain person of ambitious and aspire mind , who ( as he conjecture ) after his death may work some innovation in the common wealth , or disturb the kingdom . the nine be , because he have on no side within four or five day journey of Miac6 , any mighty or industrious captain or governor . 44 ° the ten and last be , for that he have bring his yearly revenue to two million of gold . by these course and mean , we be in good hope that firm peace will be establish in all these kingdom , and also that a fit way will be prepare , for the conversion of all the great lord unto christian religion .