the testimoniali of the company of the desire touch their lose of their general , which appear to have be utter against their meaning . the 26 of August 1591 we who name be here under write , with diverse other depart from Plymouth under m . Thomas candish our general , with 4 ship of he , to wit , the Galeon , the Robuck , the desire , and the black pinnace , for the performance of a voyage into the south sea . the 190 ? November we fall with the bay of Salvador in Brasil . the 16 . of December we take the town of Santos , hope there to revictuall our self , but it fall not out to our contentment . the 24 of January we set sail from Santos , shape our course for the strait of Magellan . the 8 of February by violent storm the say fleet be part : the Robuck and the desire arrive in porte desire the 6 of march . the 16 of march the black pinnace arrive there also : and the 18 of the same our admiral come into the road ; with who we depart the 20 of march in poor and weak estate . the 8 of April 1592 we enter the strait of Magellan . the 21 of April we anchor beyond cape froward , within 40 league of the south sea , where we ride until the 15 of May . in which time we have great store of snow , with some gusty weather , the wind continue still at westnorthwest against we . in this time we be enforce for the preserve of our victual , to live the most part upon muscle , our provision be so slender ; so that many of our man die in this hard extremity . than our general return for Brasil there to winter , and to procure victual for this voyage against the next year . so we depart the strait the 15 of May . the 21 be thwart of port desire 30 league off the shore , the wind then at Northeast and by north , at five of the clock at night lie north - east , we sudden cast about 397 the manner how they lose theirgenerall . the english voyage lie southeast and by south , and sometime southeast : the whole fleet follow the admiral , our ship come under his lee shoot ahead he , and so frame sail fit to keep company . this night we be sever , by what occasion we protest we know not , whither we lose they or they we . in the morning we only see the black pinnace , then suppose that the admiral have overshoot we . all this day we stand to the eastwards , hope to find he , because it be not likely , that he will stand to the shore again so sudden . but miss he towards night , we stand to the shoareward , hope by that course to find he . the 22 of may at night we have a violent storm , with the wind at northwest , and we be enforce to hull , not be able to bear sail , and this night we perish our main tressle - tree , so that we can not more use our main topsail , lie most dangerous in the sea . the pinnace likewise receive a great leak , so that we be enforce to seek the next shore for our relief . and because famine be like to be the best end , we desire to go for port desire , hope with seal and penguin to relieve our self , - and so to make shift to follow the general , or there to stay his come from Brasil . the 24 of may we have much wind at north . the 25 be calm , and the sea very lofty , so that our ship have dangerous foul weather . the 26 our fore - shrowd break , so that if we have not be near the shore , it have be impossible for we to get out of the sea . and now be here more in port desire , our shroud be all rot , not have a run rope whereto we may trust , and be provide only of one shift of sail all wear , our topsail not able to abide any stress of weather , neither have we any pitch , tar , or nail , nor any store for the supply of these want ; and we live only upon seal and muscle , have but five hogshead of pork within board , and meal three ounce for a man a day , with water for to drink . and forasmuch as it have please 398 god to separate our fleet , and to bring we into such hard extremity , that only now by his mere mercy we expect relief , though otherwise we be hopeless of comfort , yet because the wonderful work of God in his exceed great favour towards we his creature be far beyond the scope of man capacity , therefore by he we hope to have deliverance in this our deep distress . also forasmuch as those upon who God will bestow the favour of life , with return home to their country , may not only themselves remain blameless , but also manifest the truth of our action , we have think good in christian charity to lay down under our hand the truth of all our proceed even till the time of this our distress . give in port desire the 2 of June 1592 . beseeching the almighty god of his mercy to deliver we from [ in . 846 . ] this misery , how or when majesty . John Davis captain . ‘ Randolph Cotton . John Pery . William Maber gunner . Charles Parker . Roland miller . Edward smith . Thomas purpet . Matthew stub . John Jenkinson . Thomas Edward . " Edward Granger . John Lewis . William Hayman . George Straker . Thomas Walbie . William Wyeth . Richard Alard . Stephan Popham . Alexander coal . it shall please his divine ' Thomas Watkins . George Cunington . John Whiting . James Ling . the boatswain . Francis smith . John lay . the boatswain mate . Fisher . John Austin . Francis Copstone . Richard Garet . James Eversby . Nicolas Parker . Leonard . John pick . Benjamin . William Maber . James not Christopher Hauser . 399 a isle near port desire abound with seal and penguin . they depart the second time from port desire for the strait of Magellan . the english voyage after they have deliver this relation unto our captain under their hand , than we begin to travel for our life , and we build up a smith forge , and make a colepit , and burn coal , and there we make nail , bolt , and spike , other make rope of a piece of our cable , and the rest gather muscle , and take smelte for the whole company . three league from this harbour there be a isle with four small isle about it , where there be great abundance of seal , and at the time of the year the penguin come thither in great plenty to breed . we conclude with the pinnace , that she shall sometime go thither to fetch seal for we ; upon which condition we will share our victual with her man for man ; whereunto the whole company agree . so we part our poor store , and she labour to fetch we seal to eat , wherewith we live when smelte and muscle fail : for in the nepe stream we can get no muscle . thus in most miserable calamity we remain until the sixth of August , still keep watch upon the hill to look for our general , and so great be our vexation and anguish of soul , as i think never flesh and blood endure more . thus our misery daily increase , time pass , and our hope of the general be very cold , our captain and master be full persuade , that the general may perhaps go direct for the strait , and not come to this harbour : whereupon they think no course more convenient than to go present for the strait , and there to stay his come , for in that place he can not pass , but of force we must see he : whereunto the company most willing consent , as also the captain and master of the pinnace ; so that upon this determination we make all possible speed to depart . the sixth of August we set sail , and go to Penguinisle , and the next day we salt twenty hogshead of seal , which be as much as our salt can possible do , and so we depart for the strait the poor 400 last voyage of Thomas candish a . d . 1592 . wretch that ever be create . the seven of August toward night we depart from penguinisle , shape our course for the strait , where we have full confidence to meet with our general . the nine we have a sore storm , so that we be constrain to hull , for our sail be not to endure any force . the 14 we be drive in among certain isle never before this - certain isle cover by any know relation , lie fifty league n ™ er before or better from the shore east and northerly from the northstreight : in which place , unless it have please God east off they of his wonderful mercy to have cease the wind , we strait . must of necessity have perish . but the wind shift to the east , we direct our course for the strait , and the 18 of August we fall with the cape in a very thick fog ; and the same night we anchor ten league within the cape . the 19 day we the first and pass the first and the second strait . the 21 we s ‘ con ? double cape froward . the 22 we anchor in savage coove , so name , because we find many savage ward . there : notwithstanding the extreme cold of this place , savage coove . yet do all these wild people go naked , and live in the wood like satyr , paint and disguise , and fly from you like wild dear . they be very strong , and throw stone at we of three or four pound weight a incredible distance . the 24 in the morning we depart [ three . 847 . ] from this coove , and the same day we come into the northwest reach , which be the last reach of the strait . the northwest the 25 we ankor in a good coove , within fourteen league of the south sea : in this place we purpose to s ets shall stay for the general , for the strait in this place be scarce three mile broad , so that he can not pass but we must see he . after we have stay here a fortnight in the deep of winter , our victual consume , ( for our seal stink most vile , and our man die pitiful through cold and famine , for the great part of they have not clothes to defend the extremity of the winter cold ) be in this heavy distress , our captain and master think it the best course to depart from the strait xi 401 3 c their first entrance into you south sea . they enter the south sea the second time . the english voyage into the south sea , and to go for the isle of Santa Maria , which be to the northward of Baldivia in 37 degree and a quarter , where we may have relief , and be in a temperate clime , and there stay for the general , for of necessity he must come by that isle . so we depart the 13 of September , and come in sight of the south sea . the 14 we be force back again , and recover a coove 3 league within the strait from the south sea . again we put forth , and be 8 or 10 league free of the land , the wind rise furious at westnorthwest , we be enforce again into the strait only for want of sail ; for we never dare bear sail in any stress of weather , they be so weak : so again we recover the coove three league within the strait , where we endure most furious weather , so that one of our two cable break , whereby we be hopeless of life . yet it please God to calm the storm , and we unrive our sheate , tack , hallier , and other rope , and more our ship to the tree close by the rock . we labour to recover our anchor again , but can not by any mean , it lie so deep in the water , and as we think clean cover with oaze . now have we but one anchor which have but one whole flouke , a cable splice in two place , and a piece of a old cable . in the midst of these our trouble it please God that the wind come fair the first of October ; whereupon with all expedition we loose our moring , and weigh our anchor , and so tow off into the chanel ; for we have mend our boat in port desire , and have five oar of the pinnace . when we have weigh our anchor , we find our cable break , only one strand hold : than we praise God ; for we see apparently his mercy in preserve we . be in the chanel , we rive our rope , and again rig our ship , no man hand be idle , but all labour even for the last gasp of life . here our company be divide ; some desire to go again for port desire , and there to be set on shore , where they may travel for their life , and some stand with the captain and master to proceed . whereupon 402 the captain say to the master : master , you see the wonderful extremity of our estate , and the great doubt among our company of the truth of your report , as touch relief to be have in the south sea : some say in secret , as i be inform , that we undertake these desperate attempt through blind affection that we bear to the general . for my own part i plain make know unto you , that the love which i bear to the general cause i first to enter into this action , whereby i have not only heap upon my head this bitter calamity now present , but also have in some sort procure the dislike of my best friend in England , as it be not unknown to some in this company . but now be thus entangle by the providence of God for my former offence ( no doubt ) i desire , that it may please his divine majesty to show we such merciful favour , that we may rather proceed , than otherwise : or if it be his will , that our mortali be shall now take a end , i rather desire that it may be in proceed then in return . and because i see in reason , that the limit of our time be now draw to a end , i do in christian charity entreat you all , first to forgive i in whatsoever i have be grievous unto you ; second that you will rather pray for our general , then use hard speech of he ; and let we be full persuade , that not for his cause and negligence , but for our own offence against the divine majesty we be present punish ; last , let we forgive one another and be reconcile as child in love and charity , and not think upon the vanity of this life : so shall we in leave this life live with our glorious redeemer , or abide in this life , find favour with God . and now ( good master ) forasmuch as you have be in this voyage once before with your master the general , satisfy the company of such truth , as be to you best know ; and you the rest of the general man , which likewise have be with he in his first voyage if you hear any thing contrary to the truth , spare not to reprove it , i pray you . and so i beseech the lord to