Hine man lose , boat by sea ; but from that day to this day we never hear of our man . the 11 while most of our man be at the isle , only the captain and master with six a great mul - other be leave in the ship , there come a great multi - w ^ swith ' tude savage to the ship , throw dust in the air , wizard , or leap and run like brute beast , have vizard on face like unto their face like dog face , or else their face be dog dog face . face indeed . we great fear lest they will set our ship on fire , for they will sudden make fire , whereat we much marvel : they come to windward of our ship , and set the bush on fire , so that we be in a very stink smoke : but as soon as they come within our shot , we shoot at they , and strike one of they in the thigh they all present flee , so that we never hear nor see more of they . hereby we judge that these cannibal have slay our 9 man . when we consider what 410 last voyage of Thomas candish a . d . J592 - they be that thus be slay , and find that they be the principali man that will have murder our captain and master , with the rest of their friend , we see the just judgement of God , and make supplication to his divine majesty to be merciful unto we . while we be in this harbour , our captain and master go with the boat to discover how far this river do run , that if need shall enforce we to leave our ship , we may know how far we may go by water . so they find , that far than 20 mile they can not the river of go with the boat . at their return they send the boat P ° rtDestr ^ to the isle or penguin ; whereby we understand that passabie the penguin dry to our heart content , and that the boat . multitude of they be infinite . This Penguin have the shape of a bird , but have no wing , only two stump in the place of wing , by which he swim under water with as great swiftness as any fish . they live upon smelt , whereof there be great abundance upon this coast : in eat they be neither fish nor flesh : they lie great egg , and the bird be of a reasonable bigness , very near twice so big as a duck . all the time that we be in this place , we fare pass well with egg , penguin , young seal , young guile , beside other bird , such as i know not : of all which we have great abundance . in this place we find a herb call scurvygrasse , which we fry the great with egg , use train oil in stead of butter . this herb do so purge you blood , that it take away all kind gcurvygrasse of swell , of which many die , and restore we to perfect health of body , so that we be in as good case as when we come first out of England . we stay in this they stay in harbour until the 22 of December , in which time we have week in port dry 20000 penguin ; and the captain , the master , desire - and my self have make some salt , by lay salt water pretty de - upon the rock in hole , which in 6 day will be t0 ma ^ e kern . thus God do feed we even as it be with ’ manna from heaven . the 22 of December we depart with our ship for the isle , where with great difficulty , by the skilful industry 411 the isle of Placencia in Brasill . the english voyage of our master we get 14000 of our bird , and have almost lose our captain in labour to bring the bird aboard : and have not our master be very expert in the set of those wicked tide , which run after many fashion , we have also lose our ship in the same place : but God of his goodness have in all our extremity be our protector . So the 22 at night we depart with 14000 dry penguin , not be able to fetch the rest , and shape our course for Brasil . now our captain rate our victual , and bring we to such allowance , as that our victual may last six month ; for our hope be , that within six month we may recover our country , though our sail be very bad . So the allowance be two ounce and a half of meal for a man a day , and to have so twice a week , so that 5 ounce do serve for a week . three day a week we have oil , three spoonful for a man a day ; and 2 day in a week peason , a pint between 4 man a day , and every day 5 penguin for 4 man , and 6 quart of water for 4 man a day . this be our allowance ; wherewith ( we praise God ) we live , though weak , and very feeble . ' the 30 of January ' we arrive at the he of Placencia in Brasill , the first place that outward bound we be at : and have make the shall , our ship lie off at sea , the captain with 24 of the company go with the boat on shore , be a whole night before they can recover it . the last of January at sunrising they sudden land , hope to take the Portugal in their house , and by that mean to recover some casavi - meale , or other victual for our relief : but when they come to the house , they be all raze , and burn to the ground , so that we think no man have remain on the hand . then the captain go to the garden , and bring from thence fruit and root for the company , and come aboard the ship , and bring she into a fine creek which he have find out , where we may moor she by the tree , and where there be water , and hoop to trim our cask . our case be 412 last voyage of Thomas candish a . d . 1593 - very desperate , we present labour for dispatch away ; some cut hoop , which the cooper make , other labour upon the sail and ship , every man travel for his life , and still a guard be keep on shore to defend those that labour , every man have his weapon like wise by he . the 3 of February our man with 23 shot go again to the garden , be 3 mile from we upon the north shore , and fetch cazavi - root out of the ground , to relieve our company instead of bread ; for we spend not of our meal while we stay here . the 5 of February be Monday , our captain and master haste the company to their labour ; so some go with the Cooper to gather hoop , and the rest labour aboard . this night many of our man in the ship dream of murder and ominous and slaughter : in the morning they report their dream , fir ^ aming one say to another ; this night i dream , that thou ‘ be slay ; another answer , and i dream , that thou be slay : and this be general through the ship . the captain hear this , who like wise have dream very strange himself , give very strait charge , that those which go on shore shall take weapon with they , and see they himself deliver into the boat , and send some of purpose to guard the labourer . all the forenoon they labour in quietness , and when it be ten of the clock , the heat be extreme , they come to a rock near the wood side ( for all this country be nothing but thick wood ) and there they boil cazavi - root , and dine : after dinner some sleep , some wash themselves in the sea , all be strip to their shirt , and no man keep watch , no match light , not a piece charge . sudden as they be thus sleep and sport , have get themselves into a corner out of sight of the ship , there come a multitude of Indian and Portugal upon they , and slay they sleep : only two escape , one very sore hurt , the other not touch , by who we understand of this miserable massacre : with all speed we man our 4X3 thirteen man lose at the lie of Placencia by their own extreme negligence . the english voyage boat , and land to succour our man ; but we find they slay , and lay naked on a rank one by another , with their face upward , and a cross set by they : and withal we see two very great pinnace come from the river of Jenero very full of man ; who we mistrust come from thence to take we : because there come from Jenero soldier to Santos , when the general have take the town and be strong in it . of 76 person which depart in our ship out of England , we be now leave but 27 , have lose 13 in this place , with their chief furniture , as musket , caliver , powder , and shoot . our cask be all in decay , so that we can not take in more water than be in our ship , for want of cask , and that which we have be marvellous ill condition : and be there more by tree for want of cable and anchor , we still expect the cut of our moring , to be beat from our deck with our own furniture , and to be assail by they of Jenero : what distress we be now drive into , i be not able to express . to depart with 8 ton of water in such bad cask be to starve at sea , and in stay our case be ruinous . Theise be hard choise ; but be thus perplex , we make choice rather to fall into the hand of the lord , then into the hand of man : for his exceed mercy we have taste , and of the other cruelty we be not ignorant , so conclude to depart , the 6 of February we be off in the channel , with our ordinance and small shot in a readiness , for any assault that shall come , and have a small gale of wind , we recover the sea in most deep distress . then bemoan our estate one to another , and recount over all our extremity , nothing grieve we moor , than the loss of our man twice , first by the slaughter of the cannibal at port desire , and at this he of Placencia by the Indian and Portugal . And consider what they be that be lose , we find that all those that conspire the murder of our captain and master be now slay by savage , the 414 gunner only except . be thus at sea , when we come to cape Frio , the wind be contrary ; so that 3 week we be grievous vex with cross wind , and our water consume , our hope of life be very small . some desire to go to Baya , and to submit themselves to the Portugal , rather than to die for thirst : but the captain with fair persuasion alter their purpose of yield to the Portugal . in this distress it please God to send we rain in such plenty , as that we be well water , and in good comfort to return . but after we come near unto the sun , our dry penguin begin to corrupt , and there breed in they a most loathsome and ugly worm of a inch long . this worm do so mighty increase , and devour our victual , that there be in reason no hope how we shall avoid famine , but be devour of these wicked creature : there be nothing that they do not devour , only iron except : our clothes , boot , shoe , hat , shirt , stocking : and for the ship they do so eat the timber , as that we great fear they will undo we , by gnaw through the ship side . great be the care and diligence of our captain , master , and company to consume these vermin , but the more we labour to kill they , the more they increase ; so that at the last we can not sleep for they , but they will eat our flesh , and bite like mosquito . in this woeful case , after we have pass the equinoctial towards the north , our man begin to fall sick of such a monstrous disease , as i think the like be never hear of : for in their ankle it begin to swell ; from thence in two day it will be in their breast , so that they can not draw their breath , and then fall into their cod ; and their cod and yard do swell most grievous , and most dreadful to behold , so that they can neither stand , lie , nor go . whereupon our man grow mad with grief . our captain with extreme anguish of his soul , be in such woeful case , that he desire only a speedy end , and though he be scarce able to speak 415 A . D . 1593 - Cabo Frio 30 league east off the lie of Placencia . [ Iii . 852 . ] a moststrange and noisome kind of worm breed of unsalted penguin . for sorrow , yet he persuade they to patience , and to give God thanks , and like dutiful child to accept of his chastisement . for all this diverse grow rage mad , and some die in most loathsome and furious pain . it be incredible to write our misery as it be : there be no man in perfect health , but the captain and one boy . the master be a man of good spirit with extreme labour bear out his grief , so that it grow not upon he . to be short , all our man die except 16 , of which there be but 5 able to move . the captain be in good health , the master indifferent , captain Cotton and my self swell and short wind , yet better than the rest that be sick , and one boy in health : upon we 5 only the labour of the ship do stand . the captain and master , as occasion serve , will take in , and heave out the topsail , the master only attend on the spritsail , and all of we at the capsten without sheat and tack . in fine our misery and weakness be so great , that we can not take in , nor heave out a sail : so our topsail and spritsail be tear all in piece by the weather . the master and captain take their turn at the helm , be mighty distress and monstrous grieve with the most woeful lamenta - they arrive atbear - haven in Ireland the 11 of June « 593 - cion of our sick man . thus as lose wanderer upon the sea , the 11 of June 1593 , it please God that we arrive at bearhaven in Ireland , and there run the ship on shore : where the irish man help we to take in our sail , and to more our ship for hoot : which slender pain of they cost the captain some ten pound before he can have the ship in safety . thus without victual , sail , man , or any furniture God only guide we into Ireland , where the captain leave the master and three or four of the company to keep the ship ; and within 5 day after he and certain other have passage in a english fisherboat to Padstow in Cornwall . in this manner our small remnant by God only mercy be preserve , and restore to our country , to who be all honour and glory world without end .