but weak , and that the place where we the north - road be but 50 league from they . otherwise if west passage . jet we escape within few year they must make from manilla . account to have their town besiege and sack with a army of English . this information be give , our general call for he , and charge he with these thing , which at the first he utter deny : but in the end , the matter be make manifest and know of certainty by especial trial and proof , the next morn - the Spanish ing our general will that he shall be hang : ™ °*£ ansf : d which be accord perform the 16 of January . treachery . we ride for the space of nine day about this island of Capul , where we have diverse kind of fresh victual , with excellent fresh water in every bay , and great store the manner of of wood . the people of this island go almost all naked the people of anj be tawny of colour . the man wear only a a ? u ‘ stroope about their waste , of some kind of linen of their own weave , which be make of plantan leave , and another stroope come from their back under their twist , which cover their privy part , and be make fast to their girdle at their navel . a strange these people use a strange kind of order among they , tjun & which be this . Every man and manchild among they have a nail of tin thrust quite through the head of his privy part , be split in the low end and rivet , and on the head of the nail be as it be a crown : which be drive through their privity when 332 they be young , and the place grow up again , without any great pain to the child : and they take this nail out and in , as occasion serve : and for the truth thereof we our self have take one of these nail from a son of one of the king which be of the age of 10 year , who do wear the same in his privy member . this custom be grant at the request of the woman of the country , who find their man to be give to the foul sin of sodomy , desire some remedy against that mischief , and obtain this before name of the magistrate . Moreover all the male be circumcise , have the foreskin of their flesh cut away . Theise people whole worship the devil , and often time have conference with he , which appear unto they in most ugly and monstrous shape . on the 23 day of January , our general m . Thomas Candish cause all the principal of this island , and of a hundred island more , which he have make to pay tribute unto he ( which tribute be in hog , hen , potato and coco , ) to appear before he , and make himself and his company know unto they , that they be english man , and enemy to the Spaniard : and thereupon spread his ensign and sound up the drum , which they much marvel at : to conclude , they promise both themselves and all the island thereabouts to aid he , whensoever he shall come again to overcome the Spaniard . also our general give they , in token that we be enemy to the Spaniard , money back again for all their tribute which they have pay : which they take marvelous friendly , and row about our ship to show we pleasure marvelous swift : at the last our generail cause a saker to be shoot offj whereat they wonder , and with great contentment take their leaf of we . circumcision . the inhabitant of Capul with all the island adjoin , promise to aid the english against the Spaniard . the next day be the twenty four of Januarie , Our ^ P ^ tnre we set sail about six of the clock in the morning , j ^ d of and run along the coast of the island of manilla , shape Capul . 333 [ three . 820 . ] mark of shallow water . a Balsa be a great canoa . a Spaniard of manilla take . the english voyage our course northwest between the isle of manilla , and the isle of masbat . the 28 day in the morning about 7 of the clock , ride at a anchor betwixt 2 island , we spy a frigate under her two corpse , come out between 2 other island , which as we imagine come from manilla , sail close aboard the shore along the main island of Panama : we chase this frigate along the shore , and get very fast upon it , until in the end we come so near that it stand in to the shore close by a wind , until she be becalm and be drive to strike her sail , and bank up with her oar : whereupon we come unto a anchor with our ship , a league and a half from the place where the frigate row in ; and man our boat with half a dozen shot and as many man with sword , which do row the boat : thus we make after the frigate which have hoist sail and run into a river , which we can not find . but as we row along the shore , our boat come into very shallow water , where many wear and stick be set up in diverse place in the sea , from whence 2 or 3 canoas come forth , whereof one make somewhat near unto we , with 3 or 4 Indian in it : we call unto they , but they will not come near unto we , but row from we : who we dare not follow too far from fear of bring our self to much to the leewarde of our ship . here , as we look about we , we espy another Balsa or canoa of a great bigness which they which be in she , do set along as we do usual set a barge with long staff or pole , which be build up with great cane , and below hard by the water make to row with oar ; wherein be about 5 or 6 Indian and one Spaniard : now as we be come almost at the Balsa , we run a ground with our boat ; but one or two of our man leap overboard and free it again present , and keep thwart her head , we lay she aboard and take in to we than Spaniard , but the Indian leap into the sea and dive and rise far off again from we . present upon the take of this 334 candish ’ s circumnavigation canoa , there show upon the sand a band of soldier march with a ensign have a red cross like the flag of England , which be about 50 or 60 Spaniard , which be late come from manilla to that town which be call Ragaun in a bark to fetch a new ship of the king , which be build in a river within the bay , and stay there but for certain iron that do serve for the rudder of the say ship , which they look for every day . this band of man shoot at we from the shore with their musket , but hit none of we , and we shoot at they again : they also man a frigate and send it out after our boat to have take we , but we with sail and oar go from they : and when they perceive that they can not fetch we , but that they must come within danger of the ordinance of our ship , they stand in with the shore again and land their man , and present send their frigate about the point , but whether we know not . so we come aboard with this one Spaniard , which be neither soldier nor sailor , but one that be come among the rest from manilla , and have be in the hospital there a long time before , and be a very simple soul , and such a one as can answer to very little that he be ask , concern the state of the country . here we ride at anchor all that night , and perceive that the Spaniard have disperse their band into 2 or 3 part , and keep great watch in several steed with fire and shoot off their piece . this island have much plain ground in it in many place , and many fair and straight tree do grow upon it , fit for to make excellent good mast for all sort of ship . there be also mine of very fine gold in it which be in the custody of the Indian . and to the southward of this place , there be another very great island , which be not subdue by the Spaniard , nor any other nation . the people which inhabit it be all negro ; and the island be call the island of negro : and be almost as big as England , stand in 9 degree : the most part of it seem to 335 A . D . 1588 . 50 or 60 Spaniard show themselves . a new ship of the king in building . they man out a frigate after we . a hospitali in manilla . Mynes ofvery fine gild in the island of Panama . the island oj Negros in < ) degree . their departure from the philippinas . Batochina . 11 or 12 small island in 3 degree 10 min . to the southward . Islands in 4 degree southward of the dine . the death of eaptaine Havers . [ Iii . 821 ] . the english voyage be very low land , and by all likelihood be very fruitful . the 29 day of January about six of the clock in the morning we set sail , send our boat before until it be two of the clock in the afternoon , pass all this time as it be through a straight betwixt the say 2 island of Panama , and the island of negro , and about 16 league off we espy a fair open , trending southwest and by south , at which time our boat come aboard , and our general scent commendation to the spanish captain which we come from the evening before by the Spaniard which we take , and will he to provide good store of gold : for he mean for to see he with his company at manilla within few year , and that he do but want a big boat to have land his man , or else he will have see he then : and so cause he to be set on shore . the 8 day of February by 8 of the clock in the morning we espy a island near Gilolo , call batochina , which stand in one degree from the equinoctial line northward . the 14 day of February we fall with n or 12 very small island , lie very low and flat , full of tree , and pass by some island which be sink and have the dry sand lie in the main sea . Theise island near the malucoe , stand in 3 degree and 10 min . to the southward of the line . on the 17 day , one John Gameford a Cooper die , which have be sick of a old disease a long time . the 20 day we fall with certain other island which have many small island among they , stand 4 degree to the southward of the line . on the 21 day of February , be Ash - wednesday captain Havers die of a most fervent and pestilent ague , which hold he furious some 7 or 8 day , to the no small grief of our general and of all the rest of the company , who cause two falcon and one Sacre to be shoot off , with all the small shot in the ship , who after he be shroud 336 in a sheet and a prayer say , be heve over board with great lamentation of we all . ' Moreover , present after his death my self with diverse other in the ship fall marvelous sick , and so continue in very great pain for the space of three week or a month by reason of the extreme heat and untemperatnesse of the climate . the first day of March have pass through the strait of Java minor and Java major , we come to a anchor under the southwest part of Java major : where we espy certain of the people which be fish by the sea side in a bay which be under the island . than our general take into the shipboat certain of his company , and a negro which can speak the morisco tongue , which he have take out of the great saint Anna , make towards those fisher , which have espy our boat run on shore into the wood for fear of our man : but our general cause his negro to call unto they :