self from drown . when we be out , we stand in great fear that our own boat wherein we come on shore be sink : for we can not where see it . howbeit the captain command they to keep it off - , for fear of the great surge that go by the shore . yet in the end we spy it , and go aboard by two and two , and be drive to wade up to the armhole 60 pace into the sea before we can get into the boat , by reason of the shoaldnesse : and then depart the fourteen day in the morning . the 16 we take with the huge gallant , be but sixteen man of we in it , a great ship which come from guaianil , which be call the Lewis , and be of the burden of three hundred tun , have four and twenty man in it , wherein be pilot one Gonsalvo de Ribas , who we carry along with we , and a negro call Emmanuel . the ship be lade with nothing but timber and victual : wherefore we leave she seven league from the land very leak and ready to sink in 7 degree to the southward of the line : we sink a ship of 300 ton take after half a hour fight . seven degree of southerly latitude . they meet their fleet again . two rich ship take . one ship worth 20000 pound . the bay of Paita in 5 degree 4 min . a new fort in building . the town of Paita take and burn . the english voyage her boat and take away her foresail and certain victual . the 17 of may we meet with our admiral again , and all the rest of our fleet . they have take two ship , the one lade with sugar , moloss , maiz , cor - dovan - skinne , montego de Porco , many pack of pintado , many Indian coat , and some marmalade , and 1000 hen : and the other ship be lade with wheat - meal , and box of marmalade . one of these ship which have the chief merchandise in it , be worth twenty thousand pound , if it have be in England or in any other place of Christendom where we may have sell it . we fill all our ship with as much as we can bestow of these good : the rest we burn and the ship also ; and set the man and woman that be not kill on shore . the 20 day in the morning we come into the road of Paita , and be at a anchor , our general land with sixty or seventie man , skirmish with they of the town , and drive they all to flight to the top of the hill which be over the town , except a few slave and some other which be of the mean sort , who be command by the governor to stay below in the town , at a place which be in build for a fort , have with they a bloody ensign , be in number about one hundred man . now as we be row between the ship and the shore , our gunner shoot off a great piece out of one of the bark , and the shot fall among they , and drive they to fly from the fort as fast as they may run , who get they up upon a hill , and from thence shoot among we with their small shot . after we be land and have take the town , we run upon they , and chase they so fierce up the hill for the space of a hour that we drive they in the end away perforce , and be get up the hill , we find where they have lay all their stufle which they have bring out of the town , and have hide it there upon the mountain . we also find the 312 quantity of 25 pound weight in silver in piece of eight rial , and abundance of household stuff and storehouse full of all kind of ware : but our general will not suffer any man to carry much cloth or apparel away , because they shall not cloy themselves with burden : for he know not whether our enemy be provide with furniture accord to the number of their man : for they be five man to one of we : and we have a english mile and a half to our ship . thus we come down in safety to the town , which be [ three . 812 . ] very well bud , and marvellous clean keep in every street , with a town - house or guild hall in the midst , and have to the number of two hundred house at the least in it . we set it on fire to the ground , and good to the value of five or six thousand pound : there be also a bark ride in the road which we set on fire , and fire . depart , direct our course to the hand of Puna . the 25 day of may we arrive at the hand of Puna , where be a very good harbour , where we find a great ship of the burden of 250 ton ride at a anchor with all her furniture , which be ready to be hale on ground : for there be a speciali good place for that purpose . we sink it , and go on shore where the lord of the hand dwell , which be by the water side , who have a sumptuous house marvellous well contrive with very many singular good room and chamber in it : and out of every chamber be frame a gallery with a stately prospect into the sea on the one side , and into the hand on the other side , with a marvellous great hall below , and a very great storehouse at the one end of the hall , which be fill with botija of pitch and bash to make cable withal : for the most part of the cable in the south sea be make upon that hand . this great cacique do make all the Indian upon the hand to work and to drudge for he : and he himself be a Indian bear , but be marry to a marvellous fair woman which be a Spaniard , by reason of his pleasant habitation and of his great wealth . 313 A . D . 1587 . 25 pound weight in silver . the town of Paitahad 200 house in it . a bark set on the hand of Puna within 1 degree the equinoctial to the south . a great ship burn . great store of cable make in Puna . this spanish woman his wife be honour as a queen in the island , and never go on the ground upon her foot : but hold it too base a thing for she : but when her pleasure be to take the air , or to go abroad , she be always carry in a shadow like unto a horselit upon four man shoulder , with a veil or canopy over she for the sun or the wind , have her gentlewoman still attend about she with a great troop of the best man of the hand with she . but both she and the lord of the island with all the Indian in the town be new flee out of the island before we can get to a anchor , by reason we be becalm before we can get in , and be go over unto the main land , have carry away with they to the sum of 100000 crown , which we know by a captain of the island a Indian , which be leave there with some other upon the island under he , who we have take at sea as we be come into the road , be in a balsam or canoa for a spy to see what we be . the 27 our general himself with certain shot and some targeteer go over into the main unto the place where this foresay Indian captain which we have take have tell we that the cacique , which be the lord of all the island , be go unto , and have carry all his treasure with he : but at our come to the place which we go to land at , we find new arrive there four or five great balsa , which be lade with plantan , bag of meal , and many other kind of victual . Oure general marvel what they be and what they mean , ask the Indian guide and command he to speak the truth upon his life : be then bind fast , he answer be very much abash , as well as our company be , that he neither know from whence they shall come , nor who they shall be : for there be never a man in any one of the balsa : and because he have tell our general before , that it be a easy matter to take the say cacique and all his treasure , and that there be but three or four 314 ... 15871 house stand in a desert place and no resistance , and that if he find it not so , he shall hang he . again be demand to speak upon his life what he think these Balsas shall be , he answer that he can not say from whence they shall come , except it be to bring 60 soldier , which he do hear be to go to a place call Guaiaquil , which off be about 6 league from the say island , where two guaiaiu ^- or three of the king ship be on the stock in building , where be continual a hundred soldier in garrison who have hear of we , and have send for sixty more for fear of burn of the ship and town . Oure general not any whit discourage either at the sight of the balsa unlooked for , or for hear of the threescore soldier not until then speak of , with a brave courage animate his company in the exploit , go present forward , be in the night in a most desert path in the wood , until such time as he come to the place ; where , as it seem , they have keep watch either at the water side , or at the house , or else at both , and be new go out of the house , have so short warn , that they leave the meat both boil and rest at the fire and be flee with their treasure with they , or else bury it where it can not be find , be also in the night . our company take hen and such thing as we think good , and come away . the 29 day of May our general go in the ship - a little island boat into a little island there by , whereas the say cacique np ™ a unt0 which be the lord of Puna , have cause all the hang - ’ ing of his chamber , which be of cordovan leather all guild over , and paint very fair and rich , with all his household stuff , and all the ship tackle which be ride in the road at our come in , with great store of nail , spike of iron , and very many other [ in . 813 . ] thing to be convey : all which we find , and bring away what our general thought requisite for the ship business . 3 * 5 the I | will of Puna be almost as big as the lie of wight . Cotton tree . a excellent orchard . the english voyage this hand be very pleasant for all thing requisite , and fruitful : but there be no mine of gold nor silver in it . there be at the least 200 house in the town about the cacique palace , and as many in one or two town more upon the hand , which be almost as big as the he of wight in England . there be plant on the one side of the cacique house a fair garden , with all herb grow in it , and at the low end a well of fresh water , and round about it be trees ' set , whereon bombasin cotton grow after this manner : the top of the tree grow full of cod , out of which the cotton grow , and in the cotton be a seed of the bigness of a pease , and in every codde there be seven or eight of these seed : and if the cotton be not gather when it be ripe , than these seed fall from it , and spring again . there be also in this garden figtree which bear continual , also pompion , melon , cucumber , radish , rosemary and thyme , with many other herb and fruit . at the other end of the house there be also another orchard , where grow orange sweet and sour , limmons , pomegranate and lymes , with diverse other fruit . there be very good pasture ground in this hand ;