year old . the name of the elder be Alphonso , the second Anthony de dasi , the three remains with the right honourable the countess of Essex . he also take from they , one Nicholas Roderigo a Portugal , who have not only be in canton and other part of China , but also in the island of japon be a country most rich in silver mine , and have also be in the philippinas . he take also from they a Spaniard who name be Thomas the Ersola , which be a very good pilot from Acapulco and the coast of Nueva Espanna unto the island of ladrone , where the Spaniard do put in to water , sail between Acapulco and the philippinas : in which isle of ladrone , they find fresh water , plantan , and potato root : howbeit the people be very rude and heathen . the 19 day of November aforesaid , about 3 of the clock in the afternoon , our general cause the king ship to be set on fire , which have to the quantity of 500 ton of good in she we see burn unto the water , and then give they a piece of ordinance and set sail joyful homeward towards England with a fair wind , which by this time be come about to Eastnortheast : and night grow near , we leave the content a stern of we , which be not as yet come out of the road . and here think she will have overtake we , we lose she 327 A . D . 1587 . two boy of Japan . three boy of manilla . Nicolas rod - erigp , a Portugal . a spanish pilot . Acapulco be the haven whence they set forth to the philippinas . good water at the ladrone . the wind at Eastnortheast . the content whereof Steven hare be master , leave behind in the road . company and never see she after . we be say ling from this haven of Aguada Segura in California unto the isle of ladrone the rest of November , and all December , and so forth until the 3 of Januarie 1588 , with a fair wind for the space 45 day : and we esteem it to be between 17 and 18 hundred league . the 3 day of January by six of the clock in the morning we have sight of one of the island of ladrone the island of call the island of Guana , stand in 13 degree Ih ^ I ^ adrma towards north , and sail with a gentle gale before in 13 degree wmde , by i or 2 of the clock in the afternoon , andtwothird . vree be come up within 2 league of the island , where commodity we meet with 60 or 70 sail of canoas full of savage , adrone ^ w ^° come to sea unto we ’ and bring with they ‘ in their boat plantan , cocos , potato root , and fresh fish , which they have catch at sea , and hold they up unto we for to truck or exchange with we ; which when we perceive , we make fast little piece of old iron upon small cord and fish line , and so vex the iron unto their canoas , and they catch hold of they and take off the iron , and in exchange of it they will make fast unto the same line either a potato root , or a bundle of plantan , which we hale in : and thus our company exchange with they until they have satisfy themselves with as much as do content they : yet we can not be rid of they . for afterward they be so thick about the ship , that it stem and break 1 or 2 of their canoas : but the man save themselves be in every canoa 4 , 6 , or 8 person all naked and excellent the colour and swimmer and diverse . they be of a tawny colour and 5people of the marvellous fat , and big ordinary of stature than the isle of la - most part of our man in England , wear their hair drone . marvelous long ; yet some of they have it make up and tie with a knot on the crown , and some with 2 ^ [ 11 . 818 . ] knot , much like unto their image which we see they etr image . carvej jn wood , anj stand in the head of their artificial boat like unto the image of the devil . their canoas eamas - be as artificial make as any that ever we have see : 328 consider they be make and contrive without any edgetool . they be not above half a yard in breadth and in length some seven or eight yard , and their head and sterne be both alike , they be make out with raft of cane and reed on the starrebordside , with mast and sail : their sail be make of mat of sedge , square or triangle wise : and they sail as well right against the wind , as before the wind : these savage follow we so long , that we can not be rid of they : until in the end our general command some half dozen harquebusses to be make ready ; and himself strike one of they and the rest shoot at they : but they be so yare and nimble , that we can not discern whether they be kill or no , because they can fall backward into the sea and prevent we by dive . the 14 day of January lie at hull with our ship all the middle watch , from 12 at night until four in the morning , by the break of day we fall with a headland of the isle of the philippinas , which be call Cabo deal Spirito Santo which be of very great bigness and length , high land in the midst of it , and very low land as the cape lie east and west , trending far into the sea to the westward . this cape or island be distant from the isle of Guana , one of the ladrone , 310 league . we be in sail of this course eleven day with scant wind and some foul weather , bear no sail two or three night . this island stand in 13 degree , and be a place much people with heathen people , and all woody through the whole land : and it be short of the chief island of the philippinas call manilla about 60 league . manilla be well plant and inhabit with Spaniards to the number of six or seven hundred person : which dwell in a town unwalled , which have 3 or 4 small block house , part make of wood , and part of stone be indeed of no great strength : they have one or two small galley belong to the town . it be a very rich place of gold and many other commodity ; and they have yearly traffic from Acapulco in Nueva canoas sail right against the wind . the nimbleness of the people of the ladrone . Cabo deal Spirito Santo , one of the isle of the philippinas inn 13 degree . from Guana a isle of the ladrone to Cabo deal Spirito Santo be $ 10 league . the description of the town of manilla . trade from Acapulco to manilla . 329 silver exchange weight for weight for gold . the island of Capul at which our man stay 9 day . one of the chief governors of the island come aboard we . the english voyage Espanna , and also 20 or 30 ship from China and from the Sanguelos , which bring they many sort of merchandise . the merchant of China and the Sanguelos be part moor and part heathen people . they bring great store of gold with they , which they traffic and exchange for silver , and give weight for weight . Theise Sanguelos be man of marvelous capacity in devise and make all manner of thing , especial in all handy craft and science : and every one be so expert , perfect , and skilful in his faculty , as few or no christian be able to go beyond they in that which they take in hand . for draw and embroider upon satin , silck , or lawn , either beast , foul , fish or worm , for liveliness and perfectness , both in silk , silver , gold , and pearl , they excel . also the 14 day at night we enter the strait between the island of Luzon , and the island of Camlaia . the fifteen of January we fall with a island call Capul , and have betwixt the say island and another island but a narrow passage , and a marvelous rippling of a very great tide with a ledge of rock lie off the point of the island of Capul : and no danger but water enough a fair breadth off : and within the point a fair bay and a very good harbour in four fathom water hard aboard the shore within a cable length . about 10 of the clock in the morning we come to a anchor . our ship be no soon come to a anchor , but present there come a canoa row aboard we , wherein be one of the chief cacique of the island whereof there be seven , who suppose that we be Spaniard , bring we potato root , which they call camotas , and green coco , in exchange whereof we give his company piece of linen to the quantity of a yard for four coco , and as much linen for a basket of potato root of a quart in quantity ; which root be very good meat , and excellent sweet either roast or boil . this cacique skin be carve and cut with sundry and many strike and devise all over his body . we 330 candish ’ s circumnavigation a . d . 1588 . keep he still aboard and cause he to send those man which bring he aboard back to the island to cause the rest of the principal to come aboard : who be no soon go on shore , but present the people of the island come down with their coco and potato root , and the rest of the principal likewise come aboard and bring with they hen and hog : hen and and they use the same order with we which they do with the Spaniard . for they take for every hog ( which they call balboye ) eight rial of plate , and for every hen ne or cock one rial of plate . thus we ride at anchor all that day , do nothing but buy root , coco , hen , hog , and such thing as they bring , refresh our self marvellous well . the same day at night be the fifteen of January 1588 , Nicolas Roderigo the Portugal , who we take out of the great Santa Anna at the cape of California , desire , to speak with our general in secret : which when our general understand , he send for he , and ask he what he have to say unto he . the Portugal make he this answer , that although he have offend his worship heretofore , yet now he have vow his [ in . 819 . ] faith and true service unto he , and in respect thereof he neither can nor will conceal such treason as be in work against he and his company : and that be this . that the Spaniard which be take out of the treason of the great sant anne for a pilot , who name be the spanish Thomas de Ersola , have write a letter , and secret seal it and lock it up in his chest , mean to the copy of convey it by the inhabitant of this island to manilla , the spanish the content whereof be : that there have be two pistes letter English ship along the coast of Chili , Peru , Nueva Espanna , and Nueva Galicia , and that they have take manilla , many ship and merchandise in they , and burn which be diverse town , and spoil all that ever they can come fiun ^ in unto , and that they have take the king ship which come from manilla and all his treasure , with all the Timothy shot - marchandize that be therein ; and have set all the tun . 331 people on shore , take himself away perforce . therefore he will they that they shall make strong their bulwark with their two galley , and all such provision as they can possible make . he far signify , Capul adjoin - that we be ride at a island call Capul , which be at the end of the island of manilla , be but manilla . one ship with small force in it , and that the other ship , as he suppose , be go for the northwest passage , stand in 55 degree : and that if they can use any mean to surprise we be there at a anchor , they shall dispatch it : for our force be but small , and our man