403 this Santos stand upon the coast of Peru in 9 deg . of southerly latitude . they enter the south sea the three time . the english voyage bestow his mercy upon we . then the master begin in these speech : captain , your request be very reasonable , and i refer to your judgement my honest care , and great pain take in the general service , my love towards he , and in what sort i have discharge my duty , from the first day to this hour . i be command by the general to follow your direction , which hitherto i have perform . you all know , that when i be extremely sick , the general be lose in my mate watch , as you have well examine : since which time , in what anguish and grief of mind i have live , God only know , and you be in some part a witness . and now if you think good to return , i will not gainsay it : but this i assure you , if life may be preserve by any mean , it be in proceed . for at the isle of Santa Maria i do assure you of wheat , pork , and root enough . also i will bring you to a isle , where pelican be in great abundance , and at Santos we shall have meal in great plenty , beside all our possibility of intercept some ship upon the coast of Chili and Peru . but if we return there be nothing but death to be hope for : therefore do as you like , i be ready , but my desire be to proceed . Theise his speech be confirm by other that be in the former voyage , there be a general consent of proceed ; and so the second of October we put into the south sea , and be free of all land . this night the wind begin to blow very much at westnorthwest , and still increase in fury , so that we be in great doubt what course to take : to put into the strait we dare not for lack of ground tackle : to bear sail we doubt , the tempest be so furious , and our sail so bad . the pinnace come room with we , and tell we that she have receive many grievous sea , and that her rope do every hour fail she , so as they can not tell what shift to make : we be unable in any sort to help they , stand under our corpse in view of the lee - shore , still expect our ruinous end . 404 the four of October the storm grow beyond all reason furious , the pinnace be in the wind of we , strike sudden ahull , so that we think she have receive some grievous sea , or spring a leak , or that her sail fail she , because she come not with we : but we dare not hull in that unmerciful storm , but sometime try under our main coarse , sometime with a haddock of our sail , for our ship be very leeward , and most laboursome in the sea . this night we lose the pinnace , and never see she again . the five , our foresail be split , and all to turn : than our master take the mizzen , and bring it to the foremast , to make our ship work , and with our spritsail we mend our foresail , the storm continue without all reason in fury , with hail , snow , rain , and wind such and so mighty , as that in nature it can not possible be moor , the sea such and so lofty , with continual breach , that many time we be doubtful whether our ship do sink or swim . the ten of October be by the account of our captain and master very near the shore , the weather dark , the storm furious , and most of our man have give over to travel , we yield our self to death , without further hope of succour . our captain sit in the gallery very pensive , i come and bring he some rosa solis to comfort he ; for he be so cold , that he be scarce able to move a joint . after he have drink , and be comfort in heart , he begin for the ease of his conscience to make a large repetition of his forepass time , and with many grievous sigh he conclude in these word : oh most glorious God , with who power the mighty thing among man be matter of no moment , i most humble beseech thou , that the intolerable burden of my sin may through the blood of Jesus Christ be take from i : and end our day with speed , or show we some merciful sign of thy love and our preservation . have thus end , he desire i not to make know to any of the company 405 A . D . 1592 - the black pinnace lose in the south sea . his intolerable grief and anguish of mind , because they shall not thereby be dismay . and so sudden , before i go from he the sun shine clear ; so that he and the master both observe the true elevation of the pole , whereby they know by what course to recover the strait . wherewithal ! our captain and master be so revive , and give such comfortable speech to the company , that every man rejoice , as though we have receive a present deliverance . the next day be the 11 of October , we see Cabo Deseado be the cape on the south shore ( the north shore be nothing but a company of dangerous rock , isle , and shold . ) this cape be within two league to leeward off we , our master great doubt , that we can not double the same : whereupon the captain tell he : you see there be no remedy , either we must double it , or before noon we must die : therefore loose your sail , and let we put it to God mercy . the master be a man of good spirit resolute make quick dispatch and set sail . our sail have not be half a hour aboard , but the footrope of our foresail break , so that nothing hold but the eyelet hole . the sea continual break over the ship poop , and fly into the sail with such violence , that we still expect the tear of our sail , or oversetting of the ship , and withal to our utter discomfort , we perceive that we fall still more and more to leeward , so that we can not double the cape : we be not we come within half a mile of the cape , and so near the shore , that the counter - suff of the sea will rebound against the ship side , so that we be much dismay with the horror of our present end . be thus at the very pinch of death , the wind and sea rage beyond measure , our master vear some of the main sheate ; and whether it be by that occasion , or by some current , or by the wonderful power of God , as we very think it be , the ship quicken her way , and shoot past that rock , where we think she will have shore . then between 406 last voyage of Thomas candish a . d . the cape and the point there be a little bay ; so that we be somewhat far from the shore : and when we be come so far as the cape , we yield to death : yet our good God the father of all mercy deliver we , and we double the cape about the length of our ship , or very little moor . be shoot past the cape , we present take in our sail , which only God have preserve unto we : and when we be shoot in between the high land , the wind blow trade , without any inch of sail , we spoon before the sea , three man be not able to guide the helm , and in six hour we be put five and twenty league within the strait , where we find a sea answerable to the ocean . in this time we free our ship from water , and after we have rest a little , our man be not able to move ; their sinew be stifle , and their flesh dead , and many of they ( which be most lamentable to be report ) be so eat with lice , as that in their flesh do lie cluster of lice as big as peason , yea and some as big as bean . be in this misery we be constrain to put into a coove for the refresh our man . our master know the shore and every coove very perfect , put in with the shore , and more to the tree , as beforetime we have do , lay our anchor to the seaward . here we continue until the twenty of October ; but not be able any long to stay through extremity of famine , the one and twenty we put off into the channel , the weather be reasonable calm : but before night it blow most extreme at westnorthwest . the storm grow outrageous , our man can scarce stand by their labour ; and the strait be full of turn reach we be constrain by discretion of the captain and master in their account to guide the ship in the hell - dark night , when we can not see any shore , the channel be in some plice scarce three mile broad . but our captain , as we first pass through the strait draw such a exquisite plat of the same , as i be assure it can in 407 1592 . [ he . 8 + 9 . ] the cape deseado most dangerous double , after they have be nine day in the south sea . a excellent plat of the strait of Magellan . penguinisle within three league of port desire . the english voyage any sort be better : which plat he and the master so often peruse , and so careful regard , as that in memory they have every turn and creek , and in the deep dark night without any doubt they convey the ship through that crooked channel : so that i conclude , the world have not any so skilful pilot for that place , as they be : for otherwise we can never have pass in such sort as we do . the 25 we come to a island in the strait name penguinisle , whither we send our boat to seek relief , for there be great abundance of bird , and the weather be very calm ; so we come to a anchor by the island in seven fathom . while our boat be at shore , and we have great store of penguin , there arise a sudden storm , so that our ship do drive over a breach and our boat sink at the shore . captain Cotton and the lieutenant be on shore leap in the boat , and free the same , and throw away all the bird , and with great difficulty recover the ship : my self also be in the boat the same time , where for my life i labour to the best of my power . the ship all this while drive upon the lee - shore , when we come aboard , we help to set sail , and weigh the anchor ; for before our come they can scarce hoist up their yard , yet with much ado they set their fore - coarse . thus in a mighty fret of weather the seven and twenty day of October we be free of the strait , and the thirty of October we come to penguinisle be three league from port desire , the place which we purpose to seek for our relief . when we be come to this isle we send our boat on shore , which return lade with bird and egg ; and our man say that the penguin be so thick upon the isle , that ship may be lade with they ; for they can not go without tread upon the bird , whereat we great rejoice . then the captain appoint Charles Parker and Edward smith , with twenty other to go on shore , and to stay upon the isle , for the kill and dry of those penguin , and promise 408 last voyage of Thomas candish a . d . i59x after the ship be in harbour to send the rest , not only for expedition , but also to save the small store of victual in the ship . but Parker , smith , and the rest of their faction suspect , that this be a devise of the captain to leave his man on shore , that by these mean there may be victual for the rest to recover their country : and when they remember , that this be the place where they will have slay their captain and master , sure ( think they ) for revenge hereof will they leave we on shore . which when our captain understand , he use these speech unto they : i understand that you be doubtful of your security through the perverseness of your own guilty conscience : it be a extreme grief unto i , that you shall judge i bloodthirsty , in who you have see nothing but kind conversation : if you have find otherwise , speak bold , and accuse i of the wrong that i have do ; if not , why do you then measure i by your own uncharitable conscience ? all the company know indeed , that in this place you practise to the utmost of your power , to murder i and the master causeless , as God know , which evil in this place we do remit you : and now i may conceive without do you wrong , that you again purpose some evil in bring these matter to repetition : but God have so shorten your [ in . 850 . ] confederacy , as that i nothing doubt you : it be for your master sake that i have forbear you in your unchristian practice : and here i protest before God , that for his sake alone i will yet endure this injury , and you shall in no sort be prejudice or in any thing be by I | be command : but when we come into England ( if God so favour we ) your master shall know your honesty : in the mean space be void of these suspicion , for , God i call to witness , revenge be no part of my thought . they give he thank , desire to go into the harbour with the ship , which he grant . so there be ten leave upon the isle , and the last of October we enter the harbour . our master at our last be the three time . 409 here have take careful ! notice of every creek in the river , in a very convenient place , upon sandy oaze , run the ship on ground , lay our anchor to seaward , and with our run rope more she to stake upon the shore , which he have fasten for that purpose ; where the ship remain till our departure . the three of November our boat with water , wood , and as many as she can carry , go for the isle of penguin : but be deep , she dare not proceed , but return again the same night . then Parker , smith , Townesend , purpet , with five other , desire that they may go by land , and that the boat may fetch they Penguin isle when they be against the isle , it be scarce a mile scarce a mile from the shore . the captain bid they do what they ne ^ think best , advise they to take weapon with they : for ( say he ) although we have not at any time see people in this place , yet in the country there may be savage . they answer , that here be great store of deer , and ostrich ; but if there be savage , they will devour they : notwithstanding the captain cause they to carry weapon , caliver , sword , and target : so the sixth of November they depart by land , and the