who no soon hear he call , but present one of they come out to the shore side and make answer . Oure general by the negro inquire of he for fresh water , which they find , and cause the fisher to go to the king and to certify he of a ship that be come to have traffic for victual , and for diamond , pearl , or any other rich jewel that he have : for which he shall have either gold or other merchandise in exchange . the fisher answer that we shall have all manner of victual that we will request . thus the boat come aboard again . within a while after we go about to furnish our ship thorough with wood and water . about the eight of march two or three canoas come from the town unto we with egg , hen , fresh fish , orange , and lymes , and bring word we shall have have victual more plentiful , but that they be so far to be bring to we where we rid . which when our general heard he weigh anchor and stand in near for the town : and as we be under sail we meet with one of the king canoas come toward we : whereupon we shake the ship in the wind and xi 337 y march 1588 . ourarrivalat Java major . the morisco or , Arabian tongiie common in Java . Cloves , pepper , sugar , and many other commodity in Java major . the english voyage stay for the canoa until it come aboard of we , and stand into the bay which be hard by and come to a anchor . in this canoa be the king secretary , who have on his head a piece of die linen cloth fold up like a Turk Tuliban : he be all naked save about his waste , his breast be carve with the broad arrow upon it : he go barefooted : he have a interpretor with he , which be a mestizo , that be , half a Indian and half a Portugal , who can speak very good portugese . this secretary signify unto our general that he have bring he a hog , hen , egg , fresh fish , sugar - cane and wine : ( which wine be as strong as any aquavitae , and as clear as any rock water : ) he tell he far that he will bring victual so sufficient for he , as he and his company will request , and that within the space of four day . Oure general use he singular well , banquet he most royal with the choice of many and sundry conserves , wine both sweet and other , and cause his musician to make he music . this do our general tell he that he and his company be Englishman ; and that we have be at China and have have traffic there with they , and that we be come thither to discover , and purpose to go to Malaca . the people of Java tell our general that there be certain Portugal in the island which lie there as factor continual to traffic with they , to buy negro , clove , pepper , sugar , and many other commodity . this secretary of the king with his interpretor lie one night aboard our ship . the same night , because they lie aboard , in the evening at the set of the watch , our general command every man in the ship to provide his harquebus and his shot , and so with shoot off 40 . or 50 . small shot and one Sacre , himself set the watch with they . this be no small marveile unto these heathen people , who have not common see any ship so furnish with man and ordinance . the next morning we dismiss the secretary and his interpretor with all humanity . 338 the four day after , which be the 12 . of march , accord to their appointment come the king canoas ; but the wind be somewhat scant they can not get aboard that night , but put into a bay under the island until the next day , and present after the break of day there come to the number of 9 or 10 . of the king nine or in . canoas so deep lade with victual as they can swim , ° fthe with two great live ox , half a score of wonderful ' great and fat hog , a number of hen which be alive , drake , goose , egg , plantan , sugar cane , sugar in plate , coco , sweet orange and sour , lymes , great store of wine and aquavitae , salt to season victual withal , and almost all manner of victual else , with diverse of the king officer which be there . among all the rest of the people in one of these canoas come two Portugal , two portu - which be of middle stature , and man of marvelous in proper personage ; they be each of they in a loose jerkin , and hose , which come down from the waste to the ankle , because of the use of the country , and partly because it be lend , and a time for do of their penance , ( for they account it as a thing of great dislike [ three . 822 . ] among these heathen to wear either hose or shoe on their foot : ) they have on each of they a very fair and a white lawn shirt , with fall band on the same , very decent , only their bare leg except . these Portugal be no small joy unto our general and all the rest of our company : for we have not see any Christian that be our friend of a year and a half before . Oure general use and entreat they singular well , with banquet and music : they tell we that they be no less glad to see we , than we to see they , and inquire of the estate of their country , and what be become of don Antonio their king , and whether he be enquiry oj living or no : for that they have not of long time bene Antony . in Portugal ! , and that the Spaniard have always bring they word that he be dead . than our general satisfy they in every demand ; assure they , that their king be alive , and in England , and have honourable 339 the wife kill themselves after their husband death . a strange order . the english voyage allowance of our queen , and that there be war between Spain and England , and that we be come under the king of Portugal into the south sea , and have war upon the Spaniard there , and have fire , spoil and sink all the ship along the coast that we can meet withal , to the number of eighteen or twenty sail . with this report they be sufficient satisfy . on the other side they declare unto we the state of the island of Java . First the plentifulness and great choice and store of victual of all sort , and of all manner of fruit as before be set down : then the great and rich merchandise which be there to be have . than they describe the property and nature of the people as follow . the name of the king of that part of the island be Raja Bolamboam , who be a man have in great majesty and fear among they . the common people may not bargain , sell , or exchange any thing with any other nation without speciali licence from their king : and if any so do , it be present death for he . the king himself be a man of great year , and have a hundred wife , his son have fifty . the custom of the country be , that whensoever the king do die , they take the body so dead and burn it and preserve the ash of he , and within five day next after , the wife of the say king so dead , accord to the custom and use of their country , every one of they go together to a place appoint , and the chief of the woman , which be near unto he in account , have a ball in her hand , and throw it from she , and to the place where the ball rest , thither they go all , and turn their face to the eastward , and every one with a dagger in their hand , ( which dagger they call a Crise , and be as sharp as a razor ) stab themselves to the heart , and with their hand all to bee - bath themselves in their own blood , and fall grovel on their face so end their day . this thing be as true as it seem to any hearer to be strange . the man of themselves be very politic and subtle , and singular valiant , be naked man , in any action 340 they undertake , and wonderful at commandment and fear of their king . for example : if their king command they to undertake any exploit , be it never so dangerous or desperate , they dare not nor will not refuse it , though they die every man in the execution of the same . for he will cut off the head of every one of they which return alive without bring of their purpose to pass : which be such a thing among they , as it make they the most valiant people in all the southeast part of the world : for they never fear any death . for be in fight with any nation , if any of they feel himself hurt with lance or sword , he will willing run himself upon the weapon quite through his body to procure his death the more speedy , and in this desperate sort end his day , or overcome his enemy . Moreover , although the man be tawny of colour and go continual naked , yet their woman be fair of complexion and go fare woman more apparel . in Java - after they have thus describe the state of the island , and the order and fashion of the people ; they tell we far , that if their king don Antonio will come don Antonio unto they , they will warrant he to have all the Malucos at commandment , beside , China , Sangles , and - tn £ ast * the isle of the philippinas , and that he may be indy . assure to have all the Indian on his side that be in the country . after we have full content these Portugal , and the people of Java which bring we victual in their canoas , they take their leaf of we with promise of all good entertainment at our return , and our general give they three great piece of ordinance at their depart . thus the next day be the 16 . they depart of march we set sail towards the cape of good hope , call by the Portugal Cabo de bvena esperancza on c the southermost coast of Africa . the rest of march and all the month of April we spend in traverse that mighty and vast sea , between the isle of Java and the main of Africa , observe the heaven , the crosier or south - pole , the other star , the 341 fowl , which be mark unto the sea man of fair weather , foul weather , approach of land or island , the wind , the tempest , the rain and thunder , with the alteration of tide and current . the 10 . day of may we have a storm at the west , and it blow so hard that it be as much as the ship can stir close by under the wind : and the storm continue all that day and all that night . [ Iii . 823 . ] the next day be the 11 . of may in the morning one of the company go into the top , and espy land bear north , and north and by west off we , and about noon we espy land to bear west off we , which as we do imagine be the cape of buena esperanza , whereof indeed we be short some 40 . or 50 . league : and by reason of the skantnesse of the wind we stand along to the southeast until midnight ; at which time the wind come fair , and we hale along westward . the 12 . and 13 . day we be becalm , and the sky be very hazy and thick until the 14 . day at three of the clock in the afternoon , at which time the sky clear , and we espy the land again which be the cape Cabo Falso , call Cabo Falso , which be short of the cape de bvena esperanza 40 or 50 league . this cape be very easy to be know . for there be right over it three very high hill stand but a small way one off another , and the high stand