Chiametlan , where we anchor in 8 fathom water , and the 26 of September we depart from the bay of Chiametlan , and the 28 day we anchor of our abode under the island of Chiametlan in 4 fathom . z day es , where item , the 9 day of October we depart from the island of Chiametlan , and cross over the mouth of twelve day , mar vermejo , the 14 day of October we have sight of they where we cape of California . water . item , the 15 day of October we lie off the cape of S . Lucas , and the 4 day of November we take the great and rich ship call Santa Anna , come from the philippinas : and the 5 day of November we put into the of our abode port of saint Lucas , where we put all the people on shore , and burn the Santa Anna : and we anchor in 12 fathom water . water . item , the 19 day of November we depart from the port of saint Lucas , and the 3 day of January we have sight of one of the island of the ladrone , which island be call the island of * Iwana , stand in the latitude * Guana . of 13 degree and 50 minute . xi 369 2 a item , the 3 day of January we depart from the island of Iwana , and the 14 day of Januarie we have sight of the cape of Spirito santo , and the same day we put of our abode into the strait of the philippinas ; and the 15 day mne ayes . of january we anchor under the island of Capul , on the which island we water and wooded . , item , the 24 of January we depart from the island of Capul , and the 28 day of January we arrive in the bay of Lago grande , which bay be in the island of Pannay , Spaniards where there be Spaniards build of a new ship . eld of a item , the 29 of January we depart from the bay of nevi ship tn the t ’ , , 7 , r . , , philippinas , Lago grande , and the same day at night we be clear from the island of the philippinas , shape our course towards the island of Maluco . day 30 . item , from the 29 day of January unto the first day of march , we be navigate between the west end of the island of Pannay and the west end of the island of Java minor . of our abode item , the first day of march we pass the strait wzr ” at west head of the island of Java minor , and the 5 water . day of march we anchor in a bay at the Wester end of Java major , where we water , and have great store of victual from the town of Polambo . Java major . item , the 16 day of march we depart from the total of and Java major , and the 11 day of may we have sight buena Espe - and 4 ° league unto the eastwards of the cape of ranxa . buena esperanza , the land be low land . a note from the cape of buena esperanza unto the northward . of our abode TTem , the 21 day of may we depart from the cape herem1 ^ ® uena esperanza , and the 8 day of June we water anchor on the northwest part of the island of Santa Helena , where we water , and make our abode 12 day . item , the 20 day of June at night we depart day 14 . from the island of Santa Helena , and the 4 day of July we pass under the equinoctial line . 370 item , the 20 day of June at night we depart from the island of Santa Helena , and the 25 day of August in the morning we have sight of the island of Flores and 2 * 4 # space of Corvo in the latitude of 40 degree . ournavigation item , the 9 day of September 1588 we arrive , after iia ^ ewas a long and terrible tempest , in the narrow sea , in the threescore y haven of Plymouth in safety , by the gracious and most five day . merciful protection of the almighty , to who therefore be render immortali praise and thanksgiving now and for ever . amen . a note of our anker in those place where we arrive after our departure from England 1586 . hr = = = = = = | n primis , we anchor in the harbour of Sierra leona in 10 fathom water : and fathom 10 . a northwest wind in that road be the worst that can blow . item , you may anchor under the island that be call ilha Verde in 6 fathom fathom 6 . — — i water : and the wind be at the westnorthwest be the worst wind that can blow . item , you may anchor under the island of saint Sebastian on the northwest part in 10 fathom : and a Westsouth - fathom 10 . west wind be the worst wind . item , you may anchor in port desire in 5 fathom [ hl 835 . ] water , and a west and by south wind be the worst . fa < i ° ms 5 - item , you may anchor under cape joy without the mouth of the strait of Magellan in 7 fathom water . fathom 7 . item , you may anchor within the strait of Magellan , until you come unto the first narrow in 25 or 30 fathom 25 . fathom water , in the mid way of the strait . item , you may anchor in the second narrow of the strait in 16 fathom water . fathom 16 . item , you may anchor under Penguin island on which side you please in 6 or 7 fathom water . fathom 7 . item , you may anchor in port famine in 5 or 6 fathom fathom 6 . water , and a southsoutheast wind be the worst . item , you may anchor in muscle cove , which cove be on 371 the south side , and be 7 league to the southward of fathom 12 . cape froward , and you shall ride in 12 fathom . item , you may anchor in Elizabeth bay , which bay be on fathom 8 . the north side of the strait in 8 fathom water . item , from Elizabeth bay unto Cabo deseado , you may anchor on both side of the strait in many place . a note of our anker after we be enter into the south sea . in primis , you may anchor in the bay of Mocha in 7 or 8 fathom water , and there a north - east wind be the worst . item , you may anchor on the north side of saint mary fathom 9 island in nine fathom water : and there a northnorthwest wind be the worst wind . item , you may anchor in the bay of conception under fathom 9 one small island in 9 fathom water , and a northnorthwest wind be the worst wind in that bay . fathom 7 . item , you may anchor in the bay of Quintero in 7 fathom water , and a northnorthwest wind be the worst wind . fathom 6 . item , you may anchor in the bay of Arica in 6 fathom , and in that bay a westnorthwest wind be the worst wind . item , you may anchor in the bay of Pisca and Paraca fathom 5 . in five fathom : and in that bay a northnorthwest wind be the worst . fathom 8 . item , you may anchor in the bay of cherepe in 8 fathom , and there from the northwest unto the south . east it be open . fathom 7 . item , you may anchor in the bay of Paita in 7 fathom water : and there a northnortheast wind be the worst wind . item , you may anchor on the north - east part of the fathom 4 . island of Puna in 4 fathom : and a north - east wind be the worst . item , you may anchor at Rio dolce , where we water , fathom 10 . unto the eastwards of the island of Puna in 10 fathom . 372 a note of what depth we anchor in on the coast of new Spain . item , you may anchor in the port of Aguatulco in six fathom water : and a southsouthwest wind be fathom 6 . the worst . item , you may anchor in the port of saint Iago in 6 fathom 6 . fathom water : and a westsouthwest wind be the worst . item , you may anchor in the port of Natividad in 8 fathom 8 . fathom water : and a southeast wind be the worst . item , you may anchor on the bay of Xalisco in 9 fathom 9 fathom water : and a westsouthwest wind be the worst . item , you may anchor on the northwest part of the island of saint Andrew in 17 fathom water . fathom 17 . item , you may anchor under the island of Chiametlan in 4 fathom water : and a southeast wind be the worst . fathom 4 . item , you may anchor in the port of saint Lucas on the cape of California in 12 fathom water : and a fathom 12 . southeast wind be the worst . a note of what depth we anchor in , among the island of the philippinas . item , you may anchor on the southwest part of the island of Capul in 6 fathom water : and a west - fathom 6 . southwest wind be the worst . item , you may anchor all along the south part of [ three . 836 . ] the island of Panna in shall water , in the depth of io or 12 fathom . fathom 10 . item , you may anchor in the bay of Lago grande in seven fathom water , which bay be on the south side of the island of Panna . item , you may anchor at the east end of Java major in 16 fathom water , and a eastsoutheast wind be the fathom 16 . worst . item , you may anchor on the north part of the island of Santa Helena in 12 fathom water . fathom 12 . 373 * to you south side of the equinoctial . a note of our find of the wind for the most part of our voyage 1586 . n primis , from the 21 day of July unto the 19 day of August we find the wind at Northnortheast , be in the latitude of 7 degree . item , from the 19 day of August unto the 28 day of September , we find the wind for the most part be between the west and the southwest , be in * 24 degree . item , from the 28 day of September unto the 30 day of October , we find the wind between the north - east and the eastnortheast . item , from the 23 of November , from the island of saint Sebastian , unto the 30 day of November , we find the wind between the southeast and the southsoutheast , be in 36 degree . item , from the 30 day of November unto the 6 day of December , we find the wind to be between the west and the southwest . item , from the 6 day of December unto the first day of January , we find the wind for the most part between the north and the north - east , be then in the latitude of 52 degree . item , from the first day of January unto the 23 day of February , we find the wind to be between the northwest and the westsouthwest , we be all that time in the strait of Magellan . item , from the 23 day of February unto the first day of march , we find the wind to be between the south and the southeast , be then in the south sea in the latitude of 48 degree . item , from the first day of march unto the 7 day of march , we find the wind to be at the north and the northnortheast in the latitude of 43 degree . item , from the 7 day of march unto the 14 day of 374 march , we find the wind to be between the south and the southwest , in the latitude of 37 degree . item , from the 14 day of march unto the 28 day 1587 . of may , we find the wind to be between the south and the southwest , in the latitude of 3 degree to the south of the line . a note of the vary of our wind to the north of the equinoctial line on the coast of new Spain - item , from the 28 day of may unto the 5 day of July , we find the wind for the most part to be between the southsoutheast , and the southsouthwest , be in the latitude of 10 degree to the northward of the line on the coast of new Spain . item , from the 5 day of July unto the 14 day of October , we find the wind for the most part to be at the eastnortheast in the latitude of 23 degree northward , and almost under the tropic of cancer . a note of the wind which we find between the coast of new Spain and island of the philippinas on the coast of Asia . in the year of our lord 1587 we depart from the cape of Santa Clara on the coast of California the 19 day of November , and we find the wind to be between the east and the eastnortheast , until the 29 day of January ; depart then from the island of the philippinas , be in the latitude of 9 degree . item , from the 29 day of January unto the 19 day of march , we find the wind for the most part between the northnortheast and than northwest , be then among the land of Maluco , in the latitude of 9 degree . item , from the 19 day of march unto the 20 day of May , we find the wind for the most part between the south and the eastsoutheast , be then 375 between the land of Maluco , and the cape of buena esperanza , in the latitude of 34 degree to the south of the line . item , from the 20 day of may unto the 11 day [ three . 837 - ] of July , we find the wind for the most part between the south and the southeast , be then between the cape of buena esperanza , and 15 degree unto the southward of the line . item , from the 11 day of July unto the 18 day of August , we find the wind for the most part between the north - east and Eastnortheast , be then between the latitude of 15 degree to the southward of the line , and 38 degree unto the northward of the line .