item , in the latitude of 14 degree to the north of the line , you shall have sounding 4 league from the land in 30 fathom , brown sand . item , from the latitude of 14 degree unto the latitude of 15 degree , you shall have fair shoald 3 league from the land . sounding on the coast of Africa unto the eastward of the cape of buena esperanza 40 league . item , to the eastwards of the cape of buena esperanza 40 league , in the latitude of 34 degree and 10 minute , 8 league from the land , you shall have 65 fathom , and brown sand . [ A ought 355 a note of the lie of the land unto the southward of port desire . n primis , seal bay stand unto the southward of port desire 12 league southsouthwest . Furthermore , unto the southward of Seales bay 3 league , you shall have very low land . also more unto the southward of Seales bay 7 league , in the height of 48 degree 40 minute , you shall see a rock 5 league off the shore , the land lie southwest and by south . item , in the latitude of 49 degree you shall see a small flat island , about a league and a half off the shore , the land lie southwest and by south . Furthermore , from the latitude of 49 degree i unto the latitude of 50 degree , the land lie south and by west , and be high land . item , from the latitude of 50 degree unto the latitude of 50 degree 40 minute , the land lie southwest and by south . Furthermore , from the latitude of 50 degree 40 minute unto the latitude of 52 degree 17 minute , the land lie south and by west , north and by east . item , in the say latitude of 52 degree 17 minute , there go in a harbour , which be to be know by a long beache that lie on the south side of the harbour . Moreover , the say harbour stand 12 league unto the northward of cape joy . Furthermore , from the latitude of 52 degree 17 minute unto the latitude of 52 degree 40 minute ( in which heighth stand cape joy ) the land lie southsoutheast , and n orthnorthwest . item , come from the northward , you shall see before you come to cape joy , a very long beach , about the length of 8 league , be 5 league short of the cape unto the northward . also unto the southward of the cape , you shall see another beach about a league 356 long , adjoin hard under the cape ; about which beach be the entrance of the strait of Magellan , the which strait be in breadth six league over , from the cape unto the south shore , lie south and by east . item , from cape joy , be the entrance of the strait of Magellan , unto the first narrow passage of the say strait ; the course be west and by north , and east and by south , and be distant 18 league ; the land be in breadth from the one side to the other one league . item , from the first narrow unto the second narrow passage , the course be west and by south , and east and by north ; and the distance be 12 league : and in breadth the one side be from the other about two league over . item , from the second narrow unto the island that be call Elizabeth , Bartholomew , and Penguin island , the distance be 5 league , and the course be southwest and Northeast : the island be distant a league and a half the one from the other . item , from the say island unto port famine be 16 league : the course be southsouthwest , and northnortheast . Moreover , from port famine unto cape froward , the course be south and by west , and north and by east : and they be distant 8 league asunder . item , from cape froward unto saint Jeromes river , be 16 league : the course be northwest and southeast . also from saint Jeromes river unto the uttermost land on the south side , the which be call Cabo Deseado , the course be northwest and somewhat to the northward , and be distant 30 league . So the whole length of the strait of Magellan be 105 league . [ Iii . 829 . ] the entrance of the strait . the end of the strait . a note of the lie of the land in the south sea . in primis , there stand in the latitude of 52 degree and 50 minute , three or four island , about 8 league from Cabo Deseado : the course be northnorthwest , and 357 inn which height stand Quintero . 27 deg . 40 mi . in which height stand Copiapo . the english voyage southsoutheast . and those island stand in the mouth of the strait of Magellan , at the go into the south sea .. item , from the latitude of 52 degree 50 minute , unto the latitude of 51 degree , the land lie northnortheast , and southsouthwest . item , from the latitude of 50 degree untq the latitude of 38 degree and 30 minute , the land lie north - east and by north , Southwest and by south . item , from the latitude of 38 degree 30 minute unto the latitude of 37 degree 14 minute , the land lie north and south . item , from the island of saint marie , be in the latitude of 37 degree 14 min . unto the height of 36 degree 14 minute , in which height stand the bay of conception , the course be Northeast and Southwest , and the distance 12 league . item , from the latitude of 36 degree 40 minute unto the latitude of 35 degree 20 minute , the land lie north - east and by north , Southwest and by south . item , from the latitude of 35 degree 20 minute unto the latitude of 33 degree 30 minute , the land lie northnortheast , and southsouthwest . item , in the latitude of 34 degree you shall see about five mile off from the shore a bank of sand , on the which you shall have but shall water . item , from the latitude of 33 degree 20 minute unto the latitude of 29 degree 20 minute , the land lie northnortheast , and southsouthwest . item , from the latitude of 29 degree 20 minute unto the latitude of 27 degree 40 minute , the land lie northnortheast , and southsouthwest . item , in the latitude of 29 degree 20 minute , there lie two island distant 4 league asunder , and about one league from the main . item , from the latitude of 27 degree 40 minute unto the latitude of 23 degree 30 minute , the land lie north and by east , south and by west . 358 11 deg . 50 i . in which height stand the island oj Lobos . 5 . degree . in which height stand Paita . Thomas fuller ’ s note a . d . 1588 . from the latitude of 25 degree unto the of 23 degree and 30 minute , the land be very 23 ^ . 30 « « . in which from the latitude of 23 degree unto the of 22 degree , the land lie northnortheast , and southsouthwest . item , from the latitude of 22 degree unto the latitude of 18 degree and 30 minute , the land lie north and by 18 deg . 0 , 0 mi . east , south and by west . afab item , from the latitude of 18 degree 30 minute , unto et the latitude of 18 degree , the land lie northwest and by west , southeast and by east . item , from the latitude of 18 degree unto the latitude of 13 degree 30 minute , the land lie northwest and 13 deg . 30 mi . southeast : in which heighth there lie two or three island , whtc ^ which island lie off a place where be two town call Paraca , and Pisca . “ item , from the latitude of 13 degree 30 minute , unto the latitude of 11 degree 50 minute , the land lie northnorthwest , and southsoutheast . item , from the latitude of 11 degree 50 minute , unto [ three . 830 . ] the latitude of 6 degree , the land lie north and by west , south and by east . also you shall see two island , which be call the land of Lobos , that stand in the latitude of 6 degree . item , from the latitude of 6 degree , unto the latitude of 5 degree , the land lie northwest and by west , southeast and by east . item , from the latitude of 5 degree unto the latitude of 4 degree , the land lie northwest and southeast : in which height of 4 degree stand cape Blanco . item , from the latitude of 4 degree unto the latitude of 2 degree 50 minute ( in which latitude of 2 degree 50 minute stand the island of Puna ) the course be Northeast and Southwest . [ A ought 359 2 deg . 50 min . in which height stand the island of Puna . league 12 . league 80 . league 7 . league 55 . league 70 . league 90 . league 120 . league 71 . a note of the distance between certain place on the coast of Chili and Peru . HN primis , from the island of Mocha unto the island of saint mary , the course be north and south , and the distance be 25 league . item , from the island of saint marry unto the bay of conception , the course be Northeast and Southwest , and the distance be 12 league . item , from the bay of conception unto the port of Valpariso , the course be northnortheast and Southsouthwest , and the distance be 80 league . item , from the port of Valpariso unto the bay of Quintero , the course be Northeast and by north , and Southwest and south , and the distance be 7 league . in which bay of Quintero there lie one small island . item , from the bay of Quintero unto the bay of coquimbo , the course be Northnortheast , and southsouthwest , and the distance be 72 league : in which height stand two island . item , from the bay of coquimbo unto the bay of Copiapo , the course be northnortheast and Southsouthwest , and the distance be 55 league : in which height stand one island . item , from the bay of Copiapo unto the bay of Morro moreno , the course be northnortheast and Southsouthwest , and the distance be 70 league . item , from the bay of Morro moreno , unto the bay of Arica , the course be north and by east , south and by west , and the distance be 90 league : in which bay of Arica stand one small island . item , from the bay of Arica unto the bay of parraca , the course be northwest and southeast , and the distance be 120 league : in which bay of Parraca stand three or four island . item , from the bay of Parraca unto the bay of 360 1588 . Lima , the course be northwest and by north , southeast and by south , and the distance be 35 league : in league 35 . the bay of Lima be one island . item , from the bay of Lima unto the bay of cherrepe , the course be north and by west , south and by east , and the distance be 90 league . league 90 . item , from the bay of cherrepe unto the bay of Paita it be 45 league , the course be 20 leag west - league 45 . northwest unto two island that be call the island of Lobos , and from thence unto the bay of Paita it be 25 league , the course be north and by east . item , from Paita unto cape Blanco , the course be north and by west , south and by east , and the distance be 25 league . league 25 . item , from cape Blanco unto the island of Puna , the course be eastnortheast and Westsouth west , and the distance be 25 league : and you shall see one island that league 25 . be call Santa Clara , which stand 10 league to the league in all southward of Puna . « « 751 . a note of certain place unto the northward of the line . in primis , from cape Blanco unto cape S . Laurence , the course be north and by east , south and by west , and the distance 60 league . league 60 . item , from cape S . Lorenzo unto cape S . Francisco , the course be north and by east , south and by west , and the distance be 40 league . league 40 . item , from cape S . Francisco unto the cape that be call cape Blanco , which cape be on the coast of new Spain , the course be northnortheast and Southsouthwest , and the distance be 160 league : and you league 160 . shall have a great current that set out of the bay of Panama ; and the say current set south out . item , from cape Blanco unto the port de Veles , the course be Northeast and Southwest , and the distance 8 league . league 8 . 361 item , from the port de Veles unto the port of saint John , the course be northwest and southeast , and the league 17 . distance be 17 league . [ Iii . 831 . ] item , from the port of saint John unto Rio Lexo , the course be northwest , and southeast , and the distance be league 40 . 40 league . item , from Rio Lexo unto the gulf of Fonsecco , the course be westnorthwest , and eastsoutheast , and league 14 . they be distant 14 league . item , in the mouth of Rio Lexo there lie one island , and you must go in on the northwest part of that island ; on the which island you may be bold for to borrow on : and you must go from that island southeast up . item , that in the gulf of Fonsecco you shall have lie ten island , whereof three be people with Indian , whereon you may have water , wood , and salt . item , on the west side of the gulf of Fonsecco there be one town of Indian , which be call mapal , in which town there be great store of beef . item , from the river Lexo unto the bay of sonsonate , the course be east and west , and the distance be league 60 . 60 league . item , from the bay of sonsonate unto the port of Aguatulco , the course be northwest and by west , southleague 160 . east and by east , and the