in the midst , and the ground be much low by the seaside . the cape of good hope bear west and by south from the say Cabo Falso . the 16 . day of may about 4 . of the clock in the afternoon the wind come up at east a very stiff gale , which hold until it be Saturday with as much wind as ever the ship can go before : at which time by six of the clock in the morning we espy the pro - they double montorie or headland , call the cape de buena esperanza , ' bo ^^ which be a reasonable high land , and at the westermost point Speranza . a ^ e off the main do show two hammock , the one upon the other , and three other hammock lie further off into the sea , yet low land between and adjoin unto the sea . 342 this cape of buena esperanza be set down and accounted for two thousand league from the island of Java in the Portugal sea cart : but it be not so much almost by a hundred and fifty league , as we find by the run of our ship . we be in run of these eighteen hundred and fifty league just nine week . the eight day of June by break of day we fall in sight of the island of saint Helena , seven or eight league short of it , have but a small gale of wind , or almost none at all : insomuch as we can not get into it that day , but stand off and on all that night . the next day be the 9 of June have a pretty easy gale of wind we stand in with the shore , our boat be send away before to make the harbour ; and about one of the clock in the afternoon we come unto a anchor in 12 . fathom water two or three cable length from the shore , in a very fair and smooth bay under the northwest side of the island . this island be very high land , and lie in the main sea stand as it be in the midst of the sea between the main land of Africa , and the main of Brasilia and the coast of Guinea : and be in 15 . degree and 48 . minute to the southward of the equinoctial line , and be distant from the cape of buena esperanza between 5 . and 6 . hundred league . the same day about two or three of the clock in the afternoon we go on shore , where we find a marvelous fair and pleasant valley , wherein diverse handsome building and house be set up , and especial one which be a church , which be tile and white on the outside very fair , and make with a porch , and within the church at the upper end be set a altar , whereon stand a very large table set in a frame have in it the picture of our saviour Christ upon the cross and the image of our lady pray , with diverse other history curious paint in the same . the side of the church be all hang with stain clothes have many devise draw in they . A . D . 1588 . from Java to the cape of bona speranda it but 1850 . league . June 1588 . they anchor at the island of . Helena the t ) . of June . 8 . Helena be in the latitude of 15 . degree 48 . min . to the southward . 343 there be two house adjoin to the church , on each side one , which serve for kitchen to dress meat in , with necessary room and house of office : the cover of the say house be make flat , whereon be plant a very fair vine , and through both the say house run a very good and wholesome stream of fresh water . there be also right over against the say church a fair causey make up with stone reach unto a valley by the seaside , in which valley be plant a garden , wherein grow great store of pompion and melon : and upon the say causey be a frame erect whereon hang two bell wherewith they ring to mass ; and hard unto it be a cross set up , which be square , frame and make very artificial of free stone , whereon be carve in cipher what time it be build , which be in the year of our lord 1571 . this valley be the fair and large low plot in all the island , and it be marvelous sweet and pleasant , and plant in every place either with fruit tree , or with herb . there be fig tree , which bear fruit continual , and marvelous plentiful : for on every tree you shall have blossom , green fig , and ripe fig , all at one : and it be so all the year long : the reason be that the island Thegreatstore stand so near the sun . there be also great store of diverse of lemon tree , orange tree , pomegranate tree , pomecitron tree , date tree , which bear fruit as the fig tree do , and be plant careful and very artificial with very pleasant walk under and between they , and the say walk be overshadow with the leaf of the tree : and in every void place be plant parceley , [ three . 824 . ] sorel , basil , fennel , annis seed , mustard seed , radish , and many speciali good herb : and the fresh water brook run through diverse place of this orchard , and may with very small pain be make to water any one tree in the valley . this fresh water stream come from the top of the mountain , and fall from the cliff into the valley 344 the height of a cable , and have many arm out of it , which refresh the whole island , and almost every tree in it . the island be altogether high mountain and steep valley , except it be in the top of some hill , and down below in some of the valley , where marvelous store of all these kind of fruit before speak of do grow : there be great store grow in the top of the mountain then below in the valley : but it be wonderful laboursome and also dangerous travel up unto they and down again , by reason of the height and steepen esse of the hill . there be also upon this island great store of partridge , abundance of which be very tame , not make any great haste to fly in away though one come very near they , but only to run away , and get up into the steep cliff : we kill some of they with a fowl piece . they differ very much from our partridge which be in England both in bigness and also in colour . for they be within a little as big as a hen , and be of a ash colour , and live in covy twelve , sixteen , and twenty together : you can go ten or twelve score but you shall see or spring one or two covy at the least . there be likewise no less store of fesant in the island , great store of which be also marvelous big and fat , surpass those fesants - which be in our country in bigness and in number of a company . they differ not very much in colour from the partridge before speak of . we find moreover in this place great store of guinie turkle in cock , which we call turkey , of colour black and white , ereatluant ^ t - with red head : they be much about the same bigness which we be off in England : their egg be white , and as big as a Turkey egg . there be in this island thousand of goat , which the exceed Spaniards call cabritos , which be very wild : you shall number of see one or two hundred of they together , and sometime s ° ati ' you may behold they go in a flock almost a mile long . some of they , ( whether it be the nature of the breed of they , or of the country i wot not ) be as big as 345 the english voyage a ass , with a main like a horse and a beard hang down to the very ground : they will climb up the cliff which be so steep that a man will think it a thing unpossible for any live thing to go there . we take and kill many of they for all their swiftness : for there be thousand of they upon the mountain . here be in like manner great store of swine which be very wild and very fat , and of a marvelous bigness : they keep altogether upon the mountain , and will very seidome abide any man to come near they , except it be by mere chance when they be find asleep , or otherwise , accord to their kind , be take lay in the mire . we find in the house at our come 3 . slave which be negro , and one which be bear in the island of Java , which tell we that the east Indian fleet , which be in number 5 . sail , the least whereof be in burden 8 . or 900 . ton , all lade with spice and calicut cloth , with store of treasure and very rich stone and pearl , be go from the say island of saint Helena but 20 . day before we come thither . this island have be find of long time by the por - tugals , and have be altogether plant by they , for their refresh as they come from the east Indies . and when they come they have all thing plentiful for their relief , by reason that they suffer none to inhabit there that may spend up the fruit of the island , except some very few sick person in their company , which they stand in doubt will not live until they come home , who they leave there to refresh themselves , and take away the year follow the other fleet if they live so long . they touch here rather in their come home from the east Indies , then at their go thither , because they be thorough furnish with corn when they set out of Portugal , but be but mean victual at their come from the Indies , where there grow little corn . the 20 . day of June have take in wood and water and refresh our self with such thing as we find there , 346 1588 . and make clean our ship , we set sail about 8 . of the clock in the night towards England . at our set sail we have the wind at southeast , and we hale away northwest and by west . the wind be common off the shore at this island of saint Helena . on Wednesday be the third day of July we go July 1588 . away northwest the wind be still at southeast ; at which time we be in 1 . degree and 48 minute to the southward of the equinoctial line . the twelve day of the say month of July it be very little wind , and towards night it be calm and blow no wind at all , and so continue until it be Monday , be the 15 . day of July . on Wednesday the 17 . day of the abovesaid month we have the wind scant at west northwest . we find the wind continual to blow at east , and Northeast , and eastnortheast after we be in 3 . or 4 . degree to the [ three . 825 . ] northward ; and it alter not until we come between 30 . and 40 . degree to the northward of the equinoctial line . on Wednesday the 21 . day of August the wind come up at Southwest a fair gale : by which day at noon we be in 38 . degree of northerly latitude . on Friday in the morning be the 23 . day of August , at four of the clock we hale east , and east and by south for the northermost island of the azore . on Saturday the 24 . day of the say month by 5 . of the clock in the morning we fall in sight of the two island of Flores and Corvo stand in 39 degree and Corvo and flo - and sail away Northeast . reptwoyland the three of September we meet with a flemish hulk e zores ' which come from Lisbon , and declare unto we the overthrow of the spanish fleet , to the singular rejoice and comfort of we all . the 9 of September , after a terrible tempest which carry away most part of our sail , by the merciful favour of the almighty we recover our long wish port of Plymouth in England , from whence we set forth at the begin of our voyage .