be come so near , all our company that live in the college , in the house of probation , and in the seminary , shall depart to some other place . and the Christians from Miac6 write daily unto we , that we shall pull down our house and church at Omura , arima , and Cansaco , and that the father of Europe shall return unto nangasaque in the secular habit of Portugal , but that the japonian friar shall retire themselves unto several house of Christians , that so they may all remain safe and out of danger . but this remedy , as it be too grievous and subject to many difficulty , so do it afford we but small comfort . in brief the father visitor talk of this matter with 428 eucunocamindono , the lord Protasius , and omurandono , before their expedition towards the kingdom of Coray , find they , as before , in the same fortitude of mind , be constant in their first opinion : neither will they give any other counsel or direction , then that the father shall keep themselves secret , and shall only forsake their house at Arima , and Omura , wherein the Toni or great lord will have some of their kinsman remain . it be also think convenient , that the number of the seminary shall be diminish , and that of 90 there shall only remain 50 in our school , namely such as study the latin tongue . with the father visitor [ three . 857 . ] there come unto nangasaque certain father and friar , which be say to be of Fungo and Firando . for the say father under the name of a legate may retain they with he more open . about this time quabacondono , that he may with some pastime recreate his noble which accompany he ; and also may declare , with how great confidence and security of mind he take upon he this expedition for China ; and likewise to obscure the most renown fame of a certain hunt and hawk perform of old by that mighty prince Joritono , who be emperor over all Japan ; he determine to ordain ( as it be ) another royal court of diverse kind of fowl . whereupon being accompany with many great lord and other , he depart to the kingdom of Oiaren , where his game have so good success , that he catch above 30000 . fowl of all sort ; among which be many falcon . howbeit , for quabacondono his great recreation , and for the more solemnity of the game , there be also add many dead fowl , which the japonians with certain poulder or mean to composition know how to preserve sweet in their feather a long time . this game be end , Quaba - - m t ^ ir condono return with great pomp unto Miac6 ; before feather a long who go great multitude which carry those thou - time . sand of fowl upon guild cane . next after these follow many horseman sumptuous attire , carry 429 of great number of falcon and other bird . after they be lead many horse by the reins , most rich trap . next of all be bring coscis or littier very stately adorn : after which be carry quabacondono himself in a litty of another fashion , like unto those which in India be call palanchin , which be make in China , with most curious and singular workmanship , and be present unto he by the father visitor , and seem exceed to content he , for that in all action of solemnity he use the same . last of all follow a great troop of prince and noble brave mount on horseback , and gorgeous attire , thereby the more to delight quabacondono , who in triumphant sort be welcome by the way , with the shout and applause of infinite swarm of people , enter the city of Miac6 . now when the time of sail towards China approach , quabacondono determine first to proclaim his nephew inangondono his successor , and governor of all Japan , to the end he may supply his own room in the time of this war . and therefore he command the dairi to transfer unto his say nephew the dignity belong to himself , call he by the name of Taicusama , that be to say , great lord . which dignity be in such sort translate , that albeit he assign unto his nephew large revenue , together with that princely title , yet himself remain the very same that he be before . the day of the say translation be appoint , he summon all the prince of Japan to appear , and to swear obedience unto this his nephew : who with great pomp go unto the dairi to receive that dignity at his hand , have surrendered unto he the castle of Miac6 , and the palace of quabacondono to dwell in . thus at the begin of the three moon , he set forward on his journey to Nangoia , have before give order , that Augustine shall pass over into the kingdom of Coray , and that his other captain shall remain in Ceuxima . wherefore , the twenty day of the three moon he come unto Nangoia , where the company 43 ° of the other lord be number , be find to be 200000 . person , beside those that be conduct by the four foresay governor . in the mean season Augustine with his force , and with a fleet of eight hundred fleet of ship , arrive at Coray . in who army the lord Pro - 8 ° 0 - tasius excel all other ; for though he have but the lead of 2000 soldier , yet for the goodness of his armour , and the beauty of his ship , he be admire of all man . at their very first entrance they win 2 . castle of the kingdom of Coray by main force , wherein the corayans repose great confidence ; for they be environ with mighty high wall , and defend with great multitude of soldier , and with a kind of gun gun of 2 . span and long , which in stead of bullet wtth discharge with a terrible noise wooden arrow head arrow with fork point of iron : but the say gun be able to hurt but a small distance off , and the japonians be furnish with brazen ordinance unknown unto the corayans , they present drive they from their wall , and with ladder make for the same purpose of great cane , they forthwith scale the same , and plant their ensign thereon ; the corayans indeed for a short time make resistance , but after a while betake themselves to dishonourable flight , 5000 man of their part be slay , and of augustines but 100 and 400 . wound . Augustine perceive that the corayans can not endure any long assault , determine to take upon himself , and his army the whole burden and honour of this war , and not stay for the governor his associate , to march up into the heart of the kingdom , and to the principali city ; [ three . 858 . ] unto which determination all the lord that be with he give their consent . this be ( no doubt ) a bold , yea , and in some sort , a rash enterprise of Augustine : but yet it argue a wise and valiant mind in he . but this long delay be so grievous to the captain which in Ceuxima expect the success of the war , that before they hear any news at all concern the surprise of the two castle , they bring Augustine in suspicion among 431 their friend , that he ambitious affect the honour of the whole war . which thing be know unto quabacondono , he be so trouble in mind even before he come to Nangoia , that sudden he command the other captain to set sail from Ceuxima . but when quabacondono be come to Nangoia , and hear news of the two castle take , and that Augustine pursue they the significa - victory proceed on towards the Miaco , that be to say , time of Miaco . cltie of Coray , and be determine to invade the same also ( all which Augustine himself write , and request he to send the other captain and commander to assail the kingdom on all side , and to furnish the castle which he have take and shall take , with garrison of soldier , because as yet he have not man enough to hold those fortress which he have win ) he be surprise with such unspeakable joy , as he affirm open , that in all Japan he have no subject comparable to Augustine : and that neither Nabunanga , nor himself ever know any man endue with so valiant and courageous a mind . i ( say he ) know against who and with what force i wage war , subdue by little and little all Japan unto i : but Augustine in so short a time and with so small force , have bold set his foot in a foreign region , and with most glorious victory have subdue the mighty kingdom of Coray . wherefore ( quoth he ) i will reward he with many kingdom , and will make he next unto my self the great prince in all Japan . he add far , that now his own son seem to be rise from the death : and that whosoever dare either disgrace or extenuate the deed of Augustine , he will grievous punish he , not respect whether he do it upon reason or malice . by this speech the name and report of Augustine grow so honourable among all man , that those which most envy his estate , dare not speak one ill word of he , but high commend he before q ^ bacondono . breadth of this kingdom or Coray extend in length about Coray . roo . and in breadth 60 . league . and albeit the inhabi - 432 tants in nation , language , and strength of body ( which make the people of China to dread they ) be different from the chinians , yet because they pay tribute to the king of China , and exercise traffic with his subject , they do after a sort imitate the law , apparel , custom , and government of the chinians . they border on one side upon the Tartar , and other nation , with who sometime they have peace , and sometime war : but with the chinians they have continual peace . they be speciali good bowman ; but at other weapon , because they have but few , and those bad , they be nothing so skilful . wherefore they be not comparable to the japonians , who by reason of their war be continual exercise in arm , and be by nature more courageous and valiant , be furnish with iron - piece , with lance , and with excellent sword . only in ship they be inferior to the corayans and chinians , by reason of the hugeness of their ship which they use upon the sea . wherefore , if they be to join battle by sea , there be no doubt but that both the foresay nation will be too the people of hard for they . but now because they know nothing of an the come of the japonian army , or for that they str ^ er in doubt that their sea - force be the strong , or else ship , then because God be determine to punish they , he suffer they of Japan . they to be destitute of all the defence of their ship , so that the japonians without any resistance land upon their dominion . now the fame of augustines victory cause the army notable to increase , and the mariner , and many other which carry burden ( as they be train up in war from their childhood ) bear arm , while the corayan captive supply their base office : so great a terror possess all the people of Coray where Augustine come , that all the castle and fortress which he pass by be forsake by their garrison , and all man flee for refuge to the principali city . and while other commander and Christians send from Ceuxima and Nangoia shape their course for Coray , Augustine have pitch his camp near xi 433 2 e the king of Coray flee out of his frin - cipall city . [ HL 859 . ] the english voyage unto the foresay principali city : of the which be come within 3 . day journey , he be encounter by 20000 man ; who at the very first assault , have slay 3000 . of they , he put to flight . but approach very near unto the city , and have pass a river , he maintain a valiant conflict at a certain narrow passage against 80000 . Corayans , 8000 . whereof be slay , and a great number drown in the river . here while Augustine appoint all his troop to remain for two day , to the end they may somewhat refresh their weary limb , the king of Coray see himself besiege by his enemy , and that many other japonian lord with strong army invade his kingdom on all side , determine to have his city strengthen with garrison , and to retire himself into the inland of China . which by reason of the abundance of horse that he have , he be able right com - modiously to perform . whereupon the second or three day after , Augustine without any resistance enter the head - city , be present with great store of victual and gift by they that remain therein . thus Augustine , with other captain his associate , become lord of the principali city , and win all the honour of the victory unto himself : for albeit by this time the other captain be come from Ceuxima , and many from Nangoia , yet they find all thing perform to their hand . quabacondono be advertise of this second victory , yield as much honour unto Augustine as he can possible devise , speak so high to the