and withal many horse , ox , bullock , sheep very fat and fair , great store of goat which be very tame , and be use continual to be milk . they have moreover abundance of pigeon , turkey , and duck of a marvellous bigness . there be also a very large and great church hard by the cacique house , whither he cause all the Indian in the hand to come and hear mass : for he himself be make a Christian when he be marry to the spanish woman before speak of , and upon his conversion he cause the rest of his subject to be christen . in this church be a high altar with a crucifix , and five bell hang in the nether end thereof . we burn the church and bring the bell away . 316 by this time we have hale on ground our admiral , and have make she clean , burn her keel , pitch and tar she , and have hale she on float again . and in the mean while continual keep watch and ward in the great house both night and day . the second day of June in the morning , by and by after break of day , every one of the watch be go abroad to seek to fetch in victual , some one way , some another , some for hen , some for sheep , some for goat , upon the sudden there come down upon we a hundred spanish soldier with musket and a ensign , which be land on the other side of the hand that night , and all the Indian of the hand with they , every one with weapon and their baggage after they : which be by mean of a negro , who name be Emmanuel , which flee from we at our first land there . thus be take at advantage we have the worst : for our company be not pass sixteen or twenty ; whereof they have slay one or two before they be come to the house : yet we skirmish with they a hour and a half : ’ at the last be sore overcharge with multitude , we be drive down from the hill to the water side , and there keep they play a while , until in the end Zacharie Saxie , who with his halberd have keep the way of the hill , and slay a couple of they , as he breathe himself be somewhat tire , have a honourable death and a short : for a shot strike he to the heart : who feel himself mortal wound cry to God for mercy , and fall down present dead . but soon after the enemy be drive somewhat to retire from the bank side to the green : and in the end our boat come and carry as many of our man away as can go in she , which be in hazard of sink while they hasten into it : and one of our man who name be Robert Maddock be shoot through the head with his own piece , be a snaphance , as he be haste into the boat . but four of we be left behind which the boat can not carry : to wit , my self 317 A . D . 1587 . the second grave of their shift . the first skirmish with the Spaniard . z . acharie saxie slay honorable . Robert Maddock slay with his own piece . Francis pretty , Thomas Andrew , Steven gunner , and Richard rise : which have our shot ready and retire our self unto a cliff , until the boat come again , which be present after they have carry the rest 46 Spaniard aboard . there be six and forty of the enemy ‘ slaine ^ 0 ™ s ^ a ^ ne by we , whereof they have drag some into ane ' bush , and some into old house , which we find afterward . we lose twelve man in manner follow . 1 Zacharie Saxie , 2 neale Johnson , 3 William Geirgifield , 4 Nicolas Hendie , 5 Henry Cooper , k slay by the enemy . 1 Robert Maddock , kill with his piece . 2 Henry mawd , burn . 1 Edward the gunner man , 1 drown 2 Ambrose the musician , i it baptize Walter tilliard , 2 Edward Smith , > take prisoner . 3 Henry aselye , i [ three . 814 . ] the self same day be the second of June , we go the second on shore again with seventie man , and have a fresh skir - skirmish with mjsh with the enemy , and drive they to retire , be a t e pamar shilling . hundred Spaniards serve with musket , and two hundred Indian with bow , arrow and dart . this do , the chief set fire on the town and burn it to the ground , tbw - ntnpuna have in it to the number of three hundred house : ‘ and short after make havoc of their field , orchard and garden , and burn four great ship more which be in building on the stock . the three of June the content which be our viceadmiral be hale on ground , to grave at the same place in despite of the Spaniard : and also our pinnace t , . , which the Spaniard have burn , be new trim . etPmtk e five day of June we depart out of the road 25 of May . of Puna , where we have remain eleven day , and 318 turn up for a place which be call Rio dolce , where we water : at which place also we sink our rear - admiral call the huge gallant for want of man , the Hugh be a bark of forty ton . arkeofo the ten day of the same month we set the Indian on shore , which we have take before in a balsam as we be come into the road of Puna . the eleven day we depart from the say Rio Rio dolce . dolce . the twelve of June we double the equinoctial line , and continue our course northward all that month . the first of Julie we have sight of the coast of Nueva Espanna , be four league distant from land in the latitude of ten degree to the northward of the line . the nine of Julie we take a new ship of the burden of 120 ton , wherein be one Michael Sancius , who our general take to serve his turn to water along the coast : for he be one of the best coaster in the south sea . This Michael Sancius be a Pro - Michael vensal , bear in Marseils , and be the first man that Ancius a tell we news of the great ship call the Santa arst ian ' Anna , which we afterward take come from the philippinas . there be six man more in this new ship : we a great new take her sail , her rope , and firewood , to serve our burn . turn , set she on fire , and keep the man . the ten we take another bark which be go the second with advice of we and our ship all along the coast , barheofadvise as Michael Sancius tell we : but all the company that 1 ' be in the bark be flee on shore . none of both these ship have any good in they . for they come both from sonsonate in the province of Guatimala ; sonsonate in the new ship , for fear we shall have take she in the road , and the bark , to carry news of we along ' the coast ; which bark also we set on fire . abarkeburnt . the 26 day of July we come to a anchor at 10 fathom in the river of Copalita , where we make account the river of to water . and the same night we depart with 30 319 Aguatulco in 15 degree and 40 minute northward . a barkebumt . anile . Cacoas . Aguatulco a town of 100 house burn . Cacaos go for money in Nueva Espanna . Oure general enter two mile into the main land with 30 man . the english voyage man in the pinnace , and row to Aguatulco , which be but two league from the aforesaid river ; and stand in 15 degree 40 minute to the northward of the equinoctial line . the 27 in the morning by the break of day we come into the road of Aguatulco , where we find a bark of 50 ton , which be come from sonsonate lade with cacaos and anile which they have there land : and the man be all flee on shore . we land there , and burn their town , with the church and customhouse which be very fair and large : in which house be 600 bag of anile to dye cloth ; every bag whereof be worth 40 crown , and 400 bag of cacaos : every bag whereof be worth ten crown . Theise cacaos go among they for meat and money . for 150 of they be in value one rial of plate in ready payment . they be very like unto a almond , but be nothing so pleasant in taste : they eat they , and make drink of they . This the owner of the ship tell we . i find in this town before we burn it , a flasket full of box of balm . after we have spoil and burn the town , wherein there be some hundred house , the owner of the ship come down out of the hill with a flag of truce unto we , which before with the rest of all the townsman be run away at our first come ; and at length come aboard our pinnace upon captain Havers word of safe return . we carry he to the river of Copalita where our ship ride : and when he come to our general , he cause he to be set on shore in safety the same night , because he come upon the captain word . the 28 day we set sail from Copalita , because the sea be so great there , that we can not fill water , and run the same night into the road of Aguatulco . the 29 our general land and go on shore with thirty man two mile into the wood , where we take a mestizo , who name be Michael the Truxillo , who be customer of that town , and we find with he two chamber full of his stufie : we bring he 320 and he stuff aboard . and whereas i say he be a mestizo , it be to be understand that a mestizo be one which have a Spaniard to his father and a Indian to his mother . the second day of August , we have water , and examine the say mestizo , and set he on shore again and depart from the port of Aguatulco the same night , which stand as i say before in 15 degree and 40 minute to the northward of the line . here we overslip the haven of Acapulco , from whence the ship be set forth for the philippinas . the four and twenty day of August , our general with 30 of we go with the pinnace unto a haven call Puerto de Natividad , where we have intelligence by Michael Sancius that there shall be a pinnace , but before we can get thither the say pinnace be go to fish for pearl 12 league far , as we be inform by certain Indian which we find there . we take a mullato in this place , in his bed , which be send with letter of advice concern we along the coast , of Nueva Galicia , who horse we kill , take his letter , leave he behind , set fire on the house , and burn two new ship of 200 ton the piece , which be in build there on the stock , and come aboard of our ship again . the six and twenty day of August , we come into the bay of saint Iago , where we water at a fresh river , along which river many plantan be grow : here be great abundance of fresh fish . here also certain of our [ three . 815 . ] ourdeparture from Aguatulco . Puerto de Natividad in 19 degree . thethirdposte of advice take . Puerto de Natividad burn . two new ship burn . the river of Sant Iago . company drag for pearl and catch some quantity . pearl take . the second of September we depart from Sant Iago at four of the clock in the evening . this bay of Sant Iago stand in nineteen degree and eighteen minute to the northward of the line . the 3 of September we arrive in a little bay a league to the westward off port de Natividad call Malacca , and a3 ° f which be a very good place to ride in : and the same day Malacca . about twelve of the clock our general land with xi 321 the isle of Sant Andrew . i guanos good meat . Massatlan in