distance 160 league . item , from the bay of Coppeleto unto the port of league z . Aguatulco it be 2 league , the course be west and by north , east and by south . item , from the port of Aguatulco unto the port of angel , the course be east and west , and they be league 12 . distant 12 league . item , from the port of Aguatulco unto the port of Acapulco , the course be west and by north , east and league 78 . by south , and the distance be 78 league . item , from the port of Acapulco unto the port of saint Iago , the course be west and by north , east and league 80 . by south , and the distance be 80 league . item , from the port of saint Iago unto the port of 362 1588 . Natividad , the course be east and west , and the distance be 7 league . league 7 . item , from the port of Natividad unto the port of the island of Chiametla , the course be east and west , and the distance be 10 league . league 10 . item , from the island of Chiametla unto Cape de los Corrientes , the course be northwest and by west , southeast and by east , and the distance be 30 league . league 30 . item , from the cape de los Corrientes unto the bay of Xalisco , the course be Northnortheast , and southsouthwest , and the distance be 18 league . league 18 . item , from the bay of Xalisco unto the port of Chiametlan , the course be northnortheast and Southsouthwest , and the distance be 30 league . league 30 . item , from the cape de los Corrientes unto the island call las tres Maria , the course be northwest and southeast , and the distance be 20 league . league 20 . item , from the cape de los Corrientes unto the cape of Santa Clara on the point of California , the course be westnorthwest , and eastsoutheast , and the distance be 108 league . league 108 . a note from the coast of America unto the westwards . item , from the cape of Santa Clara unto the island of the ladrone , the course be west and by south , east and by north , and the distance between they be 1850 iMpm league . l85 ° - item , that the southermost island of the ladrone stand in the latitude of 12 degree and 10 minute , and from thence unto the northermost island , the course be northnortheast and Southsouthwest , and the distance between they be 200 league : and the say northermost island stand in 21 degree 10 minute . item , from one of the island of the ladrone , which stand in the latitude of 13 degree and 50 minute , which island be call * guaihaime , unto the cape de Spirito or Guana . 363 santo , which cape be upon one of the island of the fillip — pina , the course be west and to the southward , and the league 320 . distance be 320 league . item , from the cape of Spirito santo unto the mouth of the entrance of the strait of the philippinas , the course be west and by north , east and by south , and league 15 . the distance be 15 league . item , from the mouth of the strait unto the island league 6 . Capul , the course be southwest and by west 6 league . item , from the island of Capul unto the north head of the island call masbat , the course be northwest and league 15 . southeast , and the distance between they be 15 league . item , from the north head of the island call masbat l unto the island call Sebojon , the course be westsouth - league 1 » all west and eastnortheast , and the distance between they 2414 . be 15 league . [ Iii . 832 . ] a note of our course keep from the island Sebojon unto the southward . item , from the island of Sebojon unto the east end of the island call Pannay , the course be southeast and by south , northwest and by west , and the distance be league 22 . 22 league . item , that off the easter end of the island of Pannay there lie certain small island , unto the number of 12 or moor , and you shall have shall water among they . item , from the easter end of Pannay unto a bay that be call the bay of Lago grande , on the same island , the course be westsouthwest , and eastnortheast , league 18 . and the distance be 18 league . item , from the bay of Lago grande unto the island league 6 . that be call Ysla de los Negros , be the distance of 6 league southeast and northwest . item , from the bay of Lago grande unto three small island that stand in the latitude of 10 degree , the course be south and by west 12 league . Furthermore , from those three island unto the westermost end of Ysla de league 10 . los negro , the course be southwest and Northeast 10 364 1588 . league , where we be clear of the island of the philippinas . item , from the south end of Ysla de los negro unto the north head of the island call Mindanao , the course be south and north , and the distance be 30 league 30 . league . item , from the north end of Mindanao unto the south head of the say island , which be call cape Cannal , the course be south and by west , north and by east , and the distance be 26 league . league 26 . item , from the cape of Cannal between the south and the westsouthwest about 10 or 12 league off you league 12 . shall have great store of small island , about the number of 24 or moor . item , from the cape of Cannal unto the cape of batochina , the course be southsouthwest , and northnortheast , and the distance be 100 league , and between they set league 100 a great current unto the eastward . item , from the cape of Batochina unto the west head of Java minor , the course be southwest and by south , Northeast and by north , and the distance between they be 220 league . league 220 . item , from the west end of Java minor unto the east end of Java major , the course be west and by north , and east and by south , and the distance between they be 18 league : in the which course there lie one league 18 . * island between they , which island be in length 14 * this be the league . ofbaly . item , from the east end of Java major unto the cape of buena esperanza , the course be west and by south , and westsouth west , and the distance between £ easues they be 1800 league . j8oo . item , that cape Falso stand 30 league to the league 30 . eastward of cape de buena esperanza , and off the say cape Falso you shall have shoald 20 league off in 80 or 90 fathom , and the course be from cape Falso unto the cape of buena esperanza westnorthwest and league in all eastsoutheast . be 2292 - 365 league 1200 . a note of the distance and course from the cape of buena esperanza unto the northward . item , from the cape of buena esperanza unto the island of Santa Helena , the course be northwest , and northwest and by west , and the distance between they be 600 league . item , from the island of Santa Helena unto the island of Flores , the course between they be northnorthwest , and northwest and by north , and the distance between they be 1200 league . item , from the island of Flores unto the land end of England , the course be between the eastnortheast , and the north - east and by east , and the distance between they be four hundred and fifty league . a note of the variation of our compass . n primis , the variation of our compass on the coast of new Spain in the south sea in the latitude of 12 degree , be one point to the eastwards . item , the variation of our compass between the cape of California and the island of the philippinas , be one point and a half unto the eastward , that be , that the north do stand north and by east , and half a point unto the east . item , the variation of our compass between the island of Maluco and the cape of buena esperanza , be two point and a half at the most to the westward , that be , that the northnortheast be our north . 366 a note of our time spend in sail between [ he . 833 . ] certain place out of England , 1586 . n primis , we be sail between England and the coast of Guinea from the 21 day of July unto the 26 day of August unto the haven call Sierra leona , where we water and stay until the 6 day of September . item , we depart from the coast of of our abode ten day where we water . Guinea for the coast of Brasil the 10 day of September , and we have sight of the coast of Brasil the 26 day of October , be six league to the northward of cape Frio : and from thence we be sail unto the island of saint Sebastian until the 31 and last day of October , where we water and set up our pinnace : and we of our abode anchor on the northwest part of the island in ten four fathom , and stay there until the 23 day of November , item , the 23 day of November we depart from the water . island of Sant Sebastian , keep our course south and by west unto the port that be call port desire , where we arrive the 17 day of December ; in which port we grave our ship : and we stay there until ° four the 28 day of December , where we anchor in 5 fathom . item , the eight and twenty day of December we - a ^ our depart from the port of desire towards the strait of ship . Magellan , where we arrive the three day of January : and we remain in the strait until the four and twenty day of February ; where we water in many place on the south side , have the wind all that while between the Westsouth west and than northwest . item , we depart out of the strait the 24 day of February towards the island of Mocha , which island we have sight of the 14 day of march . item , the 14 day of march at night we anchor in the bay of marrocco ; where we ride in 9 fathom water . item , the 15 day of march we anchor in the island of saint marie , on the north part of the island in f01 * ™ 367 of our abode two in fifAe day , where we water . of our abode eight fathom water , black sand , where we stay four day . item , the 19 day of march we depart from the island of saint marie , and the same day we anchor in the bay of conception , where we stay until the next day : and there we ride in ten fathom water , shingle stone . item , the 20 day of march we depart from the bay of conception , and the thirty day of march we of our abode arrive in the bay of Quintero , where we water : 6 day , where anj there the first day of April we have twelve of our we wa re . man s ] a ; nej being on land for water : and we stay there six day : and we anchor in 7 fathom water , white sand . of our abode item , we depart from the bay of Quintero the 5 day three day . qf April , and we arrive at the bay of Arica the 24 day of April , and we anchor in 7 fathom water . of our abode item , the 27 day of April we depart from the bay of two day . Arica , and the three day of may we arrive in the bay of Pisca , and we anchor in 4 fathom water in oaze . of our abode item , the 5 day of may we depart from the bay of six day . Pisca ) and the 12 day we anchor in the bay of cherrepe , where we anchor in 7 fathom water , in white sand . of our abode item , the 18 day of may we depart from the bay of one day . cherrepe , and the 20 day of may we arrive in the bay of Payta , where we anchor in 6 fathom water . item , the 20 day of may we depart from the bay of Paita , and the 26 day of may we anchor at the island of Puna , and we anchor in 5 fathom . of our abode item , from the island of Puna we depart the four watered * ^ une Unt ° °^ ce main , where we ' water , and we anchor in 10 fathom water , brown sand . of our abode item , the 12 day of June we depart from the place % day , where where we water , be bind for the coast of new we water , gpaine , and the 29 day of July we arrive in the port of Aguatulco , where we water , and anchor in 6 fathom water . 368 item , the 3 day of August we depart from the port of Aguatulco , and the 26 day of August we arrive at the port of saint Iago , where we water , and stay of our abode there until the second day of September , and anchor in 7 wbere o radom . item , the 2 of September we depart from the port of saint Iago , and the 3 day of September we put into a port one league unto the westwards of Natividad , where of our abode we anchor in 8 fathom water . one day . item , the 4 day of September we depart from the ° / ° ur “ bode port of Natividad , and the 7 day of September we put three into the bay of Xalisco , where we anchor in 9 fathom water , and the 10 day of September we depart from the [ he . 834 ] bay of Xalisco , and the 12 day of September our anchor at the island of saint Andrew , where we anchor in 17 fathom water . item , the 17 day of September we depart from of our abode the island of saint Andrew , and the 24 day of September we put into the bay of