concern the mighty kingdom of Coray , tributary to the king of China , and borther upon his north - east frontier , call by the Portugal Coria , and by they esteem at the first a island , but since find to adjoin with the main not many day journey from Paqui the metropolitan city of China . the more perfect discovery whereof and of the coast of Tartary northward , may in time bring great light ( if not full certainty ) either of a northwest or a north - east passage from Europe to those rich country . collect out of the Portugal Jesuit yearly japonian epistle date 1590 , 1591 , 1592 , 1594 , etc the first testimony contain a resolute determination of quabacondono the great monarch of all Japan , to invade and conquer China by the way of Coray , be a country divide from the isle of Japan only by a arm of the sea about twenty league broad , and abound with victual and all other necessary for the maintenance of the war . out of the epistle of father Frier Lewis Frois , date 1590 . uabacondono have subdue all the petty kingdom of Japan , in the year of our lord 1590 ( as father Frier Lewis Frois write in his japonian epistle of the foresay year ) grow so proud and insolent that he seem another Lucifer ; so far forth , that he make a solemn vow and oath , 422 that he will pass the sea in his own person to conquer China : and for this purpose he make great preparation , say , that since he be become lord of all Japan , he have nothing now to do but to conquer China , and that although he shall end his life in that enterprise , he be not to give over the same . for he hope to leave behind he hereby so great fame , glory , and renown , as none may be comparable thereunto . and though he can not conquer the same , and shall end his life in the action , yet shall he always remain immortali with this glory . and if God do not cut he off , it be think very , that he will thorough attempt the same . and for his more secure passage thither , he be determine to leave behind he two governor ( after his manner ) in the part of Miac6 with the administration of Finqua ; and of those of his monarchic he say that he will take with he all the great japonish lord , or at the least all his principali subject , and leave in his dominion such guard and garrison as shall seem best unto he . and so have pass the winter , he mean to come to these part ofXimo , for from hence he be to set forth his army , Ximo . and : to pass to the land of Coray , which the Portugal Coray con - call Coria , be divide from Japan with a arm of the sea . and although the Portugal in time past thought , m a ^ ut ' that it be a lie or Peninsula , yet be it firm land , which join unto the kingdom of Paqui . and he have now strike such a terror with his name in the country of Coray , that the king thereof have send his ambassador hither to yield unto he a kind of homage , as he require ; which ambassador be now in the city of Miac6 . and by this Peninsula of Coray he may pass FromCorayan with his army by land in few day journey unto the city of Paqui , be the principali city where the king of - tn fa day China have his residence . and as the chinians be weak , to Paqui then and the people of Japan so valiant and fear of they , if of God do not cut he off in this expedition , it may fall china - out accord to his expectation . 423 but whatsoever become of China , it be hold for a certainty , that his come will cause great alteration in these part of Ximo , especial in this kingdom of Figen , wherein be the princedom of Arima and Omura , and all the force of our christianity : and he tell don Protasio when he be with he once before , that he will make he a great man in China , and that he will remove these lord , and deliver their government unto lord that be gentile ; which will be the ruin of all this christianity ; neither shall we have any place wherein to remain . for , as it be the custom of Japan in the alteration of estate and kingdom ( which they call Cuningaia ) to remove all the nobility and gentry , and to leave only the base people and labourer , commit they to the government of ethnic , we shall hereby also lose our house , and the Christians shall be disperse with their lord ; who sometime he handle in such sort , that he give they nothing to sustain themselves , and so they remain with all their follower , as man banish , and utter ruin . the second testimony contain the huge levy and preparation of quabacondono , as also his war and conquest , and the success thereof in the kingdom of Coray . together with a description of the same kingdom , and of their traffic and manner of government : and also of the ship of China , Japan , and Coray , with mention of certain isle thereunto adjacent , and other particular very memorable . out of the epistle of the aforesaid father friar Luis Frois date 1591 , and 1592 . a bout this time quabacondono determine to put his war against China in execution , assemble sundry of his noble and captain , unto who he declare his intent ; who , albeit they be all of a quite contrary 424 opinion , yet all of they without any pretense of difficulty approve his determination . for he have give out that he will not abstain from this war , although his own son shall rise from death to life and request he ; yea whosoever will move any impediment or difficulty in that matter , he will put he to death . wherefore for certain month there be nothing in all place to be see , but provision of ship , armour , munition , and other necessary for the war . quabacondono make a catalogue of all the lord and noble his subject , will every one of they ( not a man except ) to accompany he in this expedition , enjoin and appoint to each one , what number they shall bring . in all these kingdom of Ximo he have nominate 4 of his especial favourite ; who ( to all man admiration ) he will have to be head over all these new kingdom , notwithstanding that here be 4 other far more mighty than they . of who ( by God good providence ) two be Christians , to wit , Augustine eucunocamindono governor of half the kingdom of Finga , and cainocami the son of quambioindono governor of the great part of the kingdom of Bugen . the other two be ethnique , namely Toranosuque governor of the half of the kingdom of Finga and augustins mortali enemy ; and Iconocami governor of the residue of the kingdom of Bugen , and a enemy both to Augustine and Cainocami . and quabacondono have command all the christian lord of Teximo to follow christian governor . whereupon the lord Protasius be there with 2000 soldier ; and omurandono the lord of Ceuxima and augustins son in law , which late become a christian , with a thousand . also he appoint that the governor of Firando and Goto shall follow Augustine , who albeit they be Gentiles , have many Christians to their subject . wherefore Augustine be to conduct 15000 soldier , beside mariner , slave , and other base people to carry the baggage of the army , all which be as great a number as the former , so soon as they arrive in the kingdom of 425 the english voyage Coray , be make soldier , and bear arm . unto the say Augustine , quabacondono , in token of singular favour , grant the first assault or invasion of the kingdom of Coray , to wit , that he only with his force may enter the same , the other lord remain in Ceuxima ( which be 18 league distant from Coray ) till they shall be advertise from Augustine : which thing procure unto Augustine great envy and disdain from they all ; howbeit ( as you shall forthwith understand ) it prove in the end most honourable unto he . the other christian governor Cainocami be but a young man of 23 year , he command the king of Bungo to follow with 6000 soldier ; so that with the 4000 which he have before , his number amount unto 10000 , beside mariner and other which carry burden . this be most joyful news to we , and to all the Christians . of the ethnic lord quabacondono appoint the governor of Riosogo together with Foranosuque to march with 8000 : and likewise the king of Sazeuma and Iconocami with as many . and among all he give the first and chief place unto Augustine . all the other soldier of Japan he cause to accompany his own person : the number of all together ( as appear out of a write catalogue ) amount to three hundred thousand person : of who two hundred thousand be soldier . the order prescribe in this whole army be , that first they shall make their entrance by the kingdom of Coray , which be almost a island , one end whereof join upon the main land of China ; which though it be a several kingdom of it self , yet be it subject and tributary unto the king of China . and because this kingdom of Coray be divide but by a arm of the sea from Japan , quabacondono determine to subdue the same , for that it so abound with victual , that from thence he may the easy invade china . while all thing be prepare , it be command , that at the chief port of Ximo call Nangoia , be twelve league distant from Firando , there shall be erect a mighty 426 great castle ; where quabacondono with all his fleet be mind to stay , till news be bring of the success of the aforesaid 4 governor or captain . he appoint also another castle to be build in fuchinoxima , which be another island situate between Nangoia and Ceuxima . and he build a three castle in Ceuxima , that his passage may be the more commodious . the charge of build these castle he impose upon the 4 aforesaid governor , and command the other lord of Ximo their associate to assist they ; all which so apply that business , that in 6 month space it be whole finish . the castle of Nangoia be environ with a double wall of square and beautiful stone , with broad and deep ditch like unto Miac6 . the innermost wall be less than the other two be 100 fathom square , within the compass whereof be so many house build both for the lord , and their follower , and also for merchant shop , and victualler house , distinguish with broad and direct street , that it seem a fair town . but ( that which be much more admirable ) all the way from Miac6 to Nangoia , at the end of every day journey , all the lord and governor , at the commandment of quabacondono , build each one within his jurisdiction new and stately palace from the ground , so that for 20 day together he lodge every night with all his train in one of those palace . and because these thing be do at the very same time when the expedition into the kingdom of Coray be in hand , all Japan be so grievous oppress ( quabacondono in the mean while be at no charge ) as it be most intolerable . yet be it incredible how ready every one be to do he service : which appear by these magnificent stately building rear up in so short a space , which in Europe will have require a long time and huge expense . in the mean season it be common give out , that this enterprise of quabacondono will have most unfortunate success , as be a matter wrought by constraint , and that it will be a occasion of manifold dissension in Japan : for no man there be , but 427 mislike of this war : yea , all the lord be in great hope , that some one man at length will step forth and restore their liberty ; howbeit there be none as yet find , which dare put his hand to that business . wherefore they be all ( though to their great grief and lamentation ) violent constrain to prosecute the enterprise . but quabacondono be void of all anxiety , to the end he may encourage his follower , boast that he will make great alteration of kingdom , and will bestow upon they the kingdom of Coray and China ; and unto the lord Protasius he have promise 3 kingdom : but he with all the other lord give he great thanks , have much rather retain a small portion of their estate in Japan , than to hunt after all those kingdom which he promise . and whereas quabacondono have by proclamation publish , that he will personal be present at Nangoia the 3 moon of this year ; troop and army of man begin to resort from all the quarter of Japan to these part . now be our affliction renew . for so long as quabacondono remain at Miac6 , we may stay in these part of Ximo without any danger : but after he begin to come this way , it seem impossible for our state to continue whole and sound , and we be put into no small perplexi tie . for the christian lord advise we , that sithence quabacondono