A testimony of the right and appendances of the crown of the kingdom of Britaine , taken out of M. Lambard his & pKatovotda , fol. 137. page . 2. 
 ARthurus qui fuit quondam inclytissimus Rex Britonum , vir magnus fuit & animosus , & miles illustris . Parum fuit ei regnum istud , non fuit animus ejus contentus regno Britanniae . Subjugavit igitur sibi strenue Scantiam totam , quae modo Norweia vocatur , & omnes insulas ultra Scantiam , scz . Islandiam , & Grenlan-diam , quae sunt de appendiciis Norweiae , & Suechordam , & Hyberniam , & Gutlandiam , & Daciam , Semelandiam , Winlandiam , Curlandiam , Roe , Femelandiam , Wirelan-diam , Flandriam , Cherelam , Lappam , & omnes alias terras & insulas , Orientalis Oceani usque Russiam ( in Lappa scilicet posuit Orientalem metam regni Britanniae ) & multas insulas ultra Scantiam , usque dum sub Septentrione , quae sunt de appendicibus Scantiae , quae modo Norweia vocatur . Fuerunt autem ibi Christiani occult . Arthurus autem Christianus optimus fuit , & fecit eos baptizari , & unum Deum per totam Norweiam venerari , & unam fidem Christi semper inviolatam custodire , & suscipere . Ceperunt universi proceres Norweiae uxores suas de nobili gente Britonum tempore illo , unde Norwegienses dicunt se exiisse de gente & sanguine regni hujus . Impetravit enim temporibus illis Arthurus rex a domino Papa , & a Curia Romana , quod confirmata sit Norweia , in perpetuum coronae Britanniae in augmentum regni hujus , vocavitque illam dictus Arthurus Cameram Britanniae . Hac vero de causa dicunt Norwegienses , se debere in regno isto cohabitare & dicunt se esse de corpore regni hujus , scilicet de corona Britanniae . Maluerunt enim manner in regno isto , quam in terra eorum propria . Terra enim eorum arida est , & montuosa , & sterilis , & non sunt ibi segetes nisi per loca . Ista vero opulenta est , & fertilis , & crescunt hic segetes , & caetera universa . Qua ex causa saepius per vices gesta sunt bella 
 5 
 A.D. 
 5I7 - 
 atrocissima inter Anglos & Norwegienses , & interfecti sunt innumerabiles . Occupaverunt vero Norwegienses terras multas & insulas regni hujus , quas adhuc detinent occupatas , nec potuerunt unquam postea penitus evelli . Tandem modo confederati sunt nobis fide , & sacramento , & per uxores suas , quas postea ceperunt de sanguine nostro , & per affinitates , & conjugia . Ita demum constituit , & eis concessit bonus rex Edouardus propinquus noster ( qui fuit optimus filius pacis ) per commune consilium totius regni . Qua de causa possent , & debent praedicti de caetero nobiscum cohabitare , & remanere in regno , sicut conjurati fratres nostri . 
 The same in English . 
 ARthur which was sometime the most renowned king of the Britains , was a mighty , and valiant man , and a famous warrior . This kingdom was too little for him , & his mind was not contented with it . He therefore valiantly subdued all Scantia , which is now called Norway , and all the Islands beyond Norway , to wit , Island and Greenland , which are aPPERTAINING unto Norway , Sweveland , Ireland , Gotland , Denmarke , Semeland , Windland , Curland , Roe , Femeland , Wireland , Flanders , Cherilland , Lapland , and all the other lands & Islands of the East sea , even unto Russia ( in which Lapland he placed the Easterly bounds of his British Empire ) and many other Islands beyond Norway , even under the North pole , which are appendances of Scantia , now called Norway . These people were wild and savage , and had not in them the love of God nor of their neighbours , because all evil comes from the North , yet there were among them certain Christians living in secret . But king Arthur was and exceeding good Christian , and caused them to be baptised , and throughout all Norway to worship one God , and to receive and keep inviolably for ever , faith in Christ only . At that time all the noble men of Norway took wives of the noble nation of the Britaines , whereupon the Norses say , that they are descended of the 
 raze and blood of this kingdom . The aforesaid king Arthur obtained also in those days of the Pope & court of Room , that Norway should be for ever annexed to the crown of Britaine for the enlargement of this kingdom , and he called it the chamber of Britaine . For this cause the Norses say , that they ought to dwell with us in this kingdom , to wit , that they belong to the crown of Britaine : for they had rather dwell here then in their own native country , which is drieand full of mountains , and barren , and no grain growing there , but in certain places . But this country of Britaine is fruitful , wherein corn and all other good things do grow and increase : for which cause many cruel battles have be oftentimes fought betwixt the Englishmen and the people of Norway , and infinite numbers of people have be slain , & the Norses have possessed many lands and Islands of this Empire , which unto this day they do possess , neither could they ever afterwards be fully expelled . But now at length they are incorporated with us by the receiving of our religion and sacraments , and by taking wives of our nation , and by affinity , and marriages . For so the good king Edward ( who was a notable maintainer of peace ) ordained and granted unto them by the general consent of the whole kingdom , so that the people may , and ought from henceforth dwell and remain in this kingdom with us as our loving sworn brothers . 
 