Wolstans navigation in the | | East sea , from Hetha to Trusco , which is about Dantzig . 
 | | Within the found of Denmarke . 
 Olstan said , that he departed from Hetha , and arrived at Trusco , in the space of 7. days , and 7. nights : during which time , his ship kept her course continually under sail . All this voyage Wenedland was still upon his steerboord , and on his leerboord was Langland , Layland , Falster , 
 and Sconie : all which countries are subject to Denmarke . Upon his leerboord also , was Bargenland , which hath a Bargenland , private king , unto whom it is subject . Having left Bar - or Bornholme . genland , he passed by Blekingie , Mere , Eland and Gotland , having them on his leerboord : all which countries' are subject to Sweden : and Wenedland was all the way upon his steerboord , until he came to Wixel mouth . Wixel Wixel is the is a very great river which runneth along betwixt Witland and Wenedland . Witland is aPPERTAINING to the Easter - 1 e 
 lings : and the river of Wixel runneth out of | | Wenedland Dantzig . into Eastmeere , which Eastmeere is at the least 15. miles | | Or , Prussia . in breadth . There runneth also another river called Using from the East , and falls into Eastmeere , out of another lake upon the bank , whereupon is situated Fruso . So Fruso . that Using coming out of II Eastland , and Wixel out of | | Or , Wenedland , fallen both together into Eastmeere , and there tuania . Wixel depriveth Using of his name , and runneth thence West & North into the sea ; whereof the place is called Wixelmouth . 
 Eastland is a very large land , and there be many cities The descrip-and towns within it , and in every one of them is a king : whereby there is continually among them great strife as and ' 
 and contention . There is great plenty of honey and fish . 
 Mares milk a The wealthiest men drink commonly Mares milk , and chief dnnke . poor people and slaves mead . There is no ale brewed among the Easterlings , but of mead there is plenty . 
 