The voyage of Thomas of Woodstocke Duke of Glocester into Prussia , in the year 1391. written by Thomas Walsingham . 
 | | Filius natu minimus Edwardi 3. 
 Reditus . 
 Odem tempore dux Gloverniae Dominus II Thomas de Woodstock , multis moerenti-bus , iter apparavit versus le Pruys : quern non Londinensium gemitus , non communis vulgi moeror retinere poterant , quin proficisci vellet . Nam plebs communis tam Urbana quam rustica metuebant quod 
 eo absent aliquod novum detrimentum succresceret , quo praesente nihil tale timebant . Siquidem in eo spes & solatium totius patriae reposita videbantur . Ipse vero mox , ut fines patriae suae transiit , illico adversa agitatus fortuna , nunc hic nunc illae turbinibus procellosis circumfertur ; & in tantum destituitur , ut de vita etiam desperaret . Tandem post Daciam , post Norwagiam , post Scoticam barbariem non sine mortis pavore transcursam , pervenit Northumbriam , & ad castellum se contulit de Tinnemutha velut assylum antiquitiis notum sibi : ubi per aliquot dies recreatus , iter assumpsit versus manerium suum de Plashy , magnum apportans gaudium toti regno , tam de ejus evasione , quam de adventu suo . 
 The same in English . 
 AT the same time the Duke of Glocester Lord Thomas of Woodstock ( the youngest son of Edward the third ) to the great grief of many , took his journey towards Prussia : whom neither the Londoners mones nor yet the lamentation of the commonalty could restrain from his intended expedition . For the common people both of the City and of the country feared lest in his absence some new calamity might happen ; which they feared not while he was present . For in him the whole nation seemed to repose their hope and comfort . Howbeit having scarce passed as yet the bounds of his own 306 
 country , he was immediately by hard fortune tossed up and down with dangerous storms and tempests , and was brought into such distress , that he despaired even of his own life . At length , having not without danger of death , sailed along the coasts of Denmarke , Norway , and Scotland , he returned into Northumberland , and went to the castle of Tinmouth as unto a place of refuge known of old unto him : where , after he had refreshed himself a few days , he took his journey towards his Manor of Plashy , bringing great joy unto the whole kingdom , aswell in regard of his safety as of his return . 
 