The voyage of Nicholas de Lynna a Franciscan Friar , and and excellent Mathematician of Oxford , to all the Regions situate under the North pole , in the year 1360. and in the reign of Edward the 3. king of England . 
 The words of Gerardus Mercator , in the foot of his general Map , upon the description of the Uorth parts . 
 Uod ad descriptionem partium Septentrionalium attinet , eam nos accipimus ex Itinerario Jacobi Cnoyen Buscodu-censis , qui quaedam ex rebus gestis Arthuri Britanni citat , majorem autem partem & potiora , a Sacerdote quodam apud Regem Noruegiae , An. Dom. 1364. 
 didicit . Descenderat is ex illis quos Arthurus ad has habitandas insulas miserat , & referebat , An. 1360. Mino-ritam quendam Anglum Oxoniensem Mathematicum in eas insulas venisse , ipsisque relictis ad ulteriora arte Magica profectum descripsisse omnia , & Astrolabio dimensum esse in hanc subjectam formam fere , uti ex Jacobo collegimus . Euripos illos quatuor dicebat tanto impetu ad interiorem voraginem rapi , ut naves semel ingressae nullo vento retroagi possent , neque vero unquam tantum ibi ventum esse , ut molae frumentariae circumagendae sufficiat . Simillima his habet Giraldus 301 
 Cambrensis ( qui floruit , An. 1210. ) in libro de mirabilibus Hyberniae , sic enim scribit . Non procul ab insulis Hebridibus , Islandia , etc. ex parte Boreali , est maris quaedam miranda vorago , in quam a remotis partibus omnes undique fluctus marini tanquam ex condicto fluunt , & recurrunt , qui in secreta naturae penetralia se ibi transfundentes , quasi in Abyssum vorantur . Si vero navem h^c forte transire contigerit , tanta rapitur , & attrahitur fluctuum violentia , ut eam statim irrevocabiliter vis voracitatis absorbeat . 
 Quatuor voragines hujus Oceani , a quatuor oppositis mundi partibus Philosophi describunt , unde & tam marinos fluctus , quam & ASolicos flatus causaliter pervenire nonnulli conjectant . 
 The same in English . 
 TOuching the description of the North parts , I have taken the same out of the voyage of James Cnoyen of Hartzevan Buske , which allegeth certain conquests of Arthur king of Britaine : and the most part , and chiefest things among the rest , he learned of a certain priest in the king of Norwayes court , in the year 1364. This priest was descended from them which king Arthur had sent to inhabit these Islands , and he reported that in the year 1360 , a certain English Friar , a Franciscan , and a Mathematician of Oxford , came into those Islands , who leaving them , and passing further by his Magical ! Art , described all those places that he saw , and took the height of them with his Astrolabe , according to the form that I ( Gerard Mercator ) have set down in my map , and as I have taken it out of the aforesaid James Cnoyen . He said that those foure Indraughts were drawn into and inward gulf or whirlpool , with so great a force , that the ships which once entered therein , could by no means be driven back again , and that there is never in those parts so much wind blowing , as might be sufficient to drive a Corn mill . 
 Giraldus Cambrensis ( who flourished in the year 1210 , 
 302 
 under king John ) in his book of the miracles of Ireland , hath certain words altogether alike with these , videlicet : 
 Not far from these Islands ( namely the Hebrides , Island etc. ) towards the North there is a certain wondered whirlpool of the sea , whereinto all the waves of the sea from far have their course and recourse , as it were without stop : which , there conveying themselves into the secret receptacles of nature , are swallowed up , as it were , into a bottomless pit , and if it chance that any ship do pass this way , it is pulled , and drawn with such a violence of the waves , that eftsoons without remedy , the force of the whirlpool devoureth the same . 
 The Philosophers describe foure indraughts of this Ocean sea , in the foure opposite quarters of the world , from whence many do conjecture that as well the flowing of the sea , as the blasts of the wind , have their first originali . 
 A.D. 
 1360. 
 There is a notable whirlpool on the coast of Norway , called Malestrande , about the latitude of 68. 
 