The voyage of Henry Earl of Derbie , after Duke of Hereford , and lastly king of England , by the name of Henry the fourth , An. Dom. 1390. into Prussia and Lettowe , against the infidels , recorded by Thomas of Walsingham . 
 Ominus Henricus Comes de Derbie per idem tempus profectus est in le Pruys , ubi cum adjutorio marescalli dictae patriae , & cujusdam Regis vocati Wytot devicit exercitum Regis de Lettowe , captis qua-tuor ducibus , & tribus peremptis , & amplius quam trecentis , de valentioribus 
 exercitus supradicti pariter interemptis . Civitas quoque vocatur II Will , in cujus castellum Rex de Lettowe nomine Skirgalle confugerat , potenti virtute dicti Comitis maxim , atque suorum capta est . Namque qui fuerunt de familia sua primi murum ascenderant , & vexillum ejus super muros , caeteris vel torpentibus vel ignorantibus , posuerunt . Captaque sunt ibi vel occisa quatuor millia plebanorum , fratre Regis de Poleyn inter caeteros ibi perempto , qui adversarius nostri fuit . Obsessumque fuit castrum dictae Civitatis per quinque hebdomadas : said propter infirmitates , quibus vexabatur exercitus magistri de Pruys & de Lifland noluerunt diutius expectare . Facti sunt Christiani de gente de Lettowe octo . Et magister de Lifland duxit secum in suam patriam tria millia captivorum . 
 fl Alias Vilna . 
 An. Dorn . 
 139° . 
 3°4 
 A Bout the same time L. Henry the Earl of Derbie travailed into Prussia , where , with the help of the Marshal of the same Province , and of a certain king called Wytot , he vanquished the army of the king of Lettowe , with the captivity of foure Lithuanian Dukes , and the slaughter of three , beside more then three hundred of the principali common soldiers of the said army which were slain . The City also which is called Wil or Vilna , into the castle whereof the king of Lettow nam Skirgalle fled for his safeguard , was , by the valour of the said Earl especially and of his followers , surprised and taken . For certain of the chief men of his family , while others were slothful or at least ignorant of their intent , scaling the walls , advanced his colours thereupon . And there were taken and slain foure thousand of the common soldiers , and among others was slain the king of Poland his brother , who was our professed enemy . And the castle of the foresaid City was besieged for the space of five weeks : but by reason of the infirmities and inconveniences wherewith the whole army was annoyed , the great master's of Prussia and of Lifland would not stay any longer . There were converted of the nation of Lettowe eight persons unto the Christian faith . And the master of Lifland carried home with him into his country three thousand captives . 
 