A testimony of certain privileges obtained for william of the English and Danish Merchants of Con - imsb . iib . radus the Emperor and John the Bishop of Rome by Canutus the King of England Anglorum . in his journey to Room , extracted out of a letter of his written unto the Clergy of England . 
 It vobis notum quia magna congregatio nobilum in ipsa solemnitate Pascali , Romae cum Domino Papa Joanne , & imperatore Conrado erat , scilicet omnes principes gentium a monte Gargano , usque ad istum proximum Mare : qui omnes me & honorifice suscepere , & 
 magnificis donis honoravere . Maxim autem ab imperatore donis variis & muneribus pretiosis honoratus sum , tam in vasis aureis & argenteis , quam in palliis & vestibus valde pretiosis . Locutus sum igitur cum ipso imperatore , & Domino Papam , & principibus qui ibi erant , de necessitatibus totius populi mei , tam Angli quam Dani , ut eis concederetur lex aequior , & pax securior in via Romam adeundi , & ne tot clausuris per viam arcerentur , & propter injustum teloneum fatigarentur . Annuitque postulatis Imperator , & Rodul-phus Rex , qui maxim ipsarum clausurarum dominatur , cunctique principes edictis firmarunt , ut homines mei tam Mercatores , quam alii orandi gratia viatores , absque omni anguria clausurarum & teloneariorum , cum firma pace Romam eant & redeant . 
 The same in English . 
 YOu are to understand , that at the feast of Easter , there was a great company of Nobles with Pope John and Conradus the Emperor assembled at Rome , namely all the Princes of the nations from mount Garganus unto the West Ocean sea . Who all of them 313 
 Garganus a mountain of Apulia in Italic . 
 honourably entertained me , and welcomed me with rich and magnificent gifts : but especially the Emperor bestowed diverse costly presents and rewards upon me , both in vessels of gold and silver , and also in cloaks and garments of great valve . Wherefore I conferred with the Emperor himself and the Pope , and with the other Princes who were there present , concerning the necessities of all my subject's both Englishmen and Danes ; that a more favourable law & secure peace in their way to Room might be granted unto them , and that they might not be hindered by so many stops & impediments in their journey , and wearied by reason of injust exactions . And the Emperor condescended unto my request , and King Rodulphus also , who hath greatest authority over the foresaid stops and straights , and all the other princes confirmed by their Edicts , that my subject's , as well Merchants , as others who travailed for devotions sake , should without all hinder - 
 ance and restraint of the foresaid stops and customers , 
 go unto Room in peace , and return from thence in 
 safety . 
 