The league between Carolus Magnus and Offa King of Mercia concerning safe trade of the English Merchants in all the Emperors Dominion . This Offa died in the year of our Lord 795. 
 Ffa interea Carolum magnum Regem 
 Malmsbur . de gestis Regum Anglorum lib . 1. cap . 4. 
 Francorum frequentibus legationibus amicum paravit : quamvis non facile quod suis artibus conduceret in Caroli animo 
 invenerit . Discordarunt antea , adeo ut magnis motibus utrobique concurrentibus , etiam negociatorum commeatus prohiber - 
 entur . Est Epistola Albini hujusce rei index , cujus 
 Navigatio interdicta . 
 Negotiatorum Anglicanorum patrocinium . 
 partem hic apponam . 
 Nesico quid de nobis venturum sit . Aliquid enim dissentionis diabolico fomento inflammante , nuper inter Regem Carolum & Regem Offam exortum est : ita ut utrinque navigatio interdicta negociantibus cesset . Sunt qui dicant nos pro pace in illas parts mittendos . Et nonnullis interpositis , Nunc , inquit , ex verbis Caroli foedus firmum inter eum & Offam compactum subjiciam . Carolus gratia Dei Rex Francorum , & Longobardorum , & patricius Romanorum , viro venerando & fratri 
 charissimo Offae Regi Merciorum salutem . Primo gratias agimus omnipotenti deo , de salute animarum , de Catholicae fidei sinceritate , quam in vestris laudabiliter paginis reperimus exaratam . De peregrinis vero qui pro amore Dei , & salute animarum suarum beatorum Apostolorum limina desiderant adire , cum pace sine omni perturbation vadant . Said si aliqui , non religioni servientes , sed lucra sectantes , inveniantur inter eos , locis opportunis statuta solvant telonia . Negociatores quoque volumus ut ex mandato nostro patrocinium habeant in Regno nostro legitime . Et si aliquo loco injusta affligantur oppression , reclament ad nos vel nostros judices , & plenam videbimus justitiam fieri . 
 310 
 IN the mean season Offa by often legacies solicited Charles le maigne the king of France , to be his friend : albeit he could not easily find king Charles any whit inclined to further and promote his crafty attempts . Their minds were so alienated before , that , bearing haughty stomachs on both parts , even the mutual traffic of Trajfyue their Merchants was prohibited . The Epistle of Albinus tnhtblted-is a sufficient testimony of this matter : part whereof I will here put down . 
 I know not ( quoth he ) what will become of us . For there is of late , by the instigation of the devil , some discord and variance sprung up between king Charles and king Offa : insomuch that sailing to and from is forbidden unto the Merchants of both their dominions . Navigation Some say that we are to be sent , for the obtaining of a firbn < tien-peace , into those parts . And again , after a few lines . Now ( quoth he ) out of Charles his own words , I will make report of the league concluded between him and Offa. 
 Charles by the grace of God king of the Franks and Lombards and Senator of the Romans , unto the reverend and his most deer brother Offa king of the Mercians sends greeting . First we do render unto almighty God most humble thanks for the salvation of souls , and the sincerity of the Catholic faith , which we , to your great commendation , have found signified in your letters . As touching those pilgrimss , who for the love of God and their own souls health , are desirous to resort unto the Churches of the holy Apostles , let them go in peace without all disturbance . But if any be found among them not honouring religion , but following their own gain , they are to pay their ordinary customs at places convenient . It is our pleasure also and commandment , that your merchants shall have lawful patronage and protection in our dominions . Who , if in any place they chance to be afflicted with any injust oppression , let them 
 311 
 a league between Carol . Mag. and K. 
 Offa. 
 Protection of the English Merchants . 
 make their supplication unto us , or unto our Judges , and we will see justice executed to the full . 
 