The league between Henry the second and Fredericke Barbarossa Emperor of Germanic , wherein is mention of friendly traffic between the Merchants of the Empire and England , confirmed in the year of our Lord 1157. recorded in the first Book and seventeenth Chapter of Radevicus Canonicus Frisingensis , being and appendix to Otto Frisingensis . 
 Bidem tunc affuere etiam Henrici Regis Angliae missi , varia & preciosa donaria multo lepore verborum adornata praestantes . Inter quae papilionem unum quantitate maximum , qualitate optimum perspeximus . Cujus si quantitatem requiris , non nisi machinis & instru - 
 mentorum genere & adminiculo levari poterat : si qualitatem , nec materia nec opere ipsum putem aliquando ab aliquo hujusce apparatu superatum iri . Literas quoque mellito sermon plenas pariter direxerat , quarum hic tenor fuit . Praecordiali amico suo , Frederico Dei gratia Romanorum imperatori invictissimo , Henricus Rex Angliae , dux Normanniae , & Aquitania ? , & Comes Andegavensis , salutem , & verae dilectionis concordiam . Excellentiae vestrae quantas possumus referimus grates , dominantium optime , quod nos nunciis vestris visitare , salutare literis , muneribus praevenire , & quod his charius amplectimur , pacis & amoris invicem dignatus estis foedera inchoare . Exultavimus , & quodammodo animum nobis crescere , & in majus sensimus evehi dum vestra promissio , in qua nobis spem dedistis , in disponendis Regni nostri negociis , alacriores nos reddidit , & promptiores . Exultavimus inquam , & tota mente magnificentiae vestrae assurreximus , id vobis in sincero cordis affectu respondentes , quod quicquid ad honorem vestrum spectare noverimus , pro posse nostro effectui mancipare 316 
 parati sumus . Regnum nostrum , & quicquid ubique nostras subjicitur ditioni vobis exponimus & vestrae committimus potestati , ut ad vestrum nutum omnia disponantur , & in omnibus vestri fiat voluntas imperii . Sit igitur inter nos & populos nostros dilectionis & pacis unitas indivisa , commercia tuta : Ita tamen ut vobis , qui dignitate praeminetis , imperandi cedat authori-tas , nobis non deerit voluntas obsequendi . Et sicut vestrae Serenitatis memoriam vestrorum excitat in nobis 
 1157. 
 Commercia inter Germanos W Anglos . 
 munerum largitio , sic vos nostri quoque reminisci praeoptamus , mittentes quae pulchriora penes nos erant , & vobis magis placitura . Attendite itaque dantis affectum , non data , & eo animo quo dantur accipite . De manu beati Jacobi , super qua nobis scripsistis , in over magistri Hereberti & Guilielmi Clerici nostri verbum posuimus . Teste Thoma Cancellario apud Northanton . 
 The same in English . 
 THere were present also the same time , the messengers of Henry king of England presenting diverse rich and precious gifts , and that with great learning & eloquence of speech . among the which we saw a pavilion , most large in quantity , & most excellent in quality . For if you desire to know the quanti tie thereof , it could not be erected without engines and a kind of instruments , and main force : if the quality , I think there was never any furniture of the same kind , that surpassed the same either in stuff or workmanship . The said king directed his letters also , full of sugared speeches , the tenor whereof was this that folioweth . 
 To his entirely beloved friend Frederick by the grace of God Emperor of the Romans most invincible , Henry king of England , duke of Normandie and Aquitaine , Earl of Anjou wishes health and concord of sincere amity . We do render unto your highness ( most renowned and peerless Prince ) exceeding great thanks for that you have so graciously vouchsafed by your messengers to visit us , in your letters to salute us , with your gifts to prevent us , and ( which we do more highly esteem of then all the rest ) to begin a league of peace and friendship between us . We rejoiced , and in a manner sensibly felt our selves to be greatly emboldened , and our courage to increase , whilst your promise , whereby you put us in good comfort , did make us more cheerful and resolute , in managing the affairs of our kingdom . We rejoiced ( I say ) & in our secret cogitations did humble obeisance unto your Majesty , giving you at this time to understand from the sincere 8c unfeigned affection of our heart , that whatsoever we shall know to tend unto your honour , we are , to our power most ready to put in practice . Our kingdom , and whatsoever is under our jurisdiction we do offer unto you , and commit the same unto your highness , that all matters may be disposed according to your direction , and that your pleasure may in all things be fulfilled . Let there be therefore between our selves and our subject's , and indivisible unity of friendship and peace , and safe trade of Merchandise : yet so , as that unto you ( who excel in dignity ) authority in commanding may be ascribed , and diligence in obeying shall not want in us . And as the liberality of your rewards doth often put us in remembrance of your Majesty , even so in like manner sending unto your Highness the most rare things in our custody , and which we thought should be most acceptable unto you , we do most heartily wish that your self also would not altogether be unmindful of us . Have respect therefore not unto the gifts , but unto the affection of the giver , and accept of them with that mind , wherewith they are offered unto you . 
 Concerning the hand of S. James , about which you wrote unto us , we have sent you word by M. Herbert , and by William the Clerk . Witness Thomas our Chancellor at Northanton . 
 