Carta Lubecensibus ad septennium concessa . Anno 41. Henrici 3. 
 Enricus dei gracia Rex Angliae , dominus Hibernia ? , dux Normanniae , Aquitaniae , & Comes Andegaviae , omnibus Ballivis suis salutem . Sciatis nos ad instantiam dilecti & fidelis fratris nostri Ricardi Comitis Cornubiae in Regem Romanorum electi , suscepisse in protectionem & defensionem 
 nostram & salvum & securum conductum nostrum Burgenses de Lubek in Alemania cum omnibus rebus & mercandisis quas in Regnum nostrum deferent , vel facient deferri . Et eis concessimus , quod de omnibus rebus & mercandisis suis nihil capiatur ad opus nostrum vel alterius contra voluntatem eorundem ; sed libere vendant & negocientur inde in Regno praedicto , prout sibi viderint expedire . Et ideo vobis mandamus , quod dictis Burgen-sibus vel eorum nunciis in veniendo in terram nostram cum rebus & mercandisis suis , ibidem morando , & inde recedendo , nullum inferatis , aut ab aliis inferri permittatis impedimentum aut gravamen . Nec eos contra quietantiam praedictam vexetis , aut ab aliis vexari permittatis . In cujus rei testimonium has literas nostras fieri fecimus patentes per septennium durantes : Dum tamen iidem Burgenses interim bene & fideliter se habuerint erga praefatum electum fratrem nostrum . Teste meipso apud Westmonasterium undecimo die Maii Anno Regni nostri quadragesimo primo . Haec litera duplicata est , pro Bur-gensibus & mercatoribus Dacis , Brunswig , & Lubek . 
 324 
 The charter of Lubek granted for seven years , obtained in the one and fortieth year of Henry the third . 
 HEnry by the grace of God King of England , Lord of Ireland , Duke of Normandie and Aquitaine , and Earl of Anjou , to all his Bailiffs sends greeting . Know you that at the instant request of our well-beloved and trusty brother Richard Earl of Cornewal being of late elected king of the Romans , we have received under our protection and defence , and under our safe and secure conduct , the citizens of Lubek in Alemain , with all their goods and wares , which they shall bring or cause to be brought into our kingdom . We have also granted unto them , that of all their goods and merchandise , nothing shall be seized unto the use of our selves , or of any other without their own consent , but that they may freely fell and exercise traffic therewith , according as they shall think expedient . And therefore we straightly command you , that neither your selves do offer , nor that you permit any other to offer any impediment or molestation unto the said Burghers or unto their messengers , either at their coming into our land , with their goods and merchandise , in the time of their abided there , or at their departure from thence , and that ye neither molest them your selves , nor yet suffer them by others to be molested , contrary to the aforesaid Charter . In testimony whereof , we have caused these our Letters to be made Patents , during the space of seven years next following . 
 Provided , that the said Burghers do in the mean time behave themselves well and faithfully towards our foresaid elected brother . Witness our selves at Westminster the eleventh day of March , in the one and fortieth year of our reign . 
 This Letter was doubled , namely for the Burghers , and the Merchants of Denmarke , of Brunswig , and of Lubecke . 
 