Another Letter of Edward the second , to Haquinus King of Norway , in the behalf of certain English Merchants . 
 MAgnifico Principi Dom. Haquino Dei gratia regi IVA Norwegiae illustri , amico suo charissimo , Edwardus eadem Dei gratia Rex Angliae , dominus Hyberniae , & dux Aquitaniae , salutem cum dilectione sincera . Querelam dilectorum Mercatorum nostrorum Thomae de Swyn de Waynfleete , & Simonis filii Alani de eadem recepimus , continentem , Quod ciim ipsi nuper quosdam servientes suos infra regnum vestrum pro suis ibidem exercendis mercimoniis transmisissent , Thesaurarius vester bona & mercimonia praedictorum Thomae & Simonis ad valenciam quadraginta librarum , quae servientes praedicti in villam de Northberne in sua custodia habuerunt , die Sancti Michaelis ultimo praeterita fecit absque causa rationabili arestari , & ea adhuc taliter arestata detinet injusti , in ipsorum Thomae & Simonis damnum non modicum & depauperationem manifestam . Et quia eisdem mercatoribus nostris subvenire volumus , quatenus suadente justitia poterimus in hac parte , vestram amicitiam requirimus cum affectu , quatenus audita querela praedictorum Thomae & Simonis , vel ipsorum atturnatorum super restitution bonorum & mercimoniorum praedictorum impendere velitis eisdem celeris justitiae complementum : Ita quod pro defectu exhibitionis justitiae super arestatione praedicta non oporteat nos pro mercatoribus nostris praedictis de alio remedio providere . Nobis autem quid ad hanc nostram instantiam duxeritis faciendum , rescribere velitis per praesentium portitorem . Datae ut supra . 
 The same in English . 
 TO the mighty Prince Lord Haquinus , by the grace of God the famous King of Norway , his most deer friend Edward by the same grace of God king of England , Lord of Ireland , and Duke of Aquitaine , greeting and sincere love . we received the complaint of our well-beloved Merchant's Thomas de Swyn of Wayn-fleet , and Simon the son of Alanus of the same town : the contents whereof are , that whereas of late , the said parties sent certain of their servants to traffic in your kingdom , your Treasurer upon the feast of S. Michael last passed , without any just or reasonable occasion , caused the goods and merchandise of the foresaid Thomas and Simon , to the valve of fortie pound , which their said servants had under their custody at the town of Northberne , to be arrested , and as yet also injuriously deteineth the same under the same arrest , to the great damage and impoverishing of the said Thomas and Simon . And forasmuch as our desire is to succour these our merchants so far forth as we can , Justice requiring no less in this behalf , we do right earnestly request you , that having heard the complaint and supplication of the foresaid Thomas and Simon , or of their Attorneys , you would of your love and friendship , vouchsafe them speedy administration of Justice , about the restitution of their goods and merchandise aforesaid : lest that for want of the exhibiting of Justice about the foresaid arrest , we be constrained to provide some other remedy for our merchants aforesaid . Our request is , that you would by the bearer of these presents , return and answer unto us , what you are determined to do , at this our instant motion . Given as above . 