Compositions and ordinances concluded between the messengers of Frater Conradus the Jung-ingen master generail of Prussia : and the chancellor and treasurer of the realm of England 1403. 
 IN the year of our Lord 1403 , upon the feast of S. Michael the Archangel , the right hono : Henrie bishop of Lincoln , chancellor of England , and the lord de Roos high treasurer of England , & the ambassadors 
 of Prussia , John Godek of Dantzik , & Henry Monek of Elbing , master's of the same cities have at Westminster treated in manner of composition about the articles underwritten : between the most sovereign lord the king of England , and the right reverend & honourable Conradus de Jungingen Master general of Prussia , as concerning the injuries offered unto the people of Prussia and Livonia upon the sea by the English . 
 First , that all ships with their appurtenances , & the commodities of the mariners , according unto the condition of the things , and all other goods taken away by the English , which are actually undivided & whole , are incontinently & with all speed to be restored . And if there be any defect in ought , the valve of the said defect is to be accounted , & with other losses of goods to be restored , at the term of the restitution to be made and delivered . 
 Item , that all ships , damages , and goods ( as they are contained in our bill of accusation ) which are not now immediately restored , are to be restored and paid in the land of Prussia , between this and the term appointed , with full execution and compliment of justice . 
 Item , concerning the persons thrown over board or slain in the sea : it shall remain to be determined at the will and pleasure of the most mighty prince the king of England , and of the right reverend the Master of Prussia . 
 Item , between this and the term appointed for the restoring of the goods taken away , & until there be due payment & restitution of the said goods performed , the merchants of England and of Prussia are in no wise to exercise any traffic of merchandise at all in the foresaid lands . 
 Memorandum , that the third day of the month of 1403. October , in the year of our Lord 1403. and in the fift year of the reign of the most mighty prince and lord , king Henrie the fourth , by the grace of God king of 37 
 England and France etc. between the reverend father Henrie bishop of Lincoln , chancellor , and the right honourable William lord de Roos , high treasurer of England , both of them counsellors unto the said sovereign king on the one party , and the right worshipful John Godeke , and Henrie Moneke , sent as messengers by the right reverend and religious personage , Frater Conradus de Jungingen Master generail of the Dutch knights of the Order of S. Marry on the other party : it was , at the request and instancy of the said messengers , appointed , and mutually agreed upon , that all the liege people and subject's of the said sovereign lord and king shall have free licence and liberty until the feast of Easter next ensuing , safely to travel unto the land of Prussia aforesaid , there to remain , and thence , with their ships , merchandises , & other their goods whatsoever , to return unto their own home : which on the other side , all the subject's of the said Master general may , within the term prefixed , likewise do , in the foresaid realm of England . Provided always , that after the time above limited , neither the said merchants of the realm of England may in the land of Prussia , nor the merchants of that land , in the realm of England , exercise any traffic at all : unless it be otherwise ordained by some composition , between the foresaid king of England , & the said Master general in the mean time concluded . In witness whereof , one part of this present Indenture is to remain in the custody of the foresaid messengers . Given in the Chapter-house of the Church of S. Paul at London , the day and year above written . 
 