The Oration or speech of the Ambassadors sent from Conradus de Zolner Master generail of the land of Prussia , unto Richard the second , King of England , and France , etc. 
 The messengers which are sent from the Master general of the land of Prussia , do propound and declare the affairs and negotiations underwritten . 
 Hereas it is apparent , that diverse and sundry times heretofore , your famous progenitors and predecessors the kings of England have always be gracious promoters and speciali friends unto the general Master's of the land of Prussia , and of the whole order : 
 whereas also they have vouchsafed , by their Barons , Knights , and other their nobles of the kingdom of England , unto the Master's and order aforesaid , sundry and manifold favourable assistances in the conquest of the Infidels ( in whose steps your excellent Majesty insisting , have , in these your days showed your self in like sort right graciously affected unto the Master generail which now is , and unto his famous Predecessor ) in due consideration of the premises , and in regard also of diverse other affairs , which are at this present to be propounded unto your Highness , the foresaid Master general which now is hath caused us his messengers to be sent with letters of credence unto your Majesty : humbly praying , and earnestly beseeching your royal clemency , that in times to come , the said Master general , his successors , & our whole Order may of your bounty most graciously obtain the same favour , benevolence , and steadfast amity & friendship , which hath been continued from the times of your foresaid predecessors : in regard whereof we do offer the said Master of ours , and our whole company , unto your highness , as your perpetual and devote friends . Notwithstanding 12 
 ( most sovereign Prince ) certain other things we have to propound unto your Grace , in the name & behalf of our said Master and Order , by way of complaint , namely , that at certain times passed , and especially within the space of x . years last expired , his subject's and merchants have sustained sundry damages and ablations of their goods , by diverse subject's and inhabitants of your realm of England , and that very often , both by sea and land : the which , for the behalf , and by the appointment of the Master general aforesaid , & of his predecessor , are put down in registers , and recorded in the writings of his cities in the land of Prussia . Of which parties damnified , some have obtained letters from the Master general that now is , & also from his pre - decessor , unto your renowned grandfather K. Edward Edward the 3. of famous memory , and sundry times unto your highness also , to have restitution made for their goods taken from them : whereby they have nothing at all prevailed , but heaping loss upon loss have misspent their time & their charges : both because they were not permitted to propound & exhibit their complaints & letters before your majesty , and also for diverse other impediments . Certain of them also considering how others of their countrymen had laboured in vain , & fearing the like success , have troubled the Master general very often with grievous and sundry complaints , craving & humbly beseeching at his hands , that he would vouchsafe graciously to provide for them as his faithful & loyal subject's , as touching the restitution of their losses : especially seeing y‘ so much wealth of the English merchants was every year to be found in Prussia , as being arrested , they might obtain some reasonable satisfaction for their losses . Which thing the Master general aforesaid & his predecessor also have deferred unto this present ( albeit to you great loss of their subject's ) thereby having mere & principal respect unto those special courtesies and favours which your excellent Majesty & your worthy progenitors have 
 right graciously vouchsafed upon our Master's and Order : neither yet for the injuries aforesaid , was there ever any manner of offence , or molestation offered unto any of your subject's noble or ignoble whatsoever . Moreover , in the name & behalf of our foresaid Ma. general we do propound unto your excellency by way of complaint , that in the year last passed , 6. days after you feast of the Ascension , certain persons of your realm of England , with their ships & captains coming unto the port of Flanders , nam Swen , & finding there , among sundry other , 6. ships of Prussia resident , which had there arrived wl diverse goods & merchandises : and being informed that they were of Prussia , & their friends , they caused them & their ships to remain next unto their own ships , protesting unto them , that they should in no sort be molested or damnified by themselves or by any other of their company , & that they would faithfully defend them , as if they were their own people , from the hands of their adversaries : & for their farther security & trust , they delivered some of their own men & their standards into our men's ships : howbeit a while after being stirred up , & bent far otherwise , they took out of the foresaid ships all kind of armours , wherewith they were to guard & defend themselves from pirates , & they detained the master's of those ships , not suffering them to return unto their own ships & companies , one also of you said ships ( having taken all the goods out of her ) they consumed with fire . And within 3. dales after they came with one accord unto you abovenamed ships , and took away from them all goods and merchandises which they could find , and all the armour and weapons of the said ships , the chests also of the merchants , of the shipmasters , & of other persons they brake open , taking out money , jewels , garments , & diverse other commodities : and so they inflicted upon them irrecoverable losses and unkind grievances . And departing out of the foresaid haven , they carried 2. of the Prussian shipmasters with them , 
 as their captives unto and haven of England called Sandwich . Who , being afterwards released , were compelled to swear , that they should not declare you injuries offered unto them , either before your royal majesty , or your hon . Council , or your chancellor : neither were they permitted to come on shore . And being offered such hard measure , when they made pitiful mones & complaints unto your foresaid subject's , among other matters they spoke on this wise unto them : Do you complain of injuries & losses offered unto you ? Loe , in your own country of Prussia there are English merchants , & goods sufficient , go your ways home therefore , & recover your losses , taking two for one : and in this manner they were left , & so departed . Afterwards returning unto you land of Prussia , they & their friends repaired unto the Mast , general , jointly & wl one consent making their complaint unto him of the losses which had been inflicted upon them by your subject's . And prostrating themselves at his feet , they all and every of them made their humble suits , y‘ he would have compassion on them , as upon his poor subject's , regarding them selves , their wives , & children , and pitying their distres , and penury , and that he would graciously procure some redress for them . And when he offered his letters unto them , wishing them to prosecute their cause before your highness , they answered that they were no way able to defray the expenses , and that others , who were in like sort damnified , had laboured that way altogether in vain & to no purpose : beseeching him again and again , that he would by another kind of means , namely by arresting of your merchants and their goods , procure them restitution of their losses . At length the Master general The arresting being moved by so many and so great complaints , and by the molestation of his subject's , caused ( albeit full a^ants soar against his will ) a certain portion of English merchants goods to be laid hold on , and to be arrested , in his cities of Elburg & Dantzik , and to be bestowed 
 in sure places , until such time as he might conveniently by his messengers propound and exhibit all and singular the premises unto your highness . And forasmuch as the foresaid Master general and our Order do know no just occasion , whereby they have deserved your majesties indignation , but are firmly and most undoubtedly persuaded , to find all courtesy , favour , and friendship at your Highness , according to your wonted clemency : the said Master general therefore makes no doubt , that all the above written damages St molestations , being in such sort , against God and justice , oflred unto his subject's by yours , be altogether unknown unto your magnificence , & committed against your mind : wherefore presently upon the foresaid arrest of your merchants goods , he dispatched his messengers unto your royal majesty . Whereof one deceased by the way , namely in the territory of Holland : & the other remained sick in those parts for a long season : & so that ambassage took none effect . Wherefore the said master general was desirous to send us now the second time also unto your Highness . We do make our humble suit therefore , in the name & behalf of our Master and Order aforesaid , unto your kingly supremacy , that , having God and justice before your eyes , and also the dutiful and obsequious demeanour of the said master , and order towards you , you would vouchsafe to extend your gracious clemency , for the redress of the premises : whereby the foresaid losses may be restored and repaid unto our subject's . All which notwithstanding , that it would please you of your wisdom & providence to procure so absolute a remedy , by means whereof , in time to come , such dealings and inconveniences may be avoided on both parts , & finally that your merchants may quietly be possessed of their goods arrested in Prussia , and our merchants may be admitted unto the possession of their commodities attached in England , to convert & apply them unto such uses , as to themselves shall seem 
 most convenient . Howbeit ( most gracious prince and lord ) we are to solicit your Highness , not only about the articles to be propounded concerning the losses aforesaid , but more principally , for certain sinister reports and superstitious slanders , wherewith certain of your subject's , not seeking for peace , have falsely informed your majesty , & your most honourable and discreet Council : affirming that at the time of the aforesaid arrest your merchants were barbarously entreated , that they were cast into loathsome prisons , drenched in mire and water up to you neck , restrained from all conference and company of men , and also that their meat was thrown unto them , as a bone to a dog , with many other enormities , which they have most slanderously devised concerning the master general aforesaid , and his people , and have published them in these dominions : upon the occasion of which falsehoods certain merchants of our parts , and of other regions of Alemain ( who , of your special benevolence , were endued with certain privileges and favours in your city of London , and in other places ) were , as malefactors , apprehended and carried to prison , until such time as the truth was more apparent . Whereupon , the foresaid master general propoundeth his humble suit unto your majesty , that such enemies of truth and concord , your Majesty would vouchsafe in such sort to chastise , that they may be and example unto others presuming to do the like . 
 Moreover , ( high and mighty Prince and lord ) it was reported unto our Master general , that his former Legates required of your majesty safe conduct freely to come into your highness Realm . Which when he herd , he was exceedingly offended thereat , since undoubtedly they did not this at his commandment or direction . We therefore humbly beseech your Grace , as touching this oversight , to hold the Master general excused , because there is no need of safe conduct , between so speciali friends . 
 ii 17 B 
 Furthermore , sundry damages and complaints of the foresaid general Master , and his subject's are briefly exhibited , and put down in the bills following . Also , all and singular damnified persons , beside other proofs , were compelled to verify their losses by their formali oaths , taken upon the holy Bible . 
 Lastly , we do make our humble suit and petition unto the providence and discretion of your Highness , and of your honourable Council , that concerning the premises , and all other matters propounded , or to be propounded unto your Majesty , we may obtain a speedy answer , and and effectual end . For it would redound unto our great charges and loss to make any long delays . 
 