These be the grievances and offences , whereat the merchants of the Hans of Almain , coming unto , and residing in the Realm of England , do find themselves aggrieved , contrary to the Articles and privileges of the Charter granted unto them by the worthy Progenitors of the king of England that now is , and also by the said sovereign Lord the King , ratified , and confirmed . 
 Mprimis , whereas the foresaid merchants have a privilege granted unto them by Charter , that they may , in cities , boroughs , and in other towns and villages throughout the whole realm of England , exercise traffic in gross , as well with the natural inhabitants of the kingdom , 
 as with strangers , and private persons : of late , those that are free denizens in the cities , boroughs , and villages within the foresaid kingdom , do hinder and restrain all others that be strangers , foreigners , and aliens , that they neither can , nor dare buy and sei with the merchants of the Hans aforesaid , to their great hindrance and loss . 
 Item , the foresaid merchants by virtue of their charter were wont to have and to hold Innes and mansions , for the reposing of themselves and of their goods , wheresoever they pleased in any cities , boroughs , or villages , throughout the whole kingdom : howbeit of late the foresaid merchants are not suffered to take up their mansions , contrary to the tenor of their charter . 
 Item , the foresaid merchants are privileged not to undergo any other burdens or impositions , but only to pay certain customs , as it doth by their charter manifestly appear . Notwithstanding at you same time when Simon de Moreden was mayor of London , the foresaid merchants were constrained , in the ward of Dove-gate at London , to pay fifteenths , tallages , and 72 
 other subsidies contrary to the liberties of their charter . Whereupon the said merchants prosecuted the matter before the Council of our sovereign lord the king , insomuch that they were released from paying afterwards any such tallages , fifteenths , and subsidies . Which merchants , a while after , of their own accord and free will , gave unto the gildhall of London and hundreth marks sterling , conditionally , that they of the ci tie aforesaid should not at any time after exact or demand of the said merchants , or of their successors , any tallages , fifteenths , or subsidies , contrary to the tenor of their charter , as by records in the foresaid gildhall , it does more plainly appear . Howbeit of late the officers of our lord the king , in the foresaid ward of Dove-gate , constrained the merchants aforesaid to pay tallages , fifteenths , & other subsidies . And because the said merchants murmured and refused to pay any such contributions , alleging their privileges , the foresaid officers arrested the goods of those said merchants ( which are as yet detained upon the arrest ) notwithstanding that they were released before the council of our sovereign lord the king , & also that they gave unto the said gildhall one hundreth marks to be released , as it is aforesaid . And also the foresaid merchants were constrained to pay I2 . worser . in the pound , and of late 6.d . and other subsidies , more then their ancient customs , to the great damage of those merchants . 
 Item , the foresaid merchants are privileged as touching The ancient customs of wols by them bought within the realm of 1° ™ * England , y£ they are not bound to pay , over & beside w°° ’ their ancient customs , but only xl . worser . more then the homeborn merchants of England were wont to pay . But now you foresaid merchants are compelled to pay for every sack of wool ( beside the ancient custom & the 4O . worser . aforesaid ) a certain imposition called Pence for the Pence for the town of Cales , namely for every sack of wool i9 . worser . more then the merchants of England do pay , to their great loss , & against the liberty of their charter . 
 Item , the foresaid merchants are privileged by their charter , that concerning the quantity of their merchandise brought into the realm of England ( in regard whereof they are bound to pay 3.d . for the worth of every pound of silver ) credit is to be given unto them for the letters of their master's and of their companies , if they were able to show them . And if so be they had no letters in this behalf to show , that then credit should be given unto themselves , and that their other , or the other of their attorney should be taken , without any other proof , as touching the valve of their merchandise so brought in , & that thereupon they should be bound to pay customs , namely the customs of 3-d . justly for that cause to be paid . But now the customers of our sovereign lord the king put their goods to and higher rate then they ought or were wont to be : and hereupon they compel them to pay custom for their goods , at their pleasure , scanning about their fraught and expenses particularly disbursed in regard of the said goods and merchandise , to the great hindrance of the said merchants , and against the tenor of their charter . 
 Item , the foresaid merchants by way of pitiful complaint do allege , that whereas the worthy progenitors of our Lord the king that now is , by virtue of the said great charter , granted liberty unto them to pay the customs of certain clothes , namely of scarlet , and cloth died in grain , and of other clothes of assize , which were by them to be carried out of the realm of England , even as by their foresaid Charter it doth more plainly appear : and whereas our sovereign lord the king that now is ( ratifying and confirming the said charter , and being willing that they should have more especial favour showed unto them ) granted unto them by their Charter , that the said merchants should be exempted and freed from all custom and imposition of small clothes , as in pieces and in narrow clothes which were not of assize , and in such other clothes of like quality : yet of late the Customers of our Lord the King that now is , not allow-74 
 ing their said speciali Charter so granted unto the speciali merchants aforesaid , do compel them to pay for straight Charter . clothes and for pieces of clothes which are not of assize , ( together with other demands particularly & severally made ) as great custom as if the clothes were full out of assize . Moreover also of late , the customers of the small The customers or petty custom & of the subsidy do demand of them oftheW ) custom for kersey-clothes equal unto the custom of ' those clothes , that be of full assize , whereas the foresaid merchants were not wont to pay for those kerseys by virtue of their Charter , but only according to the worth of each pound of silver , as namely for other goods which are of gold weight : to the great hindrance of the foresaid parties , and against the manifest grant of our sovereign Lord the king , as it appears in the said speciali Charter . 
 Item , the said merchants allege , that they are privileged by their Charter , if they pay custom and subsidy for their goods in the behalf of our lord the king , at any port of England where those goods have arrived , and afterwards would transport the said goods or any part of them unto any other port within the realm aforesaid : that then they should be quite released from paying of any other custom for the same goods , if they bring a warrant that they have paid the said custom , as is aforesaid . Of late it fortuned , that a certain man of their society nam Nicholas Crossehaire , being a 1405. merchant of the land of Prussia , immediately after the concord was concluded between the English and the Prussians , brought unto the town of Sandwich a ship laden with bowstaves and other merchandise , and there well and truly paid the custom of our lord the king for all his wares : and selling there part of the same goods , he afterwards transported parcel thereof in a small bark unto London , there to be sold , and carried a warrant also with him , that he had at Sandwich paid the custom due unto our lord the king : & yet ( the said warrant notwithstanding ) the customers of the petty custom & 
 subsidy of London came & demanded custom of him at another time contrary to reason , & against the tenor of their charter : and the said Nicholas offered pledges unto them , yea , even ready money down into their hands , until the question were discussed and determined , whither he should pay new custom or no : but this they would not do . Then the said Nicholas brought a brief from our lord the king , to get himself discharged from paying the said custom : and for all that , the foresaid customers would not as yet have regard unto him , but kept the said goods within shipboard , upon the river of Thames , for the space of 15. days , until he had paid another custom , to the great loss of the said Nicholas , for that which he sold first at Sandwich to be delivered at London for seven nobles , he could not afterwards have for it above foure nobles , and yet so was it sold , by reason of the harm which his wares had taken by lying so long upon the water , contrary to the tenor of their Charter . 
 Item , the said merchants do allege , that another of their company called Peter Hertson bought at Bristow certain clothes , & jaded thee same in a ship , to be transported for Prussia , for the which he truly paid at Bristow , the customs & subsidies due unto our sovereign lord the king : which ship with the foresaid goods arriving at London : the customers of the petty-custom and of the subsidy there would not permit the said ship with the goods to pass unto the parts aforesaid , until the said Peter had paid another custom for the same goods ( the warrant , which he brought with him notwithstanding ) to his great hindrance , and contrary to the tenor of their Charter . 
 Item , pitifully complaining the foresaid merchants allege , that whereas every merchant , bringing wares into the realm , was wont to have a schedule wherein his name was written , for a specification & certificate of the quantity of his goods in the said schedule to be found at the arrival of the ship , without paying therefore ought at all , of late the customers of the petty custom do compel them to pay 76 
 for each men name written a penny , at the arrival of their goods out of every ship wherein the said goods are found , what commodities & merchandise soever they be : whenas notwithstanding , if there be a chest or any other small matter , there should not therefore be any custom due unto our lord the king , nor any received unto his Majesties use . In like manner do the customers of the The customers subsidy deal . Whereas also the foresaid merchants were not wont to pay for a cocket for the conveyance & transportation of their goods out of the realm ( albeit many names were written therein ) more then 4-d . of late the customers of the petty custom do compel them to pay for every name contained in the same cocket , 4-d . and in like sort do the customers of the said subsidy deal . 
 Which contribution in a year extendeth it self unto a great sum , to the unknown prejudice of our lord the king , more then any man could suppose , ( for the customers enjoy their fees and commodities from his Majesty that they may do him faithful service ) and likewise to the great damage of the said merchants . 
 Item , pitifully complaining the said merchants do allege that they are constrained to pay for subsidy , sometime I2 . worser . and sometime 6.d . in the pound , contrary to the tenor of their charter : and yet notwithstanding when their merchandise comes to the wharf , the customers prolong & delay the time 3. or 4. weeks before they will take custom for their goods , in the which space other merchants sei their goods , the customers not regarding whither the goods aforesaid take wet or no ; to the great damage aswell of our lord the king , as of the said merchants : because , if they had quick dispatch , they might pay custom unto his Majesty oftener then they do . 
 Item , the said merchants do farther allege , that the customers of the petie custom , and of the subsidy in the port of London have appointed among themselves certain men to seal up the goods of the said merchants , so soon as they are arrived at the port of safety , until the 77 
 said goods be customed . By means of the which sealing , the foresaid parties do compel the merchants abovenamed , ( upon and use and custom whereof themselves have be the authors ) to pay a certain sum of money , to the great hindrance of the said merchants , and contrary to justice and to their charter . Moreover , the said customers have ordained between themselves , that the said merchants shall put or make up no cloth into farthels , to transport out of the realm , unless certain men appointed by them for the same purpose be there present , to see what manner of clothes they be , under pain of the forfeiture of the said goods . Also of late , when the said march ants would have made up such farthels , the foresaid parties assigned to be overseers refused to come , unless they might have for their coming some certain sum of money , delaying and procrastinating from day to day , so long as themselves listed , to the great loss and undoing of the foresaid merchants , and contrary to their liberties : because the foresaid customers are bound by their office to do this , without any contribution therefore to be paid unto them by the said merchants : for that they do enjoy from our sovereign Lord the King their fees and commodities , to the end that they may serve him and every merchant justly and faithfully , without any contribution by them to be imposed anew upon the said merchants , of custom . 
 Item , the said merchants do allege , that the customers & bailiffs of the town of Southhampton do compel them to pay for every last of herrings , pitch , & soap ashes brought thither by them 2 . s . more then the kings custom : and for each hundreth of bowstaves & boards called Waghenscot , 2.d . for every hundreth of boards called Richolt , 4.d . & for all other merchandise brought by the foresaid merchants unto the same town : which contributions they never paid at any time heretofore , being greatly to their hindrance , and contrary to the tenor of their Charter . 
 HANSE MERCHANTS ’ GRIEVANCES a.d. . 1407 - 
 Item , the foresaid merchants do allege , that one of their company , called Albert Redewish of Prussia , bringing diverse goods & merchandizes unto Newcastle upon Tine , & there paying the usual custom of 3.d . in the pound for all his wares , the bailiffs of the said town , against all reason , exacted 7. pound sterling at his hands more then the custom : whereupon the foresaid merchant god a brief from the kings majesty , for the recovery of the said 7. H. according to equity & reason : howbeit , that at the coming of the said brief the foresaid baliffs would do nothing on his behalf , but would have slain their foresaid associate , contrary to their charter and privileges . 
 William Esturmy knight , & John Kington canon of Lincolne , being by you most mighty prince & lord , L. Henry by Gods grace K. of England & France & lord of Ireland , sufficiently deputed and appointed to parley , treat , & agree wl the common society of the merchants of the Hans of Dutchland or Almain , concerning & about the redressing & reformation of unjust attempts happening between our said sovereign L. the king his liege people & subject's on the one part , & between the common society aforesaid , the cities , towns , & particular persons thereof on the other part : do ( for the behalf of our said sovraign L. the king , with a mind & intention to have all & singular you things underwritten to come to the knowledge of the said common society ) intimate , declare , & make known unto you ( hono . sirs ) Henr. Westhoff citizen & deputy of the city of Lubec , Henry Fredelaw , Joh. van Berk citizen of Colen , Mainard Buxtehude citizen , 8c deputy of the city of Hamburgh , M. Simon Clawsten clerk , sir John de Aa knight deputy of the city of Rostok , Herman Meyer deputy of the city of Wismar , being , as the procurators , messengers , 8c commissioners of the foresaid cities , assembled together at the town of Hage in Holland , with the forenamed Will . 8c John in regard of the foresaid redress 8c reformation : that , even as our 
 said sovereign L. the king his meaning is not to disturb or hinder such privileges as have been heretofore granted & vouchsafed unto the common society of the merchants aforesaid , by the renowned kings of England , & the worthy progenitors of our L. the K. that now is , & by himself also under a certain from confirmed : even so he is determined ( without , you prejudice of foreign laws ) upon just , mature and sober deliberation , by his royal authority to withstand such privileges , as by reason of the abuse thereof , have be infinitely prejudicial ! unto himself and his subject's . 
 Inprimis the said ambassadors do affirm as afore , that whereas all and every the Merchants of the said company , as often as they would , were , both in the Realm of England , and in other territories & dominions subject unto our sovereign lord the king , admitted and suffered ( according to the tenor of the forenamed privileges granted unto them ) freely , friendly and securely to traffic and converse with any of his Majesties liege people and subject's whatsoever , or with other people of whatsoever nation living in the realm of England , or in the dominions aforesaid : the said common society of merchants by their public & deliberate common counsel did appoint & ordain , y* no society in any cities , towns , or places , neither yet any particular man of any such society ( there being no lawful or reasonable cause why ) should in any wise admit any merchants of the realm of England resorting unto their cities or other places for merchandise , to enjoy intercourse of traffic : but that the said English merchants should be altogether excluded from all traffic and mutual conversation among them , by denouncing and inflicting grievous penalties of money as well upon cities as other places , and upon particular merchants also of the foresaid society practising the contrary . 
 Item , that immediately after , the foresaid parties enacting and ordaining published their said statute and 80 
 ordinance , in all kingdoms , provinces , parts , cities , and towns , wherein any merchants of the said society were conversant . 
 Item , that after that publication , the statute and ordinance aforesaid by every of the merchants of the forenamed society were inviolably observed . 
 Item , that the said statute and ordinance hath be so rigorously put in execution , that whereas immediately after certain English merchants with their ships , mariners , and merchandise being in a certain part of one of the principali cities of the foresaid society , utterly destitute of meat , drink , and money , publicly offered to fell their woollen clothes of England , only to provide themselves of necessary victuals : yet the merchants of the said city , stoutly persisting in their statute and ordinance aforesaid , straightly prohibited the buying of such clothes , unchristianly denying meat and drink unto the said English merchants . 
 Item , the foresaid society decreed and ordained , that no merchant of the said company should in any place or country whatsoever , buy any woollen clothes of the realm or dominion of England ( albeit offered by others and not by English men ) or , having bought any , should , after the term prefixed , sei them , imposing grievous pecuniary mulcts , beside the forfeiture of the clothes so bought or sold , upon them that would attempt the contrary . 
 Item , that after the said statute and ordinance , the foresaid society decreed , that all merchants of the said company , having among their wares and merchandise any woollen clothes made in England , should either fell the said clothes , or within a short space then limited should , under penalty of forfeiting the said clothes , utterly renounce the use and commodi tie thereof : Not - The Hans withstanding a grievous penalty of money being imposed society deter-upon the violaters of the same statute . of 
 Item , that the statutes and ordinances aforesaid might English mar-with more speed and celerity be put in execution , the chants . 
 n 81 F 
 Statutes against English merchants in Norway and in Suedland . 
 said authors and publishers thereof imagining , according to their desire , that by this means and utter extirpation and overthrow of English merchants might , yea & of necessity must ensue : upon their serious & long premeditated deliberation , straitely commanded & enjoined , under pain of losing the benefit of all privileges , wheresoever , or by the princes of what lands , or the Magistrates of what Cities or towns soever vouchsafed unto the said common society , that not only the aidermen of that society in all places throughout the realm of England , but also all other merchants of the said company , after the manner of merchants conversing in the said Realm , should , without exception of persons , utterly abstain from all intercourse of traffic with the merchants of the realm aforesaid : yea , and that they should depart out of the said kingdom within a very short space limited . For the dispatching of all which premises without delay , it was according to their commandment effectually provided . 
 Item , that the society aforesaid hath approved diverse very unreasonable statutes & ordinances , made & published by the merchants of the same society residing in the kingdoms of Norway and Swedland , to the great prejudice of the kingdom of England , and the merchants thereof : and as yet both covertly and expressly do approve the same , unjustly putting them in daily execution . 
 Item , whereas in the privileges & indulgences granted by the renowned princes sometimes kings of England , you worthy progenitors of our sovereign lord the king y1 now is , unto the society aforesaid , it is provided , y‘ the said merchants shall not avow any man which is not of their company , nor shall not colour his goods and merchandise under their company : whereas also in the confirmation of the said privileges made by our sovereign lord that now is , it is manifestly provided , that the merchants of the Hans towns , under the colour of their privileges in England , shall not upon pain of 
 the perpetuali frustration and revocation of the foresaid privileges , receive any stranger of any other town in their liberties , by whom the kings custom may in any sort be withholden or diminished : & yet the contrary unto all these provisoes hath been every year , for these 20. years or thereabouts notoriously practised and committed , as well jointly by the generail counsel , and toleration of the foresaid society , as also severally by the advice and permission of diverse particular cities of the foresaid Hans company to the great diminution of his majesties custom , the estimation whereof the foresaid ambassadors are not able at this present fully to declare . But that all occasions of the last above mentioned diminution may be prevented for the time to come , the said ambassadors do demand to have from How many U ’ the foresaid society a declaration in writing , what and be the 
 i ' r . ■ . • • .. - ii Hans towns . 
 what manner ot territories , cities , towns , villages or companies they be , for which the said society challengeth and pretendeth , that they ought to enjoy the privileges granted unto their merchants , as is above mentioned . 
 Moreover , it is required by the foresaid ambassadors , if the society aforesaid hath not decreed nor ordained the things above written , that the names of the cities and places decreeing and ordaining such statutes & ordinances , may by the said common society either now or at some other times and places convenient for the same purpose , be expressed and set down in writing . 
 