The letters of Fr : Ulricas Master of Prussia directed unto the king of England , signifying that he is contented with the agreements concluded by his messengers at Hage . 
 To the most renowned prince and mighty lord L Henrie king of England and France , and lord of Ireland , our most gracious lord . 
 Unto your highness pleasure at all assays humbly recommending my voluntary service etc. Most renowned king , mighty prince , and gracious lord , we received of late with great reverence as it becomes us , by our well-beloved Arnold de Dassel the bearer of these presents , 
 your Majesties letters of late directed unto us , makingmention among other matters of certain appointments first made and concluded between the noble and worthy personages William Esturmy knight , John Kington clerk , and William Brampton citizen of London your ambassadors and messengers on the one part , and our honourable and religious brothers , namely Conradus Lichtensten great commander , Warnherus de Tettingen chief hospitalary & commander in Elbing , and Arnold de Hacken treasurer , being the procurators and commissioners of Fra. Conradus de Jungingen our last predecessor of famous memory on the other part , concerning the redressing , reformation , and amendment of unjust attempts committed on both sides , at our castle of Marienburgh , and also very lately at the town of Hage in Holland , namely the twenty eight of the month August in the year immediately passed , between your foresaid ambassadors William Esturmy knight , and John Kington clerk , for your part , and our trusty and well-beloved commissioners and procurators , namely Arnold Hecht burgomaster of our city of Dantzik , and 
 Here relation is had unto you king of the Roman . 
 John Crolow citizen of the same city , for our part . And for our more perfect knowledge in this behalf , our said commissioners made relation unto us and unto our whole counsel , that associating unto themselves our messengers of Livonia , namely , Tidman Myeul , and John Epensheid , together with your foresaid ambassadors and messengers , they there finally appointed and concluded , of and about the above mentioned sums of money due on both parts , of the which mention is made in your letters aforesaid . With this special ! proviso , that in like manner satisfaction be made in all points , both unto other of our damnified subject's of Prussia , namely such whose goods or the true valve thereof have be finally adjudged by the judges or professors of our laws , and unto such who having brought their articles of complaints unto the audience of the most dread and mighty prince and lord , our lord Rupertus king of the Roman always most sovereign , were in conclusion to have the estimations of their goods to be adjudged by the sentence of the said lord , with the advice of two of his counsellers , and also unto other of our subject's who have brought in sufficient proof of damages unjustly inflicted upon them by your subject's , over and beside the premises . So that in like manner satisfaction be made unto the common society of the Hans merchants : and by the arbitrament set down in the conferences had at Marienburgh , of the which it was above provided and enacted on their behalf , namely if they will rest contented with our subject's in the courses and means then concluded . If not , we intend not at all to adhere unto them in this behalf . Afterwards our messengers aforesaid , both they of Prussia and of Livonia demanded convenient , just , and speedy satisfaction , with the payment of all and singular the sums above mentioned , due unto both parts ( so far forth as equity and reason would yield unto , for the recompense of the parties injuried and endamaged on both sides ) to be made within one whole 
 year accounting from the feast of Easter now last expired unto the very same feast next to come in the year immediately following , & that in three several terms of payment , by three portions of the said sums equally to be divided , at the town of Bruges in Flanders as being a place indifferent for all parties , in manner and form as it was before at Marienburgh required and stood upon : namely that reformation , reparation , and amendment of all unjust attempts committed on both parts ought to be performed within one year . Howbeit contrariwise your ambassadors aforesaid decreed that the said satisfaction should be performed unto the parties injuried of both parts within three years , beginning to account from the feast of Easter last passed . And when your ambassadors were not contented with the manner of satisfaction set down by our men , nor our commissioners were willing in any sort to consent unto that course which was thought convenient by your ambassadors , the honourable messengers of the seatowns of the Hans being there at that time present , made a motion that the foresaid satisfaction might be performed within two years and and half , accounting from the feast of Easter last passed , often before mentioned : yet under a certain protestation , namely if both parties should agree unto that form of satisfaction , and if they should think good finally and conclusively to yield their consent unto it . Which kind of satisfaction also conceived by the messengers , your said ambassadors without giving notice thereof unto your royal Majesty , refused finally to approve ; being rather desirous to make a true & faithful report of the said form of satisfaction last above mentioned unto your kingly highness , and that in such sort , that ( as they hoped ) effectual satisfaction and payment of all and singular the sums due and to be due on both parts should more conveniently and speedily be performed . Whereupon we might be put in good hope , that more speedy and convenient 
 appointments of terms , for the said satisfaction friendly on both parts to be performed in , would have proceeded from your bountiful and gracious clemency . And in very deed ( most mighty prince ) albeit it was never the meaning of our foresaid predecessor , so far forth as these affairs concerned him , to protract and delay the execution of the said business so many and such long distances of time , and that for diverse respects , both because restitution unto the parties robbed consisted herein , and also because the said restitutions and satisfactions are to be made unto poor people , widows , orphans , and other miserable creatures , diversely and miserably slain and oppressed : notwithstanding we being moved with hearty & fervent zeal and speciali affection unto your royal crown of England , and having due regard and consideration of your most excellent Majesty , upon the advice of our honourable brothers our counsellers , do thankfully receive , & by the tenor of these presents totally ratify and approve such satisfactions of the foresaid sums howsoever due unto our subject's both Prussians and Livonians , in friendly sort to be performed at such times and seasons limited and prefixed by your highness as are expressed in your majesties letters , and also of other sums which within one year immediately ensuing after the feast of Easter last passed , by sufficient proofs to be made on their part before your chancellor at your city of London shall be found due unto them . Conditionally that without inconvenience of delay and impediment they be performed as they ought to be , according to the premises . In like manner also we our selves within the terms of payment above mentioned will procure satisfaction to be without fail performed unto your subject's endamaged , with the sum of 766. nobles , being in regard of their losses , of the which they have given up sufficient informations , due unto them : and with other like sums also which are by sufficient proofs , within the year 
 1408. aforesaid , and in manner and form prescribed to be exhibited before our treasurer at our city of Dantzik . 
 The almighty vouchsafe prosperously and long time to preserve your majesties royal person . Given at Sept. 27. , our castle of Marienburgh the 27. of September , in I+°8 , the year of our Lord 1408. 
 Fr. Ulricus de Jungingen master general of the order of the Dutch knights of S. Maries hospital of Jerusalem . 
 