The book made by the right worshipful M. Robert Thorn in the year 1527. in Sivil , to Doctor Ley , Lord ambassador for king Henry the eight , to Charles the Emperor , being and information of the parts of the world , discovered by him and the king of Portingal : and also of the way to the Molucca's by the North . 
 Right noble and reverend in etc. I have received your letters , and have procured and sent to know of your servant , who , your Lordship wrote , should be sick in Merchena . I cannot there or else where hear of him , without he be returned to you , or gone to S. Lucar , and shipped . 
 I cannot judge but that of some contagious sickness he died , so that the owner of the house for defaming his house would bury him secretly , and not be known of it . For such things have often times happened in this country . 
 Also to write unto your Lordship of the new trade of Spicery of the Emperor , there is no doubt but that the Islands are fertile of Cloves , Nutmegs , Mace , and Cinnamom : and that the said Islands , with other there about , abound with gold , Rubies , Diamonds , Balasses , Granates , Jacincts , and other stones & pearls , as all other lands , that are under and near the Equinoctial . For we see , where nature gives any thing , she is no niggard . For as with us and other , that are aparted from the said Equinoctial , our metals be Led , Tin , and Iron , so theirs be Gold , Silver , and Copper . And as our fruits and grains be Apples , Nuts , and Corn , so theirs be Dates , Nutmegs , Pepper , Cloves , and other Spices . And as we have Jeat , Amber , Crystal , Jasper , and other like stones , so have they Rubies , Diamonds , 164 
 Balasses , Sapphires , Jacincts , and other like . And though some say that of such precious metals , grains , or kind of spices , and precious stones , the abundance and quantity is nothing so great , as our metals , fruits or stones above rehearsed : yet if it be well considered , how the quantity of the earth under the Equinoctial to both the Tropical lines , ( in which space is found the said Gold , spices and precious stones ) is as much in quantity , as almost all the earth from the Tropickes to both the Poles ; it cannot be denied but there is more quantity of the said metals , fruits , spices , and precious stones , then there is of the other metals and other things before rehearsed . And I see that the preciousness of these things is measured after the distance that is between us , and the things that we have appetite unto . For in this navigation of the Spicery was discovered , that these Islands nothing set by gold , but set more by a knife and a nail of iron , then by his quantity of Gold : and with reason , as the thing more necessary for men service . And I doubt not but to them should be as precious our corn and seeds , if they might have them , as to us their spices : & likewise the pieces of glass that here we have counterfeited are as precious to them , as to us their stones : which by experience is seen daily by them that have trade thither . This of the riches of those countries is sufficient . 
 Touching that your Lordship wrote , whither it may Doctor Leys be profitable to the Emperor or no ? it may be without letters . doubt of great profit : if , as the king of Portingal does , he would become a merchant , and provide ships and their lading , and trade thither alone , and defend the trade of these Islands for himself . But other greater business withholdeth him from this . But still , as now it is begun to be occupied , it would come to much . For the ships coming in safety , there would thither many every year , of which to the Emperor is due of all the wares and jewels that come from thence the fift part for his custom clear without any cost . And beside 
 165 
 This was the . fleet wherein Cabot discovered the river of Plate , 1526. 
 Note . 
 The New found Islands discovered by the English . 
 A Map of the world . 
 this he putteth in every float a certain quantity of money , of which he enjoyeth of the gains pound and pounds like as other adventurers do . In a fleet of three ships and a Caravel that went from this city armed by the merchants of it , which departed in Aprill last passed , 1 and my partner have one thousand foure hundred ducats that we employed in the said fleet , principally for that two English men , friends of mine , which are somewhat learned in Cosmography , should go in the same ships , to bring me certain relation of the situation of the country , and to be expert in the navigation of those seas , and there to have informations of many other things , and advice that I desire to know especially . Seeing in these quarters are ships , and mariners of that country , and cards by which they sail , though much unlike ours , that they should procure to have the said cards , and learn how they understand them , and especially to know what navigation they have for those Islands Northwards , and Northeastward . 
 For if from the said Islands the sea did extend , without interposition of land , to sail from the North point to the - Northeast point one thousand seven hundred or one thousand eight hundred leagues , they should come to the New found Islands that we discovered , and so we should be nearer to the said Spicery by almost two thousand leagues then the Emperor , or the king of Portingal are . And to advice your Lordship whither of these Spiceries of the king of Portingal or the Emperors is nearer , and also of the titles that either of them hath , and how our New found lands are parted from it , ( for that by writing without some demonstration , it were hard to give any declaration of it ) I have caused that your Lordship shall receive herewith a little Map or Card of the world : the which , I fear me , shall put your Lordship to more labour to understand , then me to make it , only for that it is made in so little room that it cannot be but obscurely set out , that is desired 
 166 
 to be seen in it , and also for that I am in this science little expert : Yet to remedy in part this difficulty , it is necessary to declare to your Lordship my intent , with which I trust you shall perceive in this Carded part of your desire , if , for that I cannot express mine intent , with my declaration I do not make it more obscure . 
 First , your Lordship knoweth that the Cosmographers have divided the earth by 360 degrees in latitude , and as many in longitude , under the which is comprehended all the roundness of the earth : the latitude being divided into foure quarters , ninetie degrees amount to every quarter , which they measure by the altitude of the Poles , that is the North and South stars , being from the line Equinoctial till they come right under the North star the said ninetie degrees : and as much from the said line Equinoctial to the South star be other ninety degrees . And as much more is also from either of the said stars again to the Equinoctial . Which imagined to be round , is soon perceived thus , 360 degrees of latitude to be consumed in the said foure quarters of ninetie degrees a quarter : so that this latitude is the measure of the world from North to South , and from South to North . And the longitude , in which are also counted other 360 , is counted from West to East , or from East to West , as in the Carded is set . 
 The said latitude your Lordship may see marked Took ™ ™ the and divided in the end of this Carded on the left hand : iatttudes-so that if you would know in what degrees of latitude any region or coast stands , take a compass , and set the one foot of the same in the Equinoctial line right against the said region , & apply the other foot of the compass to the said region or coast , & then set the said compass at the end of the Carded , where the degrees are divided . And the one foot of the compass standing in the line Equinoctial , the other will show in the scale the degrees of altitude or latitude that the said region is in . Also the longitude of the world I have set out in the neither part of the Carded , containing 
 167 
 also 360 degrees : which begin to be counted after Ptoleme and other Cosmographers from and headland called Capo Verde , which is over against a little cross made in the part Occidental , where the division of the degrees begins , and endeth in the same Capo Verde . 
 Now to know in what longitude any land is , your Lordship must take a ruler or a compass , and set the one foot of the compass upon the land or coast whose longitude you would know , and extend the other foot of the compass to the next part of one of the transversali lines in the Orientali or Occidental part : which done , set the one foot of the compass in the said transversal line at the end of the neither scale , the scale of longitude , and the other foot shows the degree of longitude that the region is in . And your Lordship must understand that this Carded , though little , containeth the universali whole world betwixt two collaterali lines , the one in the Occidentali part descendeth perpendicular upon the 175 degree , & the other in the Orientali on the 170 degree , whose distance measureth the scale of longitude . And that which is without the two said transversali lines , is only to show how the Orientali part is joined with the Occident , and Occident with the Orient . For that that is set without the line in the Oriental part , is the same that is set within the other line in the Occidentali part : and that that is set without the line in the Occidentali part , is the same that is set within the line in the Orientali part , to show that though this figure of the world in plain or flat seems to have and end , yet one imagining that this said Carded were set upon a round thing , where the ends should touch by the lines , it would plainly appear how the Orient part joineth with the Occident , as there without the lines it is described and figured . 
 And for more declaration of the said Carded , your Lordship shall understand , that beginning on the part Occidental within the line , the first land that is set 168 
 out , is the main land and Islands of the Indies of the Emperor . Which main land or coast goes Northward , and finisheth in the land that we found , which is called here Terra de Labrador . So that it appears the said land that we found , and the Indies to be all one main land . 
 The said coast from the said Indies Southward , as by the Carded your Lordship may see , comes to a certain straight Sea , called Estrecho de todos Santos : Now called by which straight Sea the Spaniards go to the Spiceries , straight of 
 as I shall declare more at large : the which straight * ' 
 Sea is right against three hundred fifteene degrees of longitude , and is of latitude or altitude from the Equinoctial three and fifty degrees . The first land from the said beginning of the Carded towards the Orient are certain Islands of the Canaries , and Islands of Capo verde . But the first main land next to the line Equinoctial is the said Capo verde , and from thence Northward by the straight of this sea of Italie . And so follows Spayne , France , Flanders , Almain , Denmarke , and Norway , which is the highest part towards the North . And over against Flanders are our Islands of England and Ireland . Of the lands and coasts within the straights I have set out only the Regions , dividing them by lines of their limits , by which plainly I think your Lordship may see , in what situation every region is , and of what highness , and with what regions it is joined . I do think few are left out of all Europe . 
 In the parts of Asia and Affrica I could not so well make the said divisions : for that they be not so well known , nor need not so much . This I write because in the said Carded be made the said lines & strikes , that your Lordship should understand wherefore they do serve . Also returning to the foresaid Capo verde , the coast goes Southward to a Cape called Capo de buona speransa : which is right over against the 60. 8c 65. degree of longitude . And by this Cape go the Portingals to their Spicery . For from this Cape towards the 169 
 Orient , is the land of Calicut , as your Lordship may see in the headland over against the 130. degree . From the said Cape of Buona speransa the coast returns towards the line Equinoctial , and passing forth entereth the read sea , & returning out , entereth again into the gulf of Persia , and returns towards the Equinoctial line , till that it comes to the headland called Calicut aforesaid , and from thence the coast making a gulf , where is the river of Ganges , returns towards the line to a headland called Malaca , where is the principali Spicery : & from this Cape returns and makes a great gulf , and after the coast goes right towards the Orient , and over against this last gulf and coast be many Islands , which be Islands of the Spiceries of the Emperor . Upon which the Portingals and he be at variance . 
 N°te - The said coast goes towards the Orient , and endeth right against the 155. degrees , and after returns towards the Occident Northward : which coast not yet plainly known , I may join to the New found land found by us , that I spoke of before . So that I finish with this brief declaration of the Carded aforesaid . Well I know I should also have declared how the coasts within the straights of the Sea of Italie run . It is plain that passing the straights on the North side of that Sea after the coast of Granado , and with that which pertains to Spaine , is the coast of that which France hath in Italie . And then follows in one piece all Italie , which land hath and arm of the Sea , with a gulf which is called Mare Adriaticum . And in the bottom of this gulf is the city of Venice . And on the other part of the said gulf is Sclavonia , and next Grecia , then the Streits of Constantinople , and then the sea called Euxinus , which is within the said straights : and coming out of the said straights , follows Turcia major ( though now on both sides it is called Turcia . ) And so the coast runneth Southward to Syria , and over against the said Turcia are the 170 
 Islands of Rhodes , Candie , and Cyprus . And over against Italie are the Islands of Sicilia and Sardinia . And over against Spaine is Majorca and Minorca . In the end of the gulf of Syria is Judea . And from thence returns the coast towards the Occident , till it comes to the straights where we began , which all is the coast of Affrike and Barbarie . Also your Lordship shall understand that the coasts of the Sea throughout all the world , I have coloured with yellow , for that it may appear that all that is within the line coloured yellow , is to be imagined to be main land or Islands : and all without the line so coloured to be Sea : whereby it is easy and light to know it . Albeit in this little room any other description would rather have made it obscure then clear . And the said coasts of the Sea are all set justly after the manner and form as they lie , as the navigation approveth them throughout all the Carded , save only the coasts and Isles of the Spicery of the Emperor which is from over against the 160. to the 215. degrees of longitude , For these coasts and situations of the Islands , every of the Cosmographers and pilots of Portingal & Spayne do set after their purpose . The Spaniards more towards the Orient , because they should appear to appertain to the Emperor : & the Portingals more towards the Occident , for that they should fall within their jurisdiction . So that the pilots and navigants thither , which in such cases should declare the truth , by their industry do set them falsely every one to favour his prince . And for this cause can be no certain situation of that coast and Islands , till this difference betwixt them be verified . 
 Now to come to the purpose of your Lordship's demand Doctor Leys touching the difference between the Emperor and the deman^-king of Portingal , to understand it better , I must declare the beginning of this discovery . Though peradventure your Lordship may say that in that I have written ought of purpose , I fallen in the proverb , A gemino ovo bellum : But your Lordship commanded me to be large , 
 171 
 and I take licence to be prolixious , and shall peradventure tedious , but your Lordship knoweth that Nihil ignorantia verbosius . 
 In the year 1484 the king of Portingal minded to arm certain Carvels to discover this Spicery . Then forasmuch as he feared that being discovered , every other prince would send and trade thither , so that the cost and peril of discovering should be his , and the profit common : wherefore first he gave knowledge of this his mind to all princes Christened , saying that he would seek among the infidels new possessions of regions , and therefore would make a certain army : and that if any of them would help in the cost of the said army , he should enjoy his part of the profit or honour that should come of it . And as then this discovering was held for a strange thing and uncertain . Now they say , that all the Princes of Christendome answered , that they would be no part of such and army , nor yet of the profit that might come of it . After the which he gave knowledge to the Pope of his purpose , and of the answer of all the Princes , desiring him that seeing that none would help in the costs , that he would judge all that should be found and discovered to be of his jurisdiction , and command that none other princes The Pope re - should intermeddle therewith . The Pope said not as prehended . Christ says , Quis me constituit judicem inter vos ? He did not refuse , but making himself as Lord and Judge of all , not only granted that all that should be discovered from Orient to Occident , should be the kings of Portingal , but also , that upon great censures no other Prince should discover but he . And if they did , all to be the kings of Portingal . So he armed a fleet , and in the year 1497 were discovered the Islands of Calicut , from whence is brought all the spice he hath . 
 After this in the year 1492 the king of Spaine willing to discover lands towards the Occident without making any such diligence , or taking licence of the king of Portingal , armed certain Carvels , and then discovered this 172 
 India Occidentali , especially two Islands of the said India , that in this Carded I set forth , naming the one la Dominica , and the other Cuba , and brought certain gold from thence . Of the which when the king of Portingal had knowledge , he sent to the king of Spaine , requiring him to give him the said Islands . For that by the sentence of the Pope all that should be discovered was his , and that he should not proceed further in the discovery without his licence . And at the same time it seems that out of Castil into Portingal had gone for fear of burning infinite number of Jewes that were expelled out of Spaine , for that they would not turn to be Christians , and carried with them infinite number of gold and silver . So that it seems that the king of Spaine answered , that it was reason that the king of Portingal asked , and that to be obedient to that which the Pope had decreed , he would give him the said Islands of the Indies . Now for as much as it was decreed betwixt the said kings , that none should receive the others subject's fugitives , nor their goods , therefore the king of Portingal should pay and return to the king of Spaine a million of gold or more , that the Jewes had carried out of Spaine to Portingal , & that in so doing he would give these Islands , and desist from any more discovering . And not fulfilling this , he would not only not give these Islands , but procure to discover more where him thought best . It seems that the king of Portingal would not , or could not with his ease pay this money . And so not paying , that he could not let the king of Spaine to discover : so that he enterprised not towards the Orient where he had begun & found the Spicery . And consented to the king of Spaine , that touching this discovering they should divide the world between them two . And that all that should be discovered from Cape Verde , where this Carded begins to be counted in the degrees of longitude , to 180 of the said scale of longitude , which is half the world towards the Orient , & finisheth in this Carded right over against a little cross made at the said 180 degrees , to be 173 
 The longitudes hard to be found out . 
 the king of Portingals . And all the land from the said Cross toward the Occident , until it joineth with the other Cross in the Orient , which containeth the other hundreth and eightie degrees , that is the other half of the world , to be the king of Spaines . So that from the land over against the said hundreth & eighty degrees until it finish in the three hundred and sixtie on both the ends of the Carded , is the jurisdiction of the king of Spaine . So after this manner they divided the world between them . 
 Now for that these Islands of Spicery fallen near the term and limits between these princes ( for as by the said Carded you may see they begin from one hundred and sixtie degrees of longitude , and end in 215 ) it seems all that falls from 160 to 180 degrees , should be of Portingal : and all the rest of Spaine . And for that their Cosmographers and Pilots could not agree in the situation of the said Islands ( for the Portingals set them all within their 180 degrees , and the Spaniards set them all without : ) and for that in measuring , all the Cosmographers of both parts , or what other that ever have be cannot give certain order to measure the longitude of the world , as they do of the latitude : for that there is no star fixed from East to West , as are the stars of the Poles from North to South , but all moveth with the moving divine : no manner can be found how certainly it may be measured , but by conjectures , as the Navigants have esteemed the way they have gone . But it is manifest that Spaine had the situation of all the lands from Cape Verde , towards the Orient of the Portingals to their 180 degrees . And in all their Cards they never hitherto set the said Islands within their limitation of the said 180 degrees , ( though they knew very well of the Islands , ) till now that the Spaniards discovered them . And it is known that the king of Portingal had trade to these Islands afore , but would never suffer Portingal to go thither from Calicut : for so much as he knew that it fell out of his dominion : lest by going thither there 
 174 
 might come some knowledge of those other Islands of the king of Spaine , but bought the cloves of Merchants of that country , that brought them to Calicut , much dearer then they would have cost , if he had sent for them , thinking after this manner it would abide always secret . And now that it is discovered he sends and keeps the Spaniards from the trade all that he can . 
 Also it should seem that when this foresaid consent of the division of the world was agreed of between them , the king of Portingal had already discovered certain Islands that lie over against Cape Verde , and also certain part of the main land of India towards the South , from whence he fette Brasill , and called it the land of Brasil . So for that all should come in his term and limits , he took three hundred and seventie leagues beyond Cape Verde : and after this , his 180 degrees , being his part of the world , should begin in the Card right over against the 340 degrees , where I have made a little compass with a cross , and should finish at the 160 degree , where also I have made another little mark . And after this computation without any controversy , the Islands of the spicery fall out of the Portingals domination . So that now the Spaniards say to the Portingals , that if they would begin their 180 degrees from the said Cape Verde , to the intent they should extend more towards the Orient , and so to touch those Islands of the Spicery of the Emperor , which is all that is between the two crosses made in this Carded , that then the Islands of Cape Verde and the land of Brasil that the Portingals now obtain , is out of the said limitation , and that they are of the Emperors . Or if their 180 degrees they count from the 370 leagues beyond the said Cape Verde , to include in it the said Islands and lands of Brasil , then plainly appears the said 180 degrees should finish long before they come to these Islands of the Spicery of the Emperor : As by this Card your Lordship may see . For their limits should begin at the 340 degrees of this Card , and end at the 160 degrees , 
 175 
 New found land discovered by the Englishmen . 
 Note . 
 To sail by the Pole . 
 where I have made two little marks of the compass with crosses in them . 
 So that plainly it should appear by reason , that the Portingals should leave these Islands of Cape Verde and land of Brasil , if they would have part of the Spicery of the Emperors : or else holding these , they have no part there . To this the Portingals say , that they will begin their 180 degrees from the self same Cape Verde : for that it may extend so much more towards the Orient , and touch these Islands of the Emperors : and would win these Islands of Cape Verde and land of Brasil nevertheless , as a thing that they possessed before the consent of this limitation was made . 
 So none can verily tell which hath the best reason . They be not yet agreed , Quare sub Judice lis est . 
 But without doubt ( by all conjectures of reason ) the said Islands fallen all without the limitation of Portingal , and pertain to Spaine , as it appears by the most part of all the Cards made by the Portingals , save those which they have falsified of late purposely . 
 But now touching that your Lordship wrote , whither that which we discovered touches any thing the foresaid coasts : once it appears plainly , that the Newfound land that we discovered , is all a main land with the Indies Occidentali , from whence the Emperor hath all the gold and pearls : and so continueth of coast more then 5000 leagues of length , as by this Card appears . For from the said New lands it proceedeth towards the Occident to the Indies , and from the Indies returns towards the Orient , and after turns Southward up till it come to the Straits of Todos Santos , which I reckon to be more then 5000 leagues . 
 So that to the Indias it should seem that we have some title , at least that for our discovering we might trade thither as other doe . But all this is nothing near the Spicery . 
 Now then if from the said New found lands the Sea be navigable , there is no doubt , but sailing Northward and 176 
 passing the Pole , descending to the Equinoctial line , we shall hit these Islands , and it should be a much shorter way , then either the Spaniards or the Portingals have . For we be distant from the Pole but thirty and nine degrees , and from the Pole to the Equinoctial be ninetie , the which added together , be and hundred twenty and nine degrees , leagues 2489. and miles 7440 : Where we should find these Islands . And the Navigation of the Spaniards to the Spicery is , as by this Card you may see , from Spaine to the Islands of Canarie , and from these Islands they run over the line Equinoctial Southward to the Cape of the main land of the Indians , called the Cape of Saint Augustine , and from this Cape Southwards to the straits of Todos Santos , in the which Or the straits navigation to the said straits is 1700. or 1800 leagues ; DfMaSelane-and from these Straits being passed them , they return toward the line Equinoctial to the Islands of Spicery , which are distant from the said Straits 4200. or 4300. leagues . 
 The navigation of the Portingals to the said Islands is departing from Portingall Southward toward the Cape Verde , and from thence to another Cape passing the line Equinoctial called Capo de bona speransa , and from Portingal to the Cape is 1800 leagues , and from this Cape to the Islands of Spicery of the Emperor is 2500. leagues . 
 So that this navigation amounteth all to 4300. leagues . So that ( as afore is said , ) if between our New found lands or Norway , or Island , the seas towards the North be navigable , we should go to these Islands a shorter way by more then 2000. leagues . 
 And though we went not to the said Islands , for that Note . they are the Emperors or kings of Portingal , we should by the way and coming once to the line Equinoctial , find lands no less rich of gold and Spicery , as all other lands are under the said line Equinoctial : and also should , if we may pass under the North , enjoy the navigation of all Tartarie . Which should be no less 
 II 177 M 
 Answer . 
 A true opinion . 
 A voyage of discovery by the Pole . M. Thorne and M. Eliot discoverers of Newfound land . 
 The cause why the West Indies were not ours : which also Sebastian Cabot writeth in and Epistle to Baptista Ramusius . 
 profitable to our commodities of cloth , then these Spiceries to the Emperor , and king of Portingal . 
 But it is a general opinion of all Cosmographers , that passing the seventh climb , the sea is all ice , and the cold so much that none can suffer it . And hitherto they had all the like opinion , that under the line Equinoctial for much heat the land was unhabitable . 
 Yet since ( by experience is proved ) no land so much habitable nor more temperate . And to conclude , I think the same should be found under the North , if it were experimented . For as all judge , Nihil fit vacuum in rerum natura : So I judge , there is no land unhabitable , nor Sea innavigable . If I should write the reason that presents this unto me , I should be too prolix , and it seems not requisite for this present matter . God knoweth that though by it I should have no great interest , yet I have had and still have no little mind of this business : So that if I had faculty to my will , it should be the first thing that I would understand , even to attempt , if our Seas Northward be navigable to the Pole , or no . I reason , that as some sicknesses are heredi-tarious , and come from the father to the son , so this inclination or desire of this discovery I inherited of my father , which with another merchant of Bristow nam Hugh Eliot , were the discoverers of the New found lands , of the which there is no doubt , ( as now plainly appears ) if the mariners would then have be ruled , and followed their Pilots mind , the lands of the West Indies ( from whence all the gold comes ) had be ours . For all is one coast , as by the Card appears , and is aforesaid . 
 Also in this Card by the coasts where you see C. your Lordship shall understand it is set for Cape or headland , where I . for Hand , where P. for Port , where R. for River . Also in all this little Card I think nothing be erred touching the situation of the land , save only in these Hands of Spicery : which , for that ( as afore is said ) every one sets them after his mind , there can be 178 
 no certification how they stand . I do not deny , that there lack many things , that a consummate Card should have , or that a right good demonstration desires . For there should be expressed all the mountains and Rivers that are principali of name in the earth , with the names of Ports of the sea , the names of all principali cities , which all I might have set , but not in this Card , for the little space would not consent . 
 Your Lordship may see that setting only the names almost of every Region , and yet not of all , the room is occupied . Many Islands are also left out , for the said lack of room , the names almost of all Ports put to silence , with the roses of the winds or points of the compass : For that this is not for Pilots to sail by , but a summary declaration of that which your Lordship commanded . And if by this your Lordship cannot well perceive the meaning of this Carded , of the which I would not marveile , by reason of the rude composition of it , will it please your Lordship to advice me to make a bigger and a better Map , or else that I may cause one to be made . For I know my self in this and all other nothing perfect , but Licet semper discens , nunquam tamen ad perfectam scientiam perveniens . Also I know , to set the form Spherical of the world in Plano after the true rule of Cosmography , it would have be made otherwise then this is : howbeit the demonstration should not have be so plain . 
 And also these degrees of longitude , that I set in the lower part of this carded , should have been set along by the line Equinoctial , & so then must be imagined . For the degrees of longitude near either of the poles are nothing equal in bigness to them in the Equinoctial . But these are set so , for that setting them a long the Equinoctial , it would have made obscure a great part of the map . Many other curiosities may be required , which for the nonce I did not set down , as well for that the intent I had principally was to satisfy your doubt touching the spicery , as for that I lack leisure and time . I trust your Lordship 
 179 
 correcting that which is erred , will accept my good will , which is to do any thing that I may in your Lordship's service . But from henceforth I know your Lordship will rather command me to keep silence , then to be large , when you shall be wearied with the reading of this discourse . Jesus prosper your estate and health . 
 Your Lordship's 
 Robert Thorne 1527. 
 ALso this Card and that which I write touching the variance between the Emperor and the king of Portingall , is not to be showed or communicated there with many of that court . For though there is nothing in it prejudicial ! to the Emperor , yet it may be a cause of pain to the maker : as well for that none may make these Cards , but certain appointed and allowed for master's , as for that peradventure it would not found well to them , that a stranger should know or discover their secrets : and would appear worst of all , if they understand that I write touching the short way to the spicery by our Seas . Though peradventure of troth it is not to be looked to , as a thing that by all opinions is unpossible , and I think never will come to effect : and therefore neither here nor else where is it to be spoken of . For to move it among wise men , it should be had in derision . And therefore to none I would have written nor spoken of such things , but to your Lordship , to whom boldly I commit in this all my foolish fantasy as to my self . But if it please God that into England I may come with your Lordship , I will show some conjectures of reason , though against the generail opinion of Cosmographers , by which shall appear this that I say not to lack some foundation . And till that time I beseech your Lordship let it be put to silence : and in the mean season it may please God to send our two Englishmen , that are gone to the Spicery , which may also bring more plain declaration of that which in this case might be desired . 
 Also I know I needed not to have been so prolix in 180 
 the declaration of this Card to your Lordship , if the said Card had be very well made after the rules of Cosmography . For your Lordship would soon understand it better then I , or any other that could have made it : and so it should appear that I showed Delphinum natare . But for that I have made it after my rude manner , it is necessary that I be the declarer or glosser of mine own work , or else your Lordship should have had much labour to understand it , which now with it also cannot be excused , it is so grossly done . But I knew you looked for no curious things of me , and therefore I trust your Lordship will accept this , and hold me for excused . In other men's letters that they write they crave pardon that at this present they write no larger : but I must finish , asking pardon that at this present I write so largely . Jesus preserve your Lordship with augmentation of dignities . 
 Your servant Robert 
 Thorn , 1527. 
 Epitaphium M. Roberti Thorni , sepulti in Ecclesia Templariorum Londini . 
 Obertus jacet hic Thorn , quem Bristolia quondam Praetoris merito legit ad officium . 
 Huic etenim semper magna ; Respublica curae , Charior & cunctis patria divitiis . 
 Far inopi auxilium , tristes componere lights , 
 Dulce huic consilio qu6sque juvare fuit . 
 Qui pius exaudis miserorum voto precesque , 
 Christe huic coeli des region locum . 
 