Here begins the Prologue of the process of the Libel of English policy , exhorting all England to keep the sea , and namely the narrow sea : showing what profit comes thereof , and also what worship and salvation to England , and to all English-men . 
 THe true process of English policy 
 Of utterward to keep this regne in 
 Of our England , that no man may deny , Ner say of sooth but it is one of the best , Is this , that who sees South , North , East and West , Cherish Merchandise , keep the admiralty ; 
 That we be Master's of the narrow see . 
 For Sigismond the great Emperor , Which yet reigneth , when he was in this land With king Henry the fift , Prince of honour , Here much glory , as him thought , he found , A mighty land which had take in hand To war in Francej and make mortality , And ever well kept round about the see . 
 And to the king thus he said : My brother , ( When he perceived two Towns Caleis and Dover ) Of all your Towns to choose of one and other , To keep the sea and soon to come over To war outward and your regne to recover : Keep these two Towns sure , and your Majesty As your tweyne eyes : so keep the narrow see . 
 For if this sea be kept in time of war , Who can here pass without danger and woe ? Who may escape , who may mischief differre ? What Marchandie may forby be ago ? 
 For needs hem must take trewes every foe : 
 114 
 Flanders and Spaine , and other , trust to me , Or else hindered all for this Narrow see . 
 Therefore I cast me by a little writing To show at eye this conclusion , For conscience and for mine acquiring Against God and again abusion , And cowardice , and to our enemies confusion . For foure things our Noble shows to me , King , Ship , and Sword , and power of the see . Where ben our ships , where ben our swords become ? Our enemies bed for the ship set a sheep . 
 Alas our rule halteth , it is benome . 
 Who dare well say that lordship should take keep ? 
 I will assay , though mine heart gin to weep , To do this work , if we will ever thee , For very shame to keep about the see . 
 Shall any Prince , what so be his name , Which hath Nobles much leech ours , Bee Lord of see : and Flemings to our blame , Stop us , take us , and so make fade the flowers Of English state , and disteyne our honours ? For cowardice alas it should so be . 
 Therefore I gin to write now of the see . 
 Of the commodities of Spaine and of Flanders . The first Chapter . 
 Know well all men that profits in certain Commodities called coming out of Spaine 
 And Marchandie , who so will weet what it is , Bene Figs , Raisins , wine Bastard , and Datis , And Licoris , Sivill oil , and grain , White Pastill Soap , and Wax is not vain . Iron , Wool , Wadmolle , Gotefell , Kidfell also : For Point-makers full needful bene they tweyn : Saffron , Quicksilver , which own Spaine Marchandy , Is into Flanders shipped full craftily , Unto Bruges as to her staple fair : 
 IT5 
 A.D. 
 c . 1437-regni 18. Quatuor considerantur in moneta aurea Anglic a , qua dicitur Nobile : scilicet Rex , Navis , gladius , y Mare : Qua designant potestatem Anglicorum super Mare . In quorum opprobrium his diebus Britones minores ^AElandrenses y alii dicunt Anglicise Tollite de vestro Nobile navem y imponite ovem . Intendentes , quod sicut quondam a tempore Edwardi tertii AngUci erant domini Maris , modo his diebus sunt vecordes , victi , y ad bellandum y Mare observandum velut oves . 
 Figs , Raisins , Wine Bastard , Dates , Lycoras , Civil Oil , Groynes , 
 White Pastel Soft , Wax , Iron , Wadmolle , Gotefell , Kidfell , Saffron , Quicksilver . The Haven of Scluse his Haven for her repair Which is cleped Swyn though ships giding : Where many vessels and fair are abiding . But these Merchants with their ships great , And such chaffare as they buy and get By the ways must need take on hand By the coasts to pass of our England , Betwixt Dover and Caleis , this is no doubt . Who can well else such matter bring about ? And when these said Merchants discharged be Of Marchandie in Flanders never the see , Then they be charged again with Marchandy , That to Flanders bougeth full richly . Fine cloth of Ypre that nam is better than ours . Cloth of Curtrike , fine cloth of all colours , Much Fustian , and also Linen cloth . But Flemings , if ye be not wroth , 
 Flemish cloth made of English Wool . The great substance of your cloth at the full Ye wot you make it of our English will . Then may it not sink in mannis brain , But that it must this Marchandy of Spaine Both out and in by our costs pass : He that said nay in wit was like and ass . we should have peace with the grounds tweyne 
 The necessary conjunction of Spaine and Flanders . Thus if this see were kept , I dare well say . For Spaine and Flanders is as eke other brother , And neither may well live without other : They may not liven to maintain their degrees , Without our English commodities : Wool and Tin : for the wool of England Sustaineth the Commons Flemings I understand . Then if England would her wool restrain From Flanders , this follows in certain , Flanders of need must with us have peace , Or else she is destroyed without lees . Also if Flanders thus destroyed be : Some Marchandy of Spaine will never ythee : 116 
 For destroyed it is , and as in cheeffe The wool of Spaine it comes not to preeffe , But if it be costed and menged well among the English wool the greater delle . For Spanish wool in Flaunders draped is , And ever hath bee , that men have mind of this : And yet Wool is one of the chief Marchandy 
 That longeth to Spaine : who so will espy , It is of little valve , trust unto me , With English wool but if it menged be . 
 Thus if the sea be kept , than harken hither , If these two lands come not together : So that the Fleet of Flanders pass nought That in the narrow see it be not brought Into the Rochelle to fetch the fumous wine , Ner into Bytonuse Bay for salt so fine , What is then Spaine ? What is Flanders also ? As who said , nought , the thrift is ago . For the little land of Flanders is But a staple to other lands ywis : 
 And all that grows in Flanders grain and seed May not a Month find hem meat and breed . What hath then Flanders , be Flemings liefFe or loath , But a little Mader and Flemish Cloth : By Drapering of our wool in substance Liven her commons , this is her governance , Without which they may not live at ease . 
 Thus must hem starve , or with us must have peace . 
 Of the commodities of Portugal . The second Chapter . 
 THe Marchandy also of Portugal By diverse lands turn into sale . 
 Portugalers with us have troth in hand : Whose Marchandy comes much into England . They ben our friends , with their commodities , And we English passen into their countries . 
 Wine , Osey , Wax , Grain , Figs , Reisens , Honey , Cordeweyne , Dates , Salt , Hides . 
 Note well . 
 The Britons great Rovers and Thieves . 
 Her land hath wine , Osey , Wax , and Grain , Figs , Reysins , Honey and Cordoweyne : Dates , and Salt , Hides , and such Marchandy : And if they would to Flanders pass for by , They should not be suffered ones ner twyes , For supporting of our cruel enemies , That is to say Flemings with her gyle : For changeable they are in little while . Then I conclude by reasons many more , If we suffered neither friend nor foe , What so enemies , and so supporting Pass for by us in time of werring , Seth our friends will not been in cause Of our hindering , if reason's lede this clause : Then need from Flanders peace be to us sought , And other lands should seek peace , doubt nought : For Flanders is Staple , as men tell me , To all nations of Christianitie . 
 The commodities of petty Britaine , with her Rovers on the sea . The third Chapter . 
 Furthermore to write I am feign 
 Somewhat speaking of the little Britayne . Commodity thereof there , is and was , Salt , and wine , crest cloth and canvas . And the land of Flaunders sickerly Is the staple of their Marchandy . 
 Which Marchandie may not pass away But by the coast of England , this is no nay . And of this Britaine , who so truth lovis , Are the greatest rovers and the greatest theevis , That have be in the sea many one year : That our Merchants have bought full dear . For they have took notable goods of ours , On this side see , these false pelours Called of Saint Malo , and else where : Which to their Duke none obeisance will bear : 
 118 
 With such colours we have be hindered soar . And feigned peace is called no war herefore . Thus they have be in diverse coasts many Of our England , more then rehearse can I : In Norfolke coasts , and other places about , And robbed and brent and slain by many a rout : And they have also ransomed Town by Town : That into the regnes of boast have run her sown : Which hath been ruth unto this Realm and shame : They that the sea should keep are much to blame . For Britayne is of easy reputation ; 
 And Saint Malo turns hem to reprobation . 
 A story of Edward the third his ordinance for Britayne . 
 HEre bring I in a story to me lent , That a good Squire in time of Parliament Took unto me well written in a scrow : That I have commend both with high and low , Of which all men accorden into one , That it was done not many years ago . 
 But when noble King Edward the thrid Reigned in grace , right thus it betid . For he had a manner jealousy To his Merchants and loved them heartily . He felled the ways to rule well the see , Whereby Merchants might have prosperity . That for Harflew Houndflew did he maken ; And great war that time were undertaken , betwixt the King and the Duke of Britayne : At last to fallen to peace both were they fain : Upon the which made with convention Our Merchants made hem ready bowne Towards Britayne to load their Marchandie , Weening hem friends they went forth boldly : But soon anon our Merchants were ytake , And we sped never the better for truce sake . 
 " 9 
 A.D. 
 c - 1437 - 
 Historiaosten-dens quam ordinationem Rex Ed-viardus tertius feeit contra depradatores marinos Britannia minoris , ad debellandum eos & subjugandum Britannos minores . 
 They lost her good , her navy and spending : But their complaint came unto the king . Then waxed he wroth , and to the Duke he sent , And complained that such harm was hent ; By convention and peace made so refused : Which Duke sent again , and him excused , Rehearsing that the mount of Saint Michael , And Saint Malo would never a dell 
 Be subject unto his governance , Nor be under his obeisance : And so they did withouten him that deed . But when the king anon had taken heed : He in his heart set a judgement , Without calling of any Parliament , Or great tarry to take long advice To fortify anon he did devise 
 Of English Towns three , that is to say , Dertmouth , Plymouth , the third it is Fowey : And gave hem help and notable puissance With insistence set them in governance Upon petty Bretayne for to war . 
 Those good sea men would no more differre , But bete hem home and made they might not rout , Took prisoners , and made them for to lout . And eft the Duke , and ensample wise , Wrote to the king as he first did devise , Him excusing : But our men wood With great power passed over the flood And warred forth into the Dukes land , And had nigh destroyed free and bound . 
 But than the Duke knew that the towns three Should have lost all his native Country , He undertook by surety true not false , For mount Michael and Saint Malo also , And other parties of the little Brytaine , Which to obey , as said was , were not fain . The Duke himself for all did undertake : With all his heart a full peace did he make : 
 120 
 So that in all the life time of the king , Merchants had peace withouten werring : He made a statute for Lombards in this land , That they should in no wise take on hand Here to inhabit , here to charge and discharge But fortie days , no more time had they large . This good king by wit of such appreiffe Kept his Merchants and the sea from mischief . 
 Of the commodities of Scotland and draping of her wolles in Flanders . The fourth Chapter . 
 MOreover of Scotland the commodities 
 Are Fells , Hides , and of Wool the Fleece . 
 And all these must pass by us away Into Flanders by England , sooth to say . And all her wool was draped for to fell In the Towns of Poperinge and of Bell ; Which my Lord of Glocester with ire For her falsehood set upon a fire . dnno Domini 
 And yet they of Bell and Poperinge 1^56 . Hen . 6 . 
 Could never drape her wool for any thing , I4 ’ 
 But if they had English will withal . 
 Our goodly wool which is so generail 
 Needful to them in Spaine and Scotland also , And other costs , this sentence is not false : Ye worthy Merchants I do it upon you , I have this learned you wot well where and how : 
 You wot the Staple of that Marchandie , Of this Scotland is Flaunders sekerly . 
 And the Scots be charged known at the eye , 
 Out of Flanders with little Mercery , 
 And great plenty of Haberdashers Beware , 
 And half her ships with cart wheels bore , And with Barrows are laden as in substance : Thus most rude ware are in her chevesance . So they may not forbear this Flemish land . Therefore if we would manly take in hand , 121 
 StatutumRegis Edwardi tertii proLombardis . 
 To keep this Sea from Flanders and from Spaine , And from Scotland , like as from petty Britaine , we should right soon have peace for all her hosts , For they must needs pass by our English costs . 
 Of the commodities of Pruce , and High Dutch men , and Easterlings . The fifth Chapitle . 
 Now go forth to the commodities , That comes from Pruce in two manner degrees . 
 For two manner people have such use , That is to say , High Duch men of Pruse , And Esterlings , which might not be forborn , Out of Flanders , but it were verily lost . For they bring in the substance of the Beer , That they drinken feele too good cheap , not dear . Ye have herd that two Flemings together Will undertake or they go any whither , Or they rise once to drink a Ferkin full , Of good Beerekin : so soar they hall and pull . Under the board they pissen as they fit : This comes of covenant of a worthy wit . 
 Without Caleis in their Butter they cakked When they fled home , and when they leisure lacked To hold their siege , they went like as a Doe : Well was that Fleming that might truss , and go . For fear they turned back and hied fast , My Lord of Glocester made hem so aghast With his coming , and sought hem in her land , And brent and slow as he had take on hand : So that our enemies durst not bide , nor steer , They fled to mewe , they durst no more appear , Rebuked soar for ever so shamefully , Unto her utter everlasting villainy . 
 Now Beer and Bacon be from Pruse brought Into Flanders , as loved and far ysought ; 
 Osmond , Copper , Bowstaves , Steel , and Wax , Peltreware and gray Pitch , Terre , Board , and flex : 
 122 
 And Colleyne that reed , Fustian and Canvas , Carded , Bukeram : of old time thus it was . But the Flemings among these things dear , In common loven best Bacon and Beer . Also Pruse men maken her adventure Of Plate of silver of wedges good and sure In great plenty which they bring and buy , Out of the lands of Beam and Hungarie : Which is increase full great unto their land , And they be laden , I understand , With woollen cloth all manner of colours By dyers crafted full diverse , that ben ours . And they adventure full greatly unto the Bay , for salt that is needful withouten nay . Thus if they would not our friends be , We might lightly stop hem in the see : They should not pass our streemes withouten leave , It would not be , but if we should hem grieve . 
 Of the commodities of the Genuoys and her great Carracks . Chap. 6. 
 THe Genuois come in sundry wises 
 Into this land with diverse merchandises In great Carracks , arrayed withouten lack With cloth of gold , silk , and pepper black They bring with them , and of II crood great plenty , Will Oil , Woad ashen , by vessel in the see , Cotton , Rochalum , and good gold of Genne . 
 And then be charged with wool again I wen , And woollen cloth of ours of colours all . 
 And they adventure , as oft it does befall , Into Flanders with such things as they buy , That is their chief staple sekerly : And if they would be our full enemies , They should not pass our streams with merchandise . 
 A.D. 
 c . U37-Pitch , Tar , Board , Plexe , Colleinthreed , Fustian , Canvas , Cards , Bokeram , Silver-plate , Wedges of Silver and Mettle . 
 | | Or , Woad . 
 [ The 
 123 
 A.D. c . 1437 - The commodities and nicetees of the Venetians and Florentines , with their Gallees . Chap. 7. ' ! YHe great Galees of Venice and Florence J. Be well laden with things of complacence , All spicery and of gross ware : With sweet wines all manner of chaffare , Apes , and Japes , and marmusets tailed , Nifles and trifles that little have availed : And things with which they fetely blere our eye : With things not enduring that we buy . For much of this chaffare that is wastable Might be forborn for dear and deceivable . And that I ween as for infirmities In our England are such commodities Withouten help of any other land Which by wit and practise both yfound : That all humours might be voided sure , Which that we gleder with our English cure : That we should have no need of Scamonie , Turbit , enforbe , correct Diagredie , Rubarbe , Seen , and yet they been to needful , But I know things all so speedefull , That grown here , as those things said . Let of this matter no man be dismayed ; But that a man may void infirmity Without degrees fetched from beyond the sea . And yef they should except be any thing It were but sugre , trust to my saying : He that trusteth not to my saying and sentence , Let him better search experience . In this matter I will not further press , Who so not believeth , let him leave and cease . 
 Thus these galeis for this licking ware , And eating ware , bore hence our best chaffare : Cloth , will , and tin , which as I said before , Out of this land worst might be forbore , 124 
 Have great need to buy some of them three : And we receive of hem into this cost Ware and chaffare that lightly will lost . And would Jesus , that our Lords would Consider this well both young and old : Namely old that have experience , That might the young exhort to prudence ; What harm , what hurt , and what hindrance Is done to us , unto our great grievance , Of such lands , and of such nations : As expert men know by probations , By writings as discovered our counsels , And false colour always the countertailes Of our enemies ; that does us hindering Unto our goods , our Realm , and to the king : As wise men have showed well at eye ; And all this is coloured by marchandye . 
 And example of deceit . 
 ALso they bear the gold out of this land , And suck the thrift away out of our hand : 
 As the Wasp souketh honey from the bee , So minisheth our commodity . 
 Now will you hear how they in Cotteswold Were wont to borrow or they should be sold Her will good as for year and year . 
 Of cloth and tin they did in like manner : And in her galies ship this marchandie : Then soon at Venice of them men will it buy . Then utterne there the chaflare by the peise , And lightly also there they make her reise . And when the goods been at Venice sold , Then to carry her change they this money have , They will it proffer , their subtlety to save , To English merchants to yeve it out by eschange To be paid again they make not strange , 
 I25 
 At the receiving and sighed of a letter , Here in England , seeming for the better , by foure pence less in the noble round : That is twelve pence in the golden pound . And if we will have of payment A full month , than must him needs assent To eight pence loss , that is shillings twaine In the English pound ; as eft soon again , For two months twelve pence must he pay . In the English pound what is that to say , But shillings three ? So that in pound fell For hurt and harm hard is with hem to dwell . And when English merchants have content This eschange in England of assent , That these said Venetians have in won And Florentines to bear her gold soon Over the see into Flanders again : 
 And thus they live in Flanders , sooth to sane , And in London with such chevisance , That men call usury , to our loss and hindrance . 
 Another example of deceit . 
 NOw lesten well how they made us a valleys When they borrowed at the town of Caleis As they were wont , their will that was hem lent , For year and year they should make payment . And sometime also two year and two year . 
 | | Or , lone . This was fair II love : but yet will you hear , 
 How they to Bruges would her will carry , And for hem take payment withouten tarry , And fell it fast for ready money in hand . For fifty pounds of money of loss they would not woned In a thousand pound , and live thereby Till the day of payment easily , Come again in exchange : making Full like usury , as men make undertaking . Than when this payment of a thousand pound Was well content , they should have chaffare found 
 126 
 If they would from the Staple full , Receive again three thousand pound in will . In Cotteswold also they ride about , And all England , and buy withouten doubt What them list with freedom and franchise , More then we English may gitten many wise . But would God that without longer delays These galees were unfraught in fortie days , And in fortie days charged again , And that they might be put to certain To go to oste , as we there with hem do . It were expedient that they did right so , As we do there . If the king would it : Ah what worship would fallen to English wit ? What profit also to our marchandie Which would of need be cherished heartily ? For I would wit , why now our navy faileth , When many a foe us at our door assaileth . Now in these days , that if there come a need , What navy should we have it is to dread . In Denmarke were full noble conquerors In time past , full worthy warriors : Which when they had their merchants destroyed , To poverty they fell , thus were they noyed : And so they stand at mischief at this day . This learned I late well writon , this no nay . Therefore beware , I can no better will , If grace it will , of other men peril . 
 For if merchants were cherished to her speed , We were not likely to fail in any need . If they be rich , then in prosperity Shall our land , lords , and commonty , And in worship . Now think I on the son Of marchandy Richard of Whitingdon ; That load star , and chief chosen flower : What hath by him our England of honour , And what profit hath been of his riches , And yet lasteth daily in worthiness ? 
 127 
 A.D. 
 c . 1437 - 
 Note diligently . 
 A woeful complaint of lack of navy if need come . 
 A story of destruction of Denmarke for destruction open their merchants . 
 The praise of Richard of WhitAngdon merchant . 
 That pen and paper may not me suffice 
 Him to describe : so high he was of price 
 Above merchants , that set him one of the best : I can no more , but God have him in rest . 
 Now the principal matter . 
 WHat reason is it that we should go to oste In their countries , & in this English cost 
 They should not so ? but have more liberty Then we our selves now also motte I thee . I would to gifts men should take no heed That lets our thing public for to speed . For this we see well every day at eye , Gifts and fests stopen our policy . 
 Now see that fools ben either they or we : But ever we have the worse in this country . Therefore let hem unto oste go here , Or be we free with hem in like manner In their countries : and if it will not be , Compel them unto oste , and ye shall see Much advantage , and much proiite arise , Much more then I can write in any wise . 
 Of our charge and discharge at her marts .. 
 COnceive well here , that Englishmen at marts Be discharged , for all her crafts and arts , In Brabant of her marchandy 
 In fourteene days , and again hastily In the same days fourteene acharged eft . And if they bide longer all is bereft , Anon they should forfeit her goods all , Or marchandy : it should no better fallen . And we to martis in Brabant charged been With English cloth full good and fair to seen : We ben again charged with mercery , Haburdasher ware , and with grosserie : 
 To which marts , that English men call fairs , Each nation oft makes her repairs : 
 128 
 C. 1437. English , and French , Lombards , Jennoyes , Catalones , thedre they take her ways : Scots , Spaniards , Irishmen there abides , With great plenty bringing of sale hides . 
 And I here say that we in Brabant buy , Flanders and Zeland more of marchandy In common use then done all other nations : This have I herd of merchants relations : And if the English been not in the marts They been feeble , and as nought be her parts . For they byemore , and from purse put out More marchandie then all the other rout . Kept then the see , ships should not bring ne fetch , And then the carreys would not thidre stretch : And so those marts would full evil thee , If we manly kept about the see . 
 Of the commodities of Brabant and Zeland and 
 Henauld and marchandy carried by land to the marts . Cap. 8. 
 YEt marchandy of Brabant and Zeland 
 The Madre and Woad , that dyers take on hand To dyen with , Garlic and Onions , And saltfishe also for husband and commons . But they of Holland at Caleis byen our fells , And wolles our , that Englishmen hem sells . And the chaflare that Englishmen do byen In the marts , that no man may denien , Is not made in Brabant that country : It comes from out of Henauld , not by see , But all by land , by carts , and from France , Bourgoyne , Colein , Cameret in substance , Therefore at marts if there be a restraint , Men seyne plainly that list no fables paint , If Englishmen be withdrawn away , Is great rebuke and loss to her affray : As though we sent into the land of France Ten thousand people , men of good puissance , 11 129 1 
 Mader , Woad . 
 Garlic , Onions , saltfish . 
 What our merchants buy in that cost more then all other . 
 To war unto her hindering multifarie , So ben our English merchants necessary . If it be thus assay , and we shall witten Of men expert , by whom I have this written . For said is that this carted marchandy Draws in valve as much verily , As all the goods that come in ships thider , Which Englishmen buy most and bring it hither . For her marts been febel , shame to say , But Englishmen thider dress her way . 
 A conclusion of this depending of keeping of the sea . 
 THan I conclude , if never so much by land Were by cars brought unto their hand , If well the sea were kept in governance ' They should by sea have no deliverance . 
 we should hem stop , and we should hem destroy , As prisoners we should hem bring to annoy . And so we should of our cruel enemies Make our friends for fear of marchandies , If they were not suffered for to pass Into Flanders . But we be frail as glass And also brittle , not thought never abiding ; But when grace shines soon are we sliding ; We will it not receive in any wise : That maken lust , envy , and covetise : Expone me this ; and ye shall sooth it find , Bear it away , and keep it in your mind . Then should worship unto our Noble bee In feat and form to lord and Majesty : Liche as the seal the greatest of this land On the one side hath , as I understand , A prince riding with his sword ydraw , In the other side sitting , sooth it is in saw , Betokening good rule and punishing In very deed of England by the king . 
 13° 
 And it is so , God blessed might he be . So in likewise I would were on the see By the Noble , that sword should have power , And the ships on the sea about us here . 
 What needs a garland which is made of Ivy Show a tavern wineless , also thrive I ? 
 If men were wise , the Frenchmen and Fleming Should bear no state in sea by werring . 
 Then Hankin lyons should not be so bold To stop wine , and ships for to hold Unto our shame . He had be beten thence . Alas , alas , why did we this offence , Fully to shend the old English fame's ; 
 And the profits of England , and their names : Why is this power called of covetise ; 
 With false colours cast beforn our eyes ? That if good men called werriours Would take in hand for the commons succours , To purge the sea unto our great avail , And win hem goods , and have up the sail , And on our enemies their lives to impart , So that they might their prizes well depart , As reason's wold , justice and equity ; 
 To make this land have lordship of the sea . Then shall Lombards and other feigned friends Make their challenges by colour false offends , And say their chaffare in the ships is , And challenge all Look if this be amiss . For thus may all that men have bought to soar , Ben soon excused , and saved by false colour . Beware ye men that bear the great in hand That they destroy the policy of this land , By gift and good , and the fine golden clothes , And silk , and other : say ye not this sooth is ? But if we had very experience That they take meed with privy violence , Carpets , and things of price and pleasance , Whereby stopped should be good governance : 
 131 
 Of Hankin lions . 
 Lombards are cause enough to hurt this land , although there were none other cause . 
 False colouring of goods by Lombards . 
 Alas for bribes if gift of god , feasts if other means , that stoppen our policy . 
 This is the very state of our time . 
 And if it were as ye say to me , Than would I say , alas cupidity , That they that have her lives put in dread , Shall soon out of winning , all for meed , And loose her costs , and brought to poverty , That they shall never have lust to go to sea . 
 And exhortation to make and ordinance against colour of maintainers and excusers of folks goods . 
 It is a marvellous thing that so great a sickness and hurt of you land may have no remedy of so many as take themselves wise men of governance . 
 FOr this colour that must be said aloft And be declared of the great full oft , That our seamen will by many wise Spoil our friends in steed of our enemies : For which colour and Lombards maintenance , The king it needs to make and ordinance With his Counsel that may not fail , I trow , That friends should from enemies be know , Our enemies taken and our friends spared : The remedy of hem must be declared . Thus may the sea be kept in no fell , For if ought be spoken , wot ye well , We have the strokes , and enemies have the winning : But maintainers are partners of the finning . We live in lust and bide in covetise : 
 This is our rule to maintain merchandise , And policy that we have on the sea . And , but God help , it will no other bee . 
 Of the commodities of Ireland , and policy and keeping thereof , and conquering of wild Irish : with and incident of Wales . Chap. 9. 
 I Cast to speak of Ireland but a little : Commodities of it I will entitle , Hides , and fish , Salmon , Hake , Herring , Irish wool , and linen cloth , faldinge , 132 
 And marterns good ben her marchandie , Herts Hides , and other of * Venery . Skins of Otter , Squirrel and Irish hare , Of sheep , lamb , and Fox , is her chaffare , Fells of Kids , and Conies great plenty . So that if Ireland help us to keep the sea , Because the King cleped is Rex Angliae , And is Dominus also Hybernias , Old possessed by Progenitors : The Irish men have cause like to ours Our land and hers together to defend , That no enemy should hurt ne offend , Ireland ne us : but as one commontie Should help well to keep about the sea : For they have havens great , and goodly bays , Sure , wide and deep , of good assays , At Waterford , and costs many one . 
 And as men say in England be there none Better havens , ships in to ride , No more sure for enemies to abide . 
 Why speak I thus so much of Ireland ? For all so much as I can understand , It is fertile for things that there do grow And multiplien , look who lust to know , So large , so good , and so commodious , That to declare is strange and marvelous . For of silver and gold there is the oore , Among the wild Irish though they be poor . For they are rude and can thereon no skill : So that if we had their peace and good will To mine and fine , and metal for to pure , In wild Irish might we find the cure , As in London says a Juellere , Which brought from thence gold oore to us here , Whereof was foamed metal good and clean , As they touch , no better could be seen . 
 Now here beware and heartily take intent , As ye will answer at last judgement , 133 
 A.D. 
 C. 1437 - 
 * Or , hunting . 
 Mines of silver and golden Ireland . 
 That for slought and for racheshede Ye remember with all your might to heed To keep Ireland that it be not lost . For it is a boterasse and a post , Under England , and Wales another : God forbid , but each were others brother , Of one ligeance due unto the king . 
 But I have pity in good faith of this thing That I shall say with advisement : 
 I am afeard that Ireland will be shent : It must away , it will be lost from us , But if thou help , thou Jesu gracious , And give us grace all slought to leave beside . For much thing in my heart is hide , Which in another treatise I cast to write Made all only for that soil and site , Of fertile Ireland , which might not be forborn , But if England were nigh as good as gone . God forbid that a wild Irish wirlinge Should be chosen for to be their king , After her conquest for our last puissance , And hinder us by other lands alliance . Wise men sayen , which felin not , ne douten , That wild Irish so much of ground have got There upon us , as likeness may be Like as England to sheeris two or three Of this our land is made comparable : So wild Irish have won on us unable Yet to defend , and of none power , That our ground is there a little corner , To all Ireland in true comparison . 
 It needs no more this matter to expon . Which if it be lost , as Christ Jesu forbed , Farewell Wales , then England comes to dreaded , For alliance of Scotland and of Spaine , And other more , as the petty Bretaine , And so have enemies environ round about . 
 I beseech God , that some prayers devout 
 r34 
 Mutt let the said appearance probable Thus disposed without feigned fable . But all only for peril that I see Thus imminent , it’s likely for to be . And well I wot , that from hence to Room , And , as men say , in all Christendome , Is no ground ne land to Ireland liche , So large , so good , so plenteous , so rich , That to this word Dominus do long . 
 Then me seemeth that right were and no wrong , To get the land : and it were piteous To us to less this high name Dominus . And all this word Dominus of name Should have the ground obeisant wild and tame . That name and people togidre might accord All the ground subject to the Lord . 
 And that it is possible to be subject , Unto the king well shall it be detect , In the little book that I of spoke . I trow reason's all this will undertake . And I know well how it stante , Alas fortune begins so to scant , Or else grace , that dead is governance . For so minisheth parties of our puissance , In that land that we less every year , More ground and more , as well as ye may here . I heard a man speak to me full late . Which was a lord of full great estate ; 
 Than expense of one year done in France Warred on men well willed of puissance This said ground of Ireland to conquer . And yet because England might not forbear These said expenses gathered in one year , But in three years or foure gathered up here , Might win Ireland to a finali conquest , In one sole year to set us all at rest . 
 And how soon would this be paid again : Which were it worth yearly , if we not feyne : 
 135 
 This Lord was the Earl of Ormond that told to me this matter , that he would undertake it , in pain of loss of all his livelihood . 
 But this proffer could not be admitted . Ergo mall . 
 I will declare , who so lust to look , I trow full plainly in my little book . But covetise , and singularity Of own profit , envy , cruelty , Hath done us harm , and do us every day , And musters made that shame is to say : Our money spent all to little avail , And our enemies so greatly done prevail , That what harm may fallen and overthwerte I may uneath write more for soar of heart . 
 And exhortation to the keeping of Wales . 
 BEware of Wales , Christ Jesu mutt us keep , That it make not our childers child to weep , Ne us also , so if it go his way , By unwarenes : seth that many a day Men have bee ferde of her rebellion , By great tokens and ostentation : Seche the means with a discrete avise , And help that they rudely not arise For to rebel , that Christ it forbid . 
 Look well about , for God wot ye have need , Unfeigning , unfeyning and unfeint , That conscience for slought you not attaint : Keep well that ground , for harm that may ben used , Or afore God mutte ye been accused . 
 The trade of Bristow to Island . 
 Of the commodious Stockfish of Island , and keeping of the Sea , namely the Narrow sea , with and incident of the keeping of Caleis . Chap. xo . 
 OF Island to write is little need , 
 Save of Stockfish : Yet forsooth in deed 
 Out of Bristowe , and costs many one , Men have practised by needle and by stone Thider wards within a little while , Within twelve year , and without peril 
 136 
 Gone and come , as men were wont of old Of Scarborough unto the costs cold . 
 And now so feel ships this year there beware , That much loss for unfreight they bore : Island might not make hem to be fraught Unto the Hawys : thus much harm they caught . Then here I end of the commodities For which need is well to keep the seas : Este and West , South and North they be . And chiefly keep the sharp narrow see , Between Dover and Caleis : and as thus that foes pass none without good will of us : And they abide our danger in the length , What for our costis and Caleis in our strength . 
 And exhortation for the sure keeping of Caleis . 
 ANd for the love of God , and of his bliss Cherish ye Caleis better then it is . 
 See well thereto , and hear the great complaint That true men tellen , that will no lies paint , And as ye know that writing comes from thence : Do not to England for slought so great oftence , But that redressed it be for any thing : Lest a song of sorrow that we sing . 
 For little wenith the fool who so might cheese What harm it were good Caleis for to less : What woe it were for all this English ground . Which well conceived the Emperor Sigismound , That of all joys made it one of the most , That Caleis was subject unto English cost . 
 Him thought it was a jewel most of all , And so the same in Latin did it call . And if ye will more of Caleis hear and know , I cast to write within a little scrow , Like as I have done before by and by In other parteis of our policy . 
 Look how hard it was at the first to get ; And by my counsel lightly do not it let . 
 137 
 A.D. 
 c - U37 - 
 The old trade of Scarborough to Island and the North . 
 The joy oj Sigismund the Emperor that Caleis was English . 
 For if we less it with shame of face Wilfully , it is for lack of grace . Howe was Harflew cried upon , and Rone , That they were likely for shought to be gone ; How was it warned and cried on in England , I make record with this pen in my hand . It was warened plainly in Normandie , And in England , and I thereon did cry . 
 The world was defrauded , it betide right so . Harflew was Farewell * Harflew : lewdly it was a go . lost in the year jsjowe ware Caleis , I can say no better : z^^Henry My soul discharge I by this present letter . the sixth . 
 After the Chapitles of commodities of diverse lands , shows the conclusion of keeping of the sea environ , by a story of King Edgar and two incidents of King Edward the third , and King Henrie the fifth . Chap. 11. 
 Now see we well then that this round see 
 To our Noble by pariformitee Under the ship showed there the sail , And our king with royal apparel , With sword drawn bright and extent For to chastise enemies violent ; Should be lord of the sea about , To keep enemies from within and without ; To behold through Christianitee Master and lord environ of the see : All living men such a prince to dread , Of such a regne to be afeard indeed . Thus prove I well that it was thus of old ; 
 * Dicit Chro - Which by a * Chronicle anon shall told , ntca , quod iste Right curious : but I will interpret Etfpraxes - English , as I did it get : 
 soribus suis Of king Edgar : Oh most marvellous fielic'wr , nulli Prince living , witty , and chevalerous : 
 138 
 So good that none of his predecessors Was to him liche in prudence and honours . He was fortunate and more gracious Then other before , and more glorious : He was beneath no man in holiness : He passed all in virtuous sweetness . 
 Of English kings was none so commendable : To English men no less memorable , Then Cyrus was to Pierce by puissance , And as great Charles was to them of France , And as to the Romans was great Romulus , So was to England this worthy Edgarus . I may not write more of his worthiness For lack of time , ne of his holiness : But to my matter I him exemplify , Of conditions tweyne and of his policy : Within his land was one , this is no doubt , And another in the see without ; 
 That in time of Winter and of war , When boisterous winds put see men into fere ; Within his land about by all provinces He passed through , perceiving his princes , Lords , and others of the commonty , Who was oppressor , and who to poverty Was drawn and brought , and who was clean in life , And was by mischief and by strife With over leading and extortion : 
 And good and bad of eke condition He aspied : and his ministers also , Who did trought , and which of hem was falls : How the right and laws of the land Were execute , and who durst take in hand To disobey his statutes and decrees , If they were well kept in all countries : Of these he made subtle investigation Of his own espy , and other men's relation . Among other was his great business , Well to ben ware , that great men of riches , 
 139 
 A.D. 
 c - U37-sanctitate inferior , omnibus morum suavitate prastantior fuerit . Luxit ipse Anglis non minus memorabilis , quam Cyrus Persis , Carolus Francis Romulus verb Romanis . 
 Dicit Chronica , praeparaverat naves robustissimas numero tria millia sexcenta : in quibus redeunte astate omneminsulam ad terrorem extraneorum , y ad suorum excitationem cum maximo apparatu circumnavigare consueverat . 
 And men of might in city nor in town Should to the poor doe non oppression . Thus was he wont in this Winter tide On such enforchise busily to abide . This was his labour for the public thing , Thus was he occupied : a passing holy King . Now to purpose , in the Summer fair Of lusty season , when cleared was the air , He had ready ships made before Great and huge , not few but many a store : Full three thousand and sixe hundred also Stately enough on our sea to go . 
 The Chronicles say , these ships were full boysteous : Such things long to kings victorious . 
 In Summer tide would he have in won And in custom to be full ready soon , With multitude of men of good array And instruments of war of best assay . Who could hem well in any wise describe ? It were not light for any man alive . Thus he and his would enter ships great Habiliments having and the fleet Of See werres , that joyful was to see Such a navy and Lord of Majesty , There present in person hem among To sail and row environ all along , So regal liche about the English isle ; To all strangers terrors and peril . 
 Whose fame went about in all the world stout , Unto great fere of all that be without , And exercise to Knights and his meynee To him longing of his natall country . For courage of need must have exercise , Thus occupied for esshewin of vice . 
 This knew the king that policy espied ; Winter and Summer he was thus occupied . Thus conclude I by authority Of Chronike , that environ the see 
 140 
 Should be our subject's unto the King , And he be Lord thereof for any thing : For great worship and for profit also To defend his land from every foe . That worthy king I leave , Edgar by name , And all the Chronike of his worthy fame : Saffe only this I may not pass away , A word of mighty strength till that I say , That granted him God such worship here , For his merits , he was without peer , That sometime at his great festivity Kings , and Earls of many a country , And princes feel were there present , And many Lords came thider by assent , To his worship : but in a certain day He bade ships to be ready of array : For to visit Saint Johns Church he list Rowing unto the good holy Baptist , He assigned to Earls , Lords , and knights Many ships right goodly to sights : And for himself and eight kings moo Subject to him he made keep one of thoo , A good ship , and entrede into it With eight kings , and down did they fit ; And eke of them and over took in hand , At over hales , as I understand , And he himself at the ship behind As steris man it became of kind . 
 Such another rowing 1 dare well say , Was not seen of Princes many a day . Lo than how he in waters god the price , In land , in see , that 1 may not suffice To tell , Oh right , Oh magnanimity , That king Edgar had upon the see . 
 Dicit Chronica ut non minus quantam ei etiam in hac vita bonorum operum merce-dem donaverit : cum aliquando ad maximam ejus festivitatem , reges , comites , multariimque provinciarum protectores convenissent , ' c . 
 141 
 [ And 
 And incident of the Lord of the sea King Edward the third . 
 Caleis way yielded to you English 1347. 
 King Edward had 700. English ships , and 14151. English mariners before Caleis . 
 The battle of Scluse by sea . 
 OF king Edward I pass and his prowess 
 On land , on sea ye know his worthiness : The siege of Caleis , you know well all the matter Round about by land , and by the water , How it lasted not years many ago , After the battle of Crecye was ydoe : How it was closed environ about , Oide men saw it , which liven , this is no doubt . Old Knights say that the Duke of Burgoyn , Late rebuked for all his golden coin ; Of ship on see made no besieging there , For want of ships that durst not come for fear . It was nothing besieged by the see : Thus call they it no siege for honesty . Guns assailed , but assault was there none , No siege , but fuge : well was he that might be gone : This manner carping have knights far in age , Expert through age of this manner language . But king Edward made a siege royal , And won the town : and in especial The sea was kept , and thereof he was Lord . Thus made he Nobles coined of record ; In whose time was no navy on the see That might withstand his majesty . 
 Battle of Scluse ye may rede every day , How it was done I leave and go my way : It was so late done that ye it know , In comparison within a little throw : For which to God give we honour and glory ; For Lord of see the king was with victory . 
 142 
 Another incident of keeping of the see , in the time of the marvelous werriour and victorious Prince , King Henrie the fifth , and of his great ships . 
 A Nd if I should conclude all by the King Henrie the fift , what was his purposing , When at Hampton he made the great dromons , Which passed other great ships of all the commons ; The Trinitie , the Grace de Dieu , the holy Ghost , And other more , which as now be lost . 
 What hope you was the kings great intent Of thoo ships , and what in mind he meant ? It was not else , but that he cast to be Lord round about environ of the see . 
 And when Harflew had her siege about , There came carracks horrible great and stout In the narrow see willing to abide , To stop us there with multitude of pride . My Lord of Bedford came on and had the cure , Destroyed they were by that discomfiture . This was after the king Harflew had won , When our enemies to siege had begun ; That all was slain or take , by true relation , To his worship , and of his English nation . There was present the kings chamberlain At both battles ; which knoweth this in certain ; He can it tell otherwise then I : 
 Ask him , and wit ; I pass forth hastily . What had this king of his magnificence , Of great courage , of wisdom , and prudence ? Provision , forewitte , audacity , Of fortitude , justice , and agility , Discretion , subtle avisednesse , Attemperance , Noblesse , and worthiness : Science , prowess , devotion , equity , Of most estate , with his magnanimity 
 143 
 The great ships of Henry the fift , made at Hampton . 
 Great carracks of Genua taken by the Duke of Bedford . 
 1416. 
 The French name thus overthrown was of five hundred sail . 
 The Trinitie , the Grace de Dien , the holy Ghost . 
 Exhortatio generalis in custodiam totius Anglia , per diligentiam custodia circuitus maris circa littora ejusdem : qua debet esse per 
 Liche to Edgar , and the said Edward , As much of both liche hem as in regard . Where was on live a man more victorious , And in so short time prince so marvelous ? By land and sea , so well he him acquit , To speak of him I stony in my wit . Thus here I leave the king with his noblesse , Henry the fift , with whom all my process Of this true book of pure policy Of sea keeping , intending victory I leave endly : for about in the see No Prince was of better strenuity . 
 And if he had to this time lived here , He had be Prince nam withouten peer : His great ships should have been put in preefe , Unto the end that he meant of in chief , For doubt it not but that he would have bee Lord and master about the round see : 
 And kept it sure to stop our enemies hence , And won us good , and wisely brought it thence : That no passage should be without danger , And his licence on see to move and star . 
 Of unity , showing of our keeping of the see : with and endly or finali process of peace by authority . Chap. 12. 
 NOw than for love of Christ , and of his joy , Bring it England out of trouble and noy : 
 Take heart and wit , and set a governance , Set many wits withouten variance , To one accord and unanimity . 
 Put to good will for to keep the see , First for worship and profit also , And to rebuke of eke evil willed foe . Thus shall worship and riches to us long . Than to the Noble shall we do no wrong , To bear that coin in figure and in deed , To our courage , and to our enemies dread : 
 144 
 For which they must dress hem to peace in haste , Or else their thrift to standen , and to waste . 
 As this process hath proved by and by All by reason and expert policy ; 
 And by stories which proved well this part : Or else I will my life put in jeoparte , But many londs would seche her peace for need , The see well kept : it must be do for dread . Thus must Flanders for need have unity And peace with us : it will non other bee , Within short while : and ambassadors 
 Would be here soon to treat for their succours . This unity is to God pleasance : And peace after the werres variance . 
 The end of battle is peace sickerly , And power causeth peace finally . Kept than the sea about in speciali , Which of England is the town wall . As though England were likened to a city , And the wall environ were the see . 
 Keep then the sea that is the wall of England : And than is England kept by Goddes hand ; That as for any thing that is without , England were at ease withouten doubt , And thus should every land one with another Entercommon , as brother with his brother , And live together werrelesse in unity , Without rancour in very charity , In rest and peace , to Christes great pleasance , Without strife , debate and variance . 
 Which peace men should enserche with business , And knit it saddely holding in holiness . 
 The Apostle sayeth , if you list to see , be ye busy for to keep unity Of the spirit in the bound of peace . Which is needful to all withouten less . The Prophet bids us peace for to inquire To pursue it , this is holy desire . 
 n i4S K 
 A.D. 
 c - 1437-unanimitata Consiliariorum regis , y hominum bona voluntatis . 
 Tres sunt causa pradic-ta custodia : scilicet , honour , commodum regni , y opprobrium inimicis . 
 Ephes. Solliciti sitis servare unitatem spiritus in vinculo pacis . 
 c . 1437 - Our Lord Jesu says , Blessed motte they be 
 Maith . 5. Beati pacifici , quoniam filii Dei vocabuntur . That maken peace ; that is tranquillity . For peace makers , as Matthew writeth aright , Should be called the sons of God almight . God give us grace , the ways for to keep Of his precepts , and slugly not to sleep In shame of sin : that our very foe Might be to us converse , and turned so . 
 Cum placuerint Domino vice hominis ejus inimicos ad pacem convertet . For in the Proverbs is a text to this purpose Plain enough without any gloze : When men's ways please unto our Lord , It shall convert and bring to accord men enemies unto peace very , In unity , to live to Gods pay , With unity , peace , rest and charity . He that was here clad in humanity , That came from heaven , and stied up with our nature , Or he ascended , he yave to us cure , And left with us peace , again striffe and debate , Mote give us peace , so well irradicate Here in this world : that after all this feste we may have peace in the land of behest , 
 Urbs beata Jerusalem dicta pacis visio . Jerusalem , which of peace is the sighed , With his brightness of eternal light , There glorified in rest with his tuition , The Deity to see with full fruition : He second person in divineness is , Who us assume , and bring us to the bliss . Amen . Here endeth the true process of the Libel of English policy , exhorting all England to keep the sea environ : showing what profit and salvation , with worship comes thereof to the reign of England . / ^1 Oe forth Libel , and meekly show thy face ; vJ Appearing ever with humble countenance : And pray my Lords to take in grace , 146 
 In opposaile and cherishing the advance . To hardiness if that not variance Thou hast from trought by full experience Authors and reasons : if ought fail in substance Remit to hem that yafe thee this science ; 
 That seth it is sooth in very faith , That the wise Lord Baron of Hungerford Hath thee overseen , and verily he says That thou art true , and thus he doth record , Next the Gospel : God wot it was his word , When he thee red all over in a night . 
 Go forth true book , and Christ defend thy right . 
 A.D. 
 I462 . 
 The wise lord of Hungerfords judgement of this book . 
 Explicit libellus de Politia conservativa maris . 
 