Exemplar Epistolae seu literarum Missivarum , quas illustrissimus Princeps Eduardus ejus nominis Sextus , Angliae , Franciae , & Hiberniae Rex , misit ad Principes Septentrionalem , ac Orientalem mundi plagam inhabitants juxta mare glacial , nec non Indiam Orientalem ; Anno Domini 1553 Regni sui anno septimo , & ultimo . 
 Duardus sextus , Angliae , Franciae , & Hiberniae Rex , etc. Omnibus Regibus & principibus ac dominis , & cunctis Judicibus terrae , & Ducibus ejus , quibuscunque est excellens aliqua dignitas in ea , cunctis in locis quae sunt sub universo coelo : Pax , tranquillitas , & honour vobis , 
 terris , & regionibus vestris quae imperio vestro subjacent , cuique vestrum quemadmodum convenit ei . Propterea 
 206 
 qudd indidit Deus Opt. Max. hominibus prae cunctis aliis viventibus , cor & desiderium tale , ut appetat quisque cum aliis societatem inire , amare , & vicissim amari , beneficiis afficere , & mutuam accipere beneficia studeat , ided cuique pro facultate sua hoc desiderium in omnibus quidem hominibus beneficiis fovere & conservare convenit , in illis autem maxim , qui hoc desiderio adducti , a remotis etiam regionibus ad eos veniunt . Quo enim longius iter ejus rei gratia ingressi sunt , eo ardentius in eis hoc desiderium fuisse declararunt . Insuper etiam ad hoc , nos patrum majorumque nostrorum exempla invitant , qui semper humanissime susceperunt & benignissime tractaverunt illos , qui tum a locis propinquis , tum a remotis , eos amice adibant , eorum se protectioni commendantes . Quod si omnibus id praestare aequum est , certain mercatoribus imprimis praestari debet , qui per universum orbem discurrunt , mare circumlustrantes & aridam , ut res bonas & utiles , quae Dei beneficio in region eorum inveniuntur , ad remotissimas regiones & regna adferant , atque inde vicissim referant , quod suae regioni utile ibi repeterint : ut & populi ad quos eunt , non destituantur commodis quae non profert illis terra eorum , & ipsi sint participes rerum quibus illi abundant . Nam Deus coeli & terrae , humano generi maxim consulens , noluit ut omnia in quavis region invenirentur , quo regio open alterius regionis indigeret , & gens ab alia gente commodum aliquod expectaret , ac ita stabiliretur amicitia inter omnes , singuli-que omnibus benefacere quaererent . Hoc itaque ineundae ac stabiliendae amicitiae desiderio moti viri quidam regni nostri , iter in remotas maritimas regiones instituerunt , ut inter nostros & illos populos , viam mercibus inferendis & efferendis aperirent , nosque rogaverunt ut id illis concederemus . Qui petitioni illorum annuentes , concessimus viro honorabili & forti , Hugoni Wilibeo , & aliis qui cum eo sunt servis nostris fidis & charis , ut pro sua voluntate , in regiones eis prius incognitas eant , quaesituri ea quibus nos caremus , & adducant illis ex nostris terris id quo illi carent . Atque ita illis & nobis commodum inde accedat , 207 
 sitque amicitia perpetua , & foedus indissolubile inter illos & nos , dum permittent illi nos accipere de rebus , quibus superabundant in regnis suis , & nos concedemus illis ex regnis nostris res , quibus destituuntur . Rogamus itaque vos Reges & Principes , & omnes quibus aliqua est potestas in terra , ut viris istis nostris , transitum permittatis per regiones vestras . Non enim ex rebus vestris invitis vobis . Cogitate 
 ipsi sunt . Et si qua re carverint , oramus pro vestra beneficentia , eam vos illis tribuatis , accipientes vicissim ab eis quod poterunt rependere vobis . Ita vos gerite erga eos , quemadmodum cuperetis ut nos , & subditi nostri , nos gereremus erga servos vestros , si quando transierint per regiones nostras . Atque promittimus vobis per Deum omnium quae coelo , terra & mari continentur , perque vitam nostram , & tranquillitatem regnorum nostrorum , nos pari benignitate servos vestros accepturos , si ad regna nostra aliquando venerint . Atque a nobis & subditis nostris , ac si nati fuissent in regnis nostris ita benigni tractabuntur , ut rependamus vobis benignitatem , quam nostris exhibueritis . Postquam vos Reges , Principes , etc. rogavimus , ut humanitate & beneficentia omni prosequamini servos nostros nobis charos , oramus omnipotentem Deum nostrum , ut vobis diuturnam vitam largiatur , & pacem quae nullam habeat finem . Scriptum Londini , quae civitas est primaria regni nostri , Anno 5515. a creato mundo , mense lair , 14. die mensis , anno septimo regni nostri . 
 208 
 KING EDWARD VI PRESENTING THE CHARTER 
 OF BRIDEWELL TO THE CITIZENS OF LONDON 
 I Thomas Goodrich Bishop of Ely 
 2 Sir Robert Bowes Master of rhe Rolls 
 3 Earl of Pembroke 
 4 Hans Holbein 
 5 Sir George Barnes Lord M < 
 The copy of the letters missive , which the right noble Prince Edward the sixt sent to the Kings , Princes , and other Potentates , inhabiting the Northeast parts of the world , towards the mighty Empire of Cathay , at such time as Sir Hugh Willoughby knight , and Richard Chancellor , with their company , attempted their voyage thither in the year of Christ 1553. and the seventh and last year of his reign . 
 Dward the sixt , by the grace of God , King of England , France , and Ireland , etc. To all Kings , Princes , Rulers , Judges , and Governors of the earth , and all other having any excellent dignity on the same , in all places under the universali heaven : peace , tranquillity , and honour be unto 
 you , and your lands and regions , which are under your dominions , and to every of you , as is convenient . 
 Forasmuch as the great and Almighty God hath given unto mankind , above all other living creatures , such and heart and desire , that every man desires to join friendship with other , to love , and be loved , also to give and receive mutual benefits : it is therefore the duty of all men , according to their power , to maintain and increase this desire in every man , with well deserving to all men , and especially to show this good affection to such , as being moved with this desire , come unto them from far countries . For how much the longer voyage they have attempted for this intent , so much the more doe they thereby declare that this desire hath be ardent in them . Furthermore also , the examples of our father's and predecessors do invite us hereunto , forasmuch as they have ever gently and lovingly entreated such as of friendly mind came to them , aswell n 209 0 
 from Countries near hand , as far remote , commending themselves to their protection . And if it be right and equity to show such humanity towards all men , doubtless the same ought chiefly to be showed to merchants , who wandering about the world , search both the land and the sea , to carry such good and profitable things , as are found in their Countries , to remote regions and kingdoms , and again to bring from the same , such things as they find there commodious for their own Countries : both aswell that the people , to whom they go , may not be destitute of such commodities as their Countries bring not forth to them , as that also they may be partakers of such things , whereof they abound . For the God of heaven and earth greatly providing for mankind , would not that all things should be found in one region , to the end that one should have need of another , that by this means friendship might be established among all men , and every one seek to gratify all . For the establishing and furtherance of which universali amity , certain men of our Realm , moved hereunto by the said desire , have instituted and taken upon them a voyage by sea into far Countries , to the intent that between our people and them , a way may be opened to bring in , and carry out merchandises , desiring us to further their enterprise . Who assenting to their petition , have licensed the right valiant and worthy Sir Hugh Willoughby , knight , and other our trusty and faithful servants , which are with him , according to their desire , to go to countries to them heretofore unknown , aswell to seek such things as we lack , as also to carry unto them from our regions , such things as they lack . So that hereby not only commodity may ensue both to them and us , but also and indissoluble and perpetuali league of friendship be established between us both , while they permit us to take of their things , such whereof they have abundance in their regions , and we again grant them such things of ours , whereof they are destitute . We therefore desire you kings & princes , 
 210 
 and all other , to whom there is any power on the earth , to permit unto these our servants free passage by your regions and dominions : for they shall not touch any thing of yours unwilling unto you . Consider you that they also are men . If therefore they shall stand in need of any thing , we desire you of all humanity , and for the nobility which is in you , to aid and help them with such things as they lack , receiving again of them such things as they shall be able to give you in recompense . Show your selves so towards them , as you would that we and our subject's should show ourselves towards your servants , if at any time they shall pass by our regions . 
 Thus doing , we promise you by the God of all things that are contained in heaven , earth , and the Sea , and by the life and tranquillity of our kingdoms , that we will with like humanity accept your servants , if at any time they shall come to our kingdoms , where they shall as friendly and gently be entertained , as if they were born in our Dominions , that we may hereby recompense the favour and benignity which you have showed to our men . Thus after we have desired you Kings and princes , etc. with all humanity and favour , to entertain our well-beloved servants , we will pray our Almighty God , to grant you long life , and peace , which never shall have end . Written in London , which is the chief City of our kingdom , in the year from the creation of the world , 5515. in the month of liar , the fourteenth day of the month , and seventh year of our reign . 
 This letter was written also in other languages . 
 1553 - 
 liar . I would read More , that is , in the Sarasen lan - 
 Greek , and diverse gwge , mixtof Turkish and Egyptian , Februarie , interpreted by them the 
 month to set 
 ships to the 
 [ The sea ' 
 