The letter of M. George Killingworth the come - panies first Agent in Moscovie , touching their entertainment in their second voyage . Anno 1555. the 27. of November in Mosco . 
 Right worshipful , my duty considered , etc. It may please your worship to understand , 
 September we our wares up , 
 that at the making hereof we all be in good health , thanks be to God , save only William our cook as we came from Colmogro fell into the river out of the boat , and was drowned . And the 11. day of came to Vologda , and there we laid all and sold very little : but one merchant 
 would have given us 12. robles for a broad cloth , & he said he would have had them all , and 4. altines for a pound of sugar , but we did refuse it because he was the first , and the merchants were not come thither , nor would not come before Winter , trusting to have more : but I fear it will not be much better . Yet notwithstanding we did for the best . And the house that our wares lie in costs from that day until Easter ten robles . And the 28. day of September we did determine with our selves that it was good for M. Grey , Arthur Edwards , Thomas Hautory , Christopher Hudson , John Segewicke , Richard Johnson , and Richard Judde , to tarry at Vologda , and M. Chancellor , Henry Lane , Edward Prize , Robert Best and I should go to Mosco . And we did lade the Emperors sugar , with part of all sort of wares to have had to the Mosco with us , but the way was so deep , that we were feign to turn back , and leave it still at Vologda till the frost . And we went forth with post horse , & the charge of every horse being still ten in number , comes to 10. S. y.d. half penny , beside the guides . And we came to the Mosco the 4. day of October , and were lodged that night in a simple house : but the next day 
 291 
 Queen Maries letters to the Emperor of Russia . 
 we were sent for to the Emperor his secretary , and he bade us welcome with a cheerful countenance and cheerful words , and we showed him that we had a letter from our Queens grace to the Emperor his grace , and then he desired to see them all , and that they might remain with him , to have them perfect , that the true meaning might be declared to the Emperor , and so we did : and then we were appointed to a better house : and the seventh day the secretary sent for us again , & then he showed us that we should have a better house , for it was the Emperor his will , that we should have all things that we did lack , and did send us mead of two sorts , and two hens , our house free , and every two days to receive eight hens , seven altines , and two pence in money , and mead a certain , and a poor fellow to make clean our house , & to do that whereunto we would set him . And we had given many rewards before , which you shall perceive by other , and so we gave the messengers a reward with thanks : and the ninth day we were sent to make us ready to speak with the Emperor on the morrow . And the letters were sent us , that we might deliver them our selves , & we came before him the tenth day : and before we came to his presence we went thorough a great chamber , where stood many small tons , pails , bowls and pots of silver , I mean , like washing bowls , all parsel gilded : and within that another chamber , wherein sat ( I think ) near a hundred in cloth of gold , and then into the chamber where his grace sat , & there I think were more then in the other chamber also in cloth of gold , and we did our duty , & showed his grace our Queens graces letters , with a note of your present which was left in Vologda : and then his grace did ask how our Queens grace did , calling her cousin , saying that he was glad that we were come in health into his Realm , and we went one by one unto him , and took him by the hand , and then his grace did bid us go in health , and come to dinner again , and 
 292 
 we dined in his presence , and were set with our faces towards his grace , & none in the chamber sat with their backs towards him , being I think near a hundred at dinner then , and all served with gold , as platters , chargers , pots , cups , and all not slender but very-massy , and yet a great number of platters of gold , standing still on the cupboard , not moved : and diverse times in the dinner time his grace sent us meat and drink from his own table , and when we had dined we went up to his grace , and received a cup with drink at his own hand , and the same night his grace sent certain gentlemen to us with diverse sorts of wine and mede , to whom we gave a reward . And afterward we were by diverse Italians counseled to take heed whom we did trust to make the copy of the privileges that we would desire to have , for fear it should not be written in the Russie tongue , as we did mean . So first a Russian did write for us a breviate to the Emperor , the tenor whereof was , that we did desire a stronger privilege : & when the Secretary saw it , he did deliver it to his grace , and when we came again , his grace willed us to write our minds , and he would see it , and so we did . And his grace is so troubled with preparations to wars , that as yet we have no answer : but we have been required of his Secretary , and of thee under Chancellor , to know what wares we had brought into the Realm , and what wares we do intend to have , that are , or may be had in this Realm : and we showed them , and they showed the Emperor thereof . And then they said his graces pleasure was , that his best merchants of the Mosco should be spoken to , to meet and talk with us . And so a day was appointed , and we met in the Secretary his office , and there was the under Chancellor , who was not passed two years since the Emperor's merchant , and not his Chancellor : and then the conclusion of our talk was , that the Chancellor willed us to bethink us , where we would desire to have a house or houses , 
 293 
 The Italians counsel to our people . 
 The diversity of weights E5 measures in Russia . 
 that we might come to them as to our own house , and for merchandise to be made preparation for us , and they would know our prizes of our wares and frise : and we answered , that for our princes they must see the wares before we could make any price thereof , for the like in goodness hath not be brought into the Realm , and we did look for and example of all sorts of our wares to come from Vologda , with the first sledway , and then they should see them , and then we would show them the princes of them : and likewise we could not tell them what we would give them justly , till we did know as well their just weights as their measures : for in all places where we did come , all weights and measures did vary . Then the Secretary ( who had made promise unto us before ) said , that we should have all the just measures under seal , & he that was found faulty in the contrary , to buy or sei with any other measure then that , the law was , that he should be punished : he said moreover , that if it so happen that any of our merchants do promise by covenant at any time to deliver you any certain sum of wares in such a place , and of such like goodness , at such a day , for such a certain price , that then because of variance , we should cause it to be written , according as the bargain is , before a justice or the next ruler to the place : if he did not keep covenant & promise in all points , according to his covenant , that then look what loss or hindrance we could justly prove that we have thereby , he should make it good if he be worth so much : and in like case we must do to them : and to that we did agree , save only if it were to come over the sea , then if any such fortune should be ( as God forbid ) that the ship should mischance or be robbed , & the proof to be made that such kind of wares were laden , the English merchants to bear no loss to the other merchant . Then you Chancellor said , me thinks you shall do best to have your house at Colmogro , which is but 100. miles from 
 294 
 the right discharge of the ships , and yet I trust the ships shall come nearer hereafter , because the ships may not tarry long for their lading , which is rooo . miles from Vologda by water , and all our merchants shall bring all our merchandise to Colmogro to you , and so Colmogro . shall our merchants neither go empty nor come empty : for if they lack lading homeward , there is salt , which is good ware here , that they may come laden again . So we were very glad to hear that , and did agree to his saying : for we shall nevertheless , if we lust , have a house at Vologda , & at the Mosco , yea , & at Novogrode , or where we will in Rusland : But the three & twentieth of this present we were with the secretary , and then among other talk , we moved , that if we should tarry at Colmogro with our wares , and should not come to Vologda , or further to seek our market , but tarry still at Colmogro , and then the merchants of the Mosco and others should not come and bring their wares , and so the ships should come , and not have their lading ready , that then it were a great loss and hindrance for us : then said he again to us , that the merchants had been again together with him , and had put the like doubt , that if they should come and bring their wares to Colmogro , and that they should not find wares there sufficient to serve them , that then they should be at great loss and hindrance , they leaving their other trades to fall to that : and to that we did answer , that after the time that we do appoint with them to bring their wares to Colmogro , God willing , they should never come thither , but at the beginning of the year , they should find that our merchants would have at the least for a thousand robles , although the ships were not come : so that he said , that then we must talk further with the merchants : so that as yet I know not , but that we shall have need of one house at Colmogro , and another at Vologda , and if that they bring not their wares to Col - Vologda . mogro , then we shall sure to buy some at Vologda , and to be out of bondage . 
 295 
 The Russian secretary his name . 
 And thus may we continue three or foure years , and in this space we shall know the country and the merchants , and which way to save our selves best , and where to plant our houses , and where to seek for wares : for the Mosco is not best for any kind of wares for us to buy , save only wax , which we cannot have under seven pence the Russe pound , and it lacks two ounces of our pound , neither will it be much better cheap , for I have bidden 6. pence for a pound . And I have bought more , five hundred weight of yarn , which stands me in eight pence farthing the Russe pound one with another . And if we had received any store of money , and were dispatched here of that we tarry for , as I doubt not but we shall shortly ( you know what I mean ) then as soon as we have made sale , I do intend to go to Novogrode , and to Plesco , whence all the great number of the best tow flax comes , and such wares as are there I trust to buy part . And fear you not but we will do that may be done , if God send us health , desiring you to prepare fully for one ship to be ready in the beginning of April to depart off the coast of England . 
 Concerning all those things which we have done in the wares , you shall receive a perfect note by the next bearer ( God willing ) for he that carrieth these from us is a merchant of Terwill and he was caused to carry these by the commandment of the Emperor his secretary , whose name is Ivan Mecallawich Weskawate , whom we take to be our very friend . And if it please you to send any letters to Dantiske to Robert Elson , or to William Watsons servant Dunstan Walton to be conveyed to us , it may please you to enclose ours in a letter sent from you to him , written in Polish , Dutch , Latin or Italian : so enclosed , coming to the Mosco to his hands , he will convey our letters to us wheresoever we be . And I have written to Dantiske already to them for the conveyance of letters from thence . 
 And to certify you of the weather here , men say that 296 
 these hundred years was never so warm weather in this country at this time of the year . But as yesternight we received a letter from Christopher Hudson from a city called Yeraslave , who is coming hither with certain of our wares , but the winter did deceive him , so that he was feign to tarry by the way : and he wrote that the Emperors present was delivered to a gentleman at Vologda , and the sled did overthrow , and the butt of Hollock was lost , which made us all very sorry . 
 I pray you be not offended with these my rude letters for lack of time : but assoon as sales be made , I will find the means to convey you a letter with speed : for the way is made so doubtful , that the right messenger is so much in doubt , that he would not have any letters of any effect sent by any man , if he might , for he knows not of these : and to say the truth , the way is not for him to travel in . But I will make another shift beside , which I trust shall serve the turn till he come , if sales be made before he be ready , which is and shall be as pleases God : who ever preserve your worship , and send us good sales . Written in haste . 
 By yours to command 
 George Killingworth 
 Draper . 
 