Another letter to the foresaid parties . 1560. 
 THis letter before written is the copy of one sent you by Thomas Alcock , trusting that he was with you long since . The 26 day of the last month we received a letter from him , dated in Stockholme in Sweden the 14 day of January , and we perceive by his letter that he had talked with a Dutch man that came lately from the Mosco , who informed him that our friend Master Antony Jenkinson was returned to the Mosco in September last passed , but how far he had been , or what he had done , he could not tell . Also he wrote that one John Lucke a Joiner was taken by the Liefelanders , and put in prison . As yet we have not herd from the said John Luck , nor know not whither he be released out of prison or not . We suppose that by him you wrote some letter which as yet is not come to our hands : so that we think he is yet in prison , or 
 Stockholme . 
 John Luck taken prisoner in Lieflande . 
 4°7 
 otherwise dispatched out of the way . The fifteenth day of December we received a letter from Christopher Hodson , dated in the Mosco the 29 of July , by the way of Dansk : which is in effect a copy of such another received from him in our ships . You shall understand that we have laden in three good ships of ours these kind of wares following : to wit , in the The Swallow . Swallow of London , Master under God Steven Burrow , 
 34 farthels N° 136 broad short clothes , and foure farthels N° 58 Hampshire Kersies : and 23 pipes of bastards and seckes , and 263 pieces of raisins and 4 hogsheads N° 154 pieces of round pewter , and ten hogsheads and poncheons of prunes , and one dryfatte with Almonds . The Philip And in the Philip and marry , Master under God Thomas and Marie . 25 farthels N° 100 broad clothes , and three 
 farthels N° 42 Hampshire Kersies , and thirtie pipes of seckes and bastards , and 100 pieces of raisins . And in The Jesus . the Jesus of London , Master under God Arthur Pette , 
 10 farthels N° 40 broad short clothes , and twenty seven pipes of bastards and seckes , as by the Invoices herewith enclosed may appear : Also you shall receive such necessaries as you did write to be sent for the rope makers : trusting that you shall have better success with them which you shall send us in these ships , then with the rest which you have sent us yet : for we as yet have sold none of them . And whereas we wrote unto you in our former letter , that we would send you a hundred tons of salt , by reason it is so deer here we do send you but nine tons and a half , for it cost here ten pence the bushel the first penny : namely in the Swallow 6 tons and a half , in the Philip and marry one tun and a half , and in the Jesus one tun and a half . The 4 hogsheads of round pewter go in the Swallow and in the Philip and marry N° 154 pieces , as is aforesaid . We send you three ships , trusting that you have provided according to our former writing good store of lading for them . If ye have more wares then will lade the ships , let it be Train 408 
 oils that you leave behind : the price is not here so good as it was : it is worth here 9 pound the tun . We think it good you should let the smaller ship bring as much of the train as she can carry : And that the master's of the ships do look well to the rummaging , for they might bring away a great deal more then they do , if they would take pain in the rummaging : and bestow the train by it self , and the wax and tallow by it self : for the leakage of the train does fowl the other wares much . As for Allard the skinner , if you think good , he may come home in these ships . We have no doubt but that you Henrie Lane , if you mind to come home now in these ships as you requested , will leave such good order there with our servants as shall be for our most profit and their preferment , if they do their duties diligently and truly . If our friend Master Antonie Jenkinson be returned , and mean to come away in these ships to declare his mind and opinion of his travail , if need require and he be so minded he may return thither by land and be there by the fine of Januarie or before . But as we be uncertain whither he be returned or not : so we know not what he hath done , nor what benefit may rise hereafter of his travail . Therefore in this we remit it to his and your good discretions . we send you Thomas Hawtrey which is our servant for years : our mind is he should be placed , where he may do best service . 
 Also we send you Nicholas Chancellor to remain Nicholas there , who is our apprentice for years : our mind is Chancellor . he should be set about such business as he is most fit for : he hath been kept at writing school long : he hath his Algorisme , and hath understanding of keeping of books of reckonings . We send you now but 100 Kersies : but against the next year , if occasion serve , we will send you a greater quantity , according as you shall advice us : One of the pipes of seckes that is in the Swallow , which hath 2 round compasses upon the 
 409 
 Ehe salt of Russia is not so good as Bay salt . 
 Fox skins white , black , and russet vendible in England . 
 May^ . 1560. 
 bung , is to be presented to the Emperor : for it is special good . The nete weight of the 10 puncheons of prunes is 4300. 2 thirds 1 pound . It is written particularly upon the head of every puncheon : and the nete weight of the fat of almonds is 500 li . two quarters . The raisins , prunes , and almonds you were best to dispatch away at a reasonable price , and principally the raisins , for in keeping of them will be great loss in the weight , and the fruit will decay . We think it good that you provide against the next year for the coming of our ships 20 or 30 bullocks killed and salted , for beef is very deer here . Therefore you were best to save some of this salt that we do send you in these ships for the purpose . The salt of that country is not so good . In this you may take the opinion of the master's of the ships . Foxe skins , white , black , and russet will be vendible here . The last year you sent none : but there were mariners that bought many . If any of the mariners do buy any trifling furs or other commodities , we will they shall be registered in our pursers books , to the intent we may know what they be . We desire to know how the Emperor took the letter which we sent in our ships , as and answer to the letter that came in his name and under his seal for the sixe thousand dallers . Thus we rest , committing you to God , from London the fift day of May 1560. 
 For lack of time the governors have not firmed this letter : which is the copy of the other two letters firmed by them . 
 Yours , William Mericke . 
 Yours , Blaze Sanders . 
 