A Letter of Master Anthonie Jenkinson upon his return from Boghar to the worshipful Master Henrie Lane Agent for the Moscovie company resident in Vologda , written in the Mosco the 18. of September , 1559. 
 Worshipful Sir , after my hearty commendations premised with most desire to God of your welfare and prosperous success in all your affairs . It may please you to be advertised that the fourth of this present I arrived with Richard Johnson and Robert Johnson all in health , thanks be to God . we have be as far as Boghar , and had proceeded farther on our voyage towards the land of Cathay , had it not be for the uncessant and continual wars , which are in all these brutal and wild countries' , that it is at this present impossible to pass , neither went there any Caravan of people from Boghar that way these three years . And although our journey hath be so miserable , dangerous , and chargeable with losses , charges and expenses , as my pen is not able to express the same : yet shall we be able to satisfy the worshipful Companies minds , as touching the discovery of The Caspian Sea , with the trade of merchandise to be had in such lands and countries as be thereabouts adjacent , and have brought of the wares and commodities of those Countries able to answer the principali with profit : wishing that there were utterance for as great a quantity of kersies and other wares as there is profit to be had in the sales of a small quantity , ( all such evil fortune's being escaped as to us have chanced this present voyage , ) for then it would be a trade worthy to be followed . Sir , for that I trust you will be here shortly ( which I much desire ) I will defer the discourse with you at large until your coming , as well touching my travel , as of other things . Sir , John Luck departed from hence towards England the 
 400 
 seventh of this present , and intends to pass by the Passage to and way of Sweden , by whom I sent a letter to the worshipful Company , and have written that I intend to come down we n' 
 unto Colmogro to be ready there at the next shipping to embark my self for England , declaring that my service shall not be needful here , for that you are a man able to serve their worships in greater affairs then they have here to do , so far as I perceive . As touching the Companies affairs here , I refer you to Christopher Hudsons letters , for that I am but newly arrived . Having here but little business to do , I send you Richard Johnson to help you there in your affairs . Thus giving you most hearty thanks for my wench Aura Soltana , I commend you to the tuition of God , who send you health with hearts desire . 
 Your assured to command , Anthonie Jenkinson . 
 This was a young Tartar girl which he gave to the Queen afterwards . 
 