A letter of the Company of the Merchants adventurers to Russia unto George Killingworth , Richard Grey , and Henry Lane their Agents there , to be delivered in Colmogro or else where : sent in the John Evangelist . 
 Fter our hearty commendations unto you 1557. and to either of you : your general letter and other particular letters with two books of the sale and remainders of our goods , and the buying of ware there with you , we received about the end of November out of the Edward , with 
 heavy news of the loss of the said good ship and goods at Petslego in Scotland , with the death of Richard Chancellor and his Boy , with certain of the Ambassadors servants , and he himself with nine of his servants escaped very hardly only by the power of God : but all his goods and ours in manner were lost and pilfered away by the Scots , and that that is saved is not yet come to our hands , but we look for it daily , and it will skant pay the charges for the recovering of it . No remedy but patience : and to pray to God to send us better fortune hereafter . As touching the receiving and entertaining of the Ambassador and his retinewe since his coming to England at the king and Queens Majesties hands , with the Counsel & Lords of this Realm , and the Merchants that be free in Russia with feasting and benevolence given him , we refer it to his report and others . The like we think have not be seen nor showed here of a long time to any Ambassador . The Philip and Marie arrived here tenne days past : she wintered in Norway . The Confidence is lost there . And as for the Bona Esperanza , as yet we have no news of her . We fear it is wrong with her . By your bills of lading received in your general letters we perceive what wares are laden in them both . Your 
 379 
 letters have no date nor mention where they were made , which were written by Henry Lane , and firmed by you George Killingworth , and Richard Grey : both it and the other Letters and Books came so soar spoiled and broken with water that we cannot make our reckoning by them . You shall understand we have freighted for the parts of Russia foure good ships to be laden there by you & your order : That is to say , The Primerose of the burden of 240. Tons , Master under God John Buckland : The John Evangelist of 170. Tons , Master under God Laurence Roundal : The Anne of London of the burden of 160. tons , Master under God David Philly , and the Trinitie of London of the burden of 140. Tons , Master under God John Robins , as by their Charter parties may appear : which you may require to see for diverse causes . You shall receive , God willing , out of the said good ships , God sending them in safety for the use of the Company , these kinds of wares following , all marked with the general mark of the Company as Wares sent follows . 25. farthels containing 207. sorting clothes , 
 into Russia one fine violet in grain , and one scarlet , and 40. cottons 
 out of England . for wrapperS ) beginning with number 1. and ending with 
 number 52. The sorting clothes may cost the first penny 5-li . 9. S. the cloth , one with the other . The fine violet 18 . 1i . 6 . s . 6.d . The scarlet 17. IL 13. S. 6.d . the cottons at 9. IL lo . s . the pack , accounting 7. cottons for a pack . more 500. pieces of Hampshire kersies , that is 400. watchets , 43. blews , 53. reds , 15. greens , 5. ginger colours , and 2. yelowes which cost the first penny 4. IL 6 . s . the piece , & 3. packs containing 21 cottons at 9. IL lo . s . the pack : and part of the clothes is measured The Arshine by Arshines . More 9. barrels of Pewter of Thomas is a Russie Hasels making , etc. Also the wares be packed and 
 measure . laden as is aforesaid , as by and Invoyce in every Ship more plainly may appear . So that when it shall please God to send the said good ships to you in safety , you are to receive our said goods , and to procure the sales 380 
 to our most advantage either for ready money , time or barter : having consideration that you do make good debts , and give such time , if you give any , as you may employ and return the same against the next voyage ; and also foreseeing that you barter to a profit , and for such wares as be here most vendible , as wax , tallow , train oil , hemp and flax . Of furs we desire no great plenty , because they be dead wares . And as for Felts , we will in no wise you send any . And whereas you have provided tar , and as we suppose , some hemp ready bought , our advice is , that in no wise you send any of them hither unwrought , because our fraught is 4. H. a tun or little less : which is so deer , as it would not bear the charges : and therefore we have sent you 7. ropemakers , as by the copies of their i . Ropemakers covenants here enclosed shall appear . Whom we will you set to work with all expedition in making of ’ cables & ropes of all sorts , from the smallest rope to 
 xii . inches : And that such tar and hemp as is already brought to the water side , they may there make it out , and after that you settle their work in Vologhda or Colmogro as you shall think good , where their stuflfe may be nearest to them : at which place and places you do assign them a principali overseer aswell to see the delivery of the stuflfe unwrought , as also to take charge of the stuflfe wrought , & to foresee that neither the yarn be burned in tarring , nor the hemp rotted in the watering ; and also to furnish them so with labourers , workmen and stuflfe , as hereafter when these workmen shall come away , we be not destitute of good workmen , and that these may dispatch as much as possibly they may , doing it substantially : for we esteem it a principal commodity , and that the Counsel Cables and of England does well allow . Let all diligence be a 1 ™ - used , that at the return of these ships we may see clP^commQ ' samples of all ropes & cables if it be possible , and so after to continue in work , that we may have good store against the next year . Therefore they have need to 
 381 
 Dansk the old chief place for Cables . 
 Commodities not bearing 
 have a place to work in , in the winter : and at any hand let them have help enough to spin their stuff : for seeing you have great plenty of hemp there , and at a reasonable price , we trust we shall able to bring as good stuff from thence , and better cheap then out of Dansk : if it be diligently used , and have a good overseer . 
 Let the chiefest lading of these foure ships be principally in wax , flax , tallow and train oil . And if there be any more wares then these ships be able to take in , then leave that which is least in value and grossest in stouage until the next shipping : for we do purpose to ground our selves chiefly upon these commodities , as wax , cables and ropes , train oil , flax and some linen yarn . As for Masts , Tar , Hemp , Feathers , or any such other like , they would not bear 
 oflmgfraigkt charges to have any , considering our deer fraught . 
 We have sent you a Skinner to be there at our charges for meat , drink and lodging , to view and see such furs as you shall cheap or buy , not minding nevertheless , that you shall charge your selves with many , Fums most except those which be most vendible , as good marterns , 
 vendible . minivers , otherwise called Lettis and Mynkes . Of 
 these you may send us plenty , finding them good and at a reasonable price . As for Sables and other rich Furs , they be not every men money : therefore you may send the fewer , using partly the discretion of the skinner in that behalf . 
 Steel . we hear that there is great plenty of steel in 
 Russia and Tartarie , whereof we would you sent us part for and example , and to write your minds in it what store is to be had : for we hear say there is great plenty , and that the Tartars steel is better then that in Russia . And likewise we be informed that there Copper . is great plenty of Copper in the Emperors Dominions : we would be certified of it what plenty there is , and whither it be in plataeae or in round flat cakes , and send us some for and example . Also we would have you to 382 
 Woollen cloth of Rye and Revel , of Poland and Lettowe . 
 Russianlether . 
 LETTER TO THE AGENTS 
 certify us what kind of woollen cloth the men of Rye and Revel , and the Poles and Lettoes do bring to Russia , and send the skantlings of them with part of the lists , and a full advice of the lengths and breadths , colours and princes , and whither they be strained or not : and what number of them may be uttered in a year , to the intent we may make provision for them for the like sorts , and all other Flemish wares which they bring thither and be most vendible there . And to certify us whither our set clothes be vendible there or not : and whither they be rowed and shorn : because ofttimes they go undrest . Moreover , we will you send us of every commodity in that Country part , but no great quantity other then such as is before declared . And likewise every kind of Leather , whereof we be informed there is great store bought yearly by the Esterlings and Duchess for high Almaigne and Germanie . 
 More , that you do send us for proof a quantity of such earth , herbs , or what thing soever it be , that the Russes do die and colour any kind of cloth linen or woollen , Leather or any other thing withal : and also part of that which the Tartars and Turkes do bring thither , and how it must be used in dying and colouring . Moreover , that you have a speciali foresight in the choosing of your Tallow , and that it may be well purified and tried , or else it will in one year putrify & consume . 
 Also that you certify us the truth of the weights and measures , and how they do answer with ours , and to send us 3. robles in money , that we may try the just valve of them . 
 Also we do send you in these ships ten young Ten young men men that be bound Prentices to the Company , whom tent into Rus-we will you to appoint every of them as you shall there sia-finde most apt and meet , some to keep accounts , some to buy and fell by your order and Commission , and some to send abroad into the notable Cities of the Country for understanding and knowledge . And we 
 3^3 
 Things good to die withal . 
 will you send us advertisement from time to time as well of the demeanours of our Prentices which we do send now , as also of such other as be already there with you . And if you find any of them remiss , negligent , or otherwise misuse themselves and will not be ruled , that then you do send him home , and the cause why . 
 And because we do perceive the Country to be large , and that you have three households , we do appoint Henry Lane to be one of our Agents , and to join with you in all your doings , and to have like authority and power as you George Killingworth and Richard Gray have : not doubting but you three will so confer together , as both our Prentices and others may be appointed and divided every of them to his office , and to that he can best skill of : and you also so divide your selves every of you to and house , as by advertisement one from another , our business and traffic may take good success . And for diverse considerations , to avoid many troubles and business that might happen , we have appointed that he which shall abide at Colmogro ( which we do think to be most meetest Henry Lane ) shall have with him there such of our young men , as can best skill in keeping of accounts after the manner of Merchants , that is , by Debtor and Creditor : And that there shall be the place , where our books shall kept : because it is nearer the sea side , where our goods shall discharged and our ships laden . And the said Henry Lane to be charged with all such goods as we shall discharge there out of our ships , according to our Invoyces . Which goods are to be sent from Colmogro to Vologhda or to Mosco , or to any other place where you three or two of you do appoint them to be sold , so that Henry Lane be one . And so from time to time immediately as any thing is sold , do you certify . the same to Henry Lane , that he may enter it into the Books as appertaineth : otherwise he should be too far behind in his Books 
 384 
 * 557-at the coming of our ships , when he should send us the account of the whole year passed . And we will also that you George Killingworth and Richard Grey doe in the fine of April next send either of you unto Henry Lane a whole , perfect , & just account firmed with your own hands of all the goods you have sold and bought until that time , and what remains unsold : and also the account of all manner costs of wares , and charges of you and the young men under you particularly in such sort as the said account may be with him in Colmogro at the fine of May at the furthest : to the intent that he may make all our accounts perfect against the coming of our ships : and in any wise to keep account of every voyage by it self , and not mingle one voyage with another at no hand . And as we will have you to keep account of every voyage by it self , even so we would have all the whole costs and charges of every year put into the voyage of that year . As the charges of all the last year must be put to the account of the third voyage : and the charges of this year present , must 
 in the fine of April next , be put to the fourth voyage . The fourth Not doubting but your wisdom is such , that you will not take it in evil part , that we do appoint Henry Lane to take the account of the rest . For we do it for none other cause , but to keep a good order in our books , that his books and ours may by this means agree : and he being the younger man , may best take pains : and that you do keep account of every kind of wares by it self , to the intent we may perceive wherein is our most gain . And also in the making of your return , in any wise name in your bills of lading , letters , and accounts , what wares do appertain to the first , second , and third voyage : and that we may know the same by the numbers or otherwise as you shall think good by your wisdoms , putting the charges of the said wares unto them , as nigh as you can . And all such money as shall be 
 n 385 2 B 
 The old traffic of Russia to Rye , Revel and Poland turned to SaintTl icholas . 
 made of your goods in any place , we refer that to your discretion , where it shall remain until it be employed , either at Vologhda , Mosco , or else where . And likewise we will that Henry Lane do make in a readiness about the beginning of June every year our whole account of the voyage in that year passed : in such sort that we may receive the same by our ships : and that we may plainly perceive what sales are made , and what remains of the first , second , third , and fourth voyage , and what charges have be laid out for the said voyages , and what wares be bought , and laden , and what they cost , and for what voyage every parcel thereof is : and to send us a copy of the same account in every ship . And also forasmuch as at this time we have sent you but small store of wares in comparison of that we have hope will be uttered in short space , and yet nevertheless much more then you wrote for , whereby there shall not be sufficient to make any ample return : and understanding that there is great quantity of goods stayed for our trade there by the Emperor , we have moved the Ambassador that you may have credit for such quantity as shall seem good to you to provide for our benefit . Which credit if you may by his means obtain , or otherwise have , we would you bought as much Wax principally as you may get . For if there be in that country so great quantity , as we be informed there is , it will be the best commodity we may have : for having that wholly in our hands , we may serve our own country and others . Therefore seeing the Emperor does mind , that such commodities as be in his dominions shall not pass to Rye and Revel and Poland as they have done , but be reserved for us : therefore we must so lay for it , that it may not lie upon their hands that have it to fell , always having consideration in the price and time as our next dispatch may correspond . Whereof you may send a certain advice , as well what you shall receive of credit , and to what quantity , 386 
 The articles of their first Commission elven q . 
 LETTER TO THE AGENTS 
 as also what wares are remaining in your hands : which together well considered , you may advertise us as well for how many hundreth tons we must provide fraught against the next year , as also what sorts , quantities and qualities of wares we shall send you , as well to pay your credit , as also to furnish the next adventure after . Of this we would be answered largely . For we trust by this time you are able to give full instructions of the state of the country : according to the articles of your first Commissions , and what commodities do principally abound there with their princes : and likewise what of our commodities have most utterance there , and what princes will be given for them there : and all other things requisite and necessary to be known . 
 Also we do understand that in the Country of Permia or about the river of Pechora is great quantity of Yewe , and likewise in the Country of Ugory , which we be desirous to have knowledge of , because it is a speciali commodity for our Realm . Therefore we have sent you a young man , whose name is Leonard Leonard Brian , that hath some knowledge in the wood , to show ™ nt t0 you in what sort it must be cut and cloven . So our yewe - in tfie mind is if there be any store , and that it be found North parts of to be good , that there you do provide a good quantity Russia . against the next year for the coming of our ships : and if there can be found none that will serve for our purpose , then you may set the said Leonard Brian to any other business that you shall find most fittest for him , until the return of our ships the next year . For he is hired by the year only for that purpose . 
 We doubt not but that he shall do you good service there . For he hath good knowledge of wares of that Country : for his bringing up hath be most in Dansk , and hath good understanding in making of Ropes and Cables . Also we do send you two Coopers 2. Coopers to remain there with you at our finding for meat sent ™ t0 and drink and lodging to make in a readiness all Russta-such cask as shall needful for train oil , tallow , 
 387 
 or any thing else . One of them may go with Leonard Brian to cut and cleve such Yewe as he shall like there . And because we be not sure what timber they shall find there to make Cask , we have laden in these ships 140. tons empty Cask , that is 94. tons shaken Cask and 46. tons whole , and ten thousand hoops , & 480. wreathes of twigs : they may be doing with that till they can provide other timber , which we would be glad to hear of . They have and example with them of the bigness of the Cask they shall make . Nevertheless , all such Butts and Hogsheads as may be found to serve we will shall filled with Train Oil . 
 Also we charge you that you suffer no goods nor marchandies of any persons being not free of the Company , and of the account of the Company to be laden in any wise in our ships either now or at any time hereafter : except the Emperor or Ambassador mind to send any thing to the King and Queens Majesties , or to any noble man , or to the Merchants of the Company : Nor likewise that you suffer any goods that go in these ships to be brought on land there , except the Ambassadors goods , and the Physicians & Apothecaries , and others that he hath with him , who carry no Merchandise . And because our ships be freighted by the great , it shall very needful that you do appoint certain to see the rummaging of the ships , and to give the master or Boatswain , or him that will take upon him to rummage , a good reward for his labour to see the goods well rummaged . If it be iii . worser . or iiii . worser . the tun , it shall not be amiss . For if it be not substantially well looked unto , it may be a great deal of money out of our ways . 
 Also because we reckon that from the Mosco will be always better conveyance of letters to us by land : our mind is that from time to time as occasion shall serve , our Agents shall write to him that shall lie at Mosco of all things that shall pass , that he may give 388 
 us large instructions , aswell what is sold and bought , as also what lading we shall take , and what quantity and kind of goods we shall send . For hitherto we have had but a slender advice , more like a bill to serve a Chapman , then for quantity of wares to serve a kingdom . For we must procure to utter good quantity of wares , especially the commodities of our Realm , although we afford a good pennyworth , to the intent to make other that have traded thither , weary , and so to bring our selves and our commodities in estimation , and likewise to procure to have the chief commodities of that country in our hands , as wax and such others , that other nations may be served by us and at our hands . For we do understand that the greatest quantity of wax that comes to Dansk , Lubeck , and Hambourgh , comes out of Russia . Therefore if we should buy part , and they also buy , it would raise the price there , and would be little worth here . 
 And all such letters of importance and secrecy as you Themarchants do send by land for any wares or otherwise , you must letters over write them in Ciphers , after the order of a book sent written you in the ships : always taking good heed in placing of your letters and ciphers , that we may understand them by the same book here , and to send them in such sort , that we may have them here by Christmas or Candlemas , if it be possible . And because you cannot so certainly advertise us by letters of your doings , but some doubt may arise , whereof we would most gladly be certified : our mind is therefore that with these ships you send us home one such young man as is most expert in knowledge of that country , and can best certify us in such questions as may be demanded , whom we will remit unto you again in the next ships . 
 We think Arthur Edwards will fittest for that purpose : nevertheless use your discretion in that matter . 
 As touching our goods that were robbed and pilfered out of our ships at Colmogro and Vologda we trust by this time they are restored again , and the malefactors 389 
 The voyage of Steven Burrow for the discovery of the river of Ob. 
 M. Anthonie Jenkinson his first travail intended for Cathay by the Caspian sea and Boghar . 
 Good cask made in Russia . 
 so punished that other may take example for doing the like , otherwise it will be and evil president . Moreover , we do perceive that Richard Gray doth buy masts to send into England , they will not quit the costs , except we had a ship of purpose for them . And likewise that Steven Burrow is returned from his discovery with the Serchthrift , and wintereth at Colmogro , and is minded to set forth in the beginning of June next to seek the river of Ob. We pray God to speed him well , and trust to have him here in England this year to bring us good news . 
 We do perceive there is a river found about the mouth of S. Nicholas Bay that hath thirteen foot upon the bar at a low water , and is as near Colmogro as S. Nicholas : which will be a great pleasure unto us . We will that Steven Burrowe do proceed on his voyage to discover . Also we have sent you one Anthonie Jenkinson Gentleman , a man well traveled , whom we mind to use in further traveling , according to a Commission delivered him , subscribed by master Anthonie Huse and others . Wherefore we will you deliver him one or more of such painful young men as he shall think meetest for his purpose : and likewise such money and wares as he shall think best to take with him . He must have fourty pounds a year for foure years , to be paid him by the half year , or as he will demand it of you , so let him have it from Easter last . Also the princes of wares here at this present are , bale flax twenty pound the pack and better , tow flax twentie eight pound the hundred , train oil at nine pound the tun , wax at foure pound the hundred , tallow at sixteene shillings the hundred , cables and ropes very deer : as yet there are no ships come out of Dansk . 
 Kept until the tenth day of this present . As this day came the goods out of Scotland that were recovered out of the Edward Bonaventure : and now we do perceive that the cask that the train oil came in , is very good , and much better then ours . Therefore our 390 
 mind is , that you shall lade it all in such barrels of the bigger sort as you jaded in the Edward , and no long barrels nor small . And that cask that we have sent may serve for the Tallow or any other ware that is not leakage . Nevertheless , this voyage you must take such as you can get . 
 Also if the Emperor be minded to deliver you any sum of money , or good Wax at as reasonable a price as you may buy for ready money , we will that you shall take it and lade it for our accounts , and to come at our adventure , and he to be paid at the return of the ships in Velvets , Sattens , or any other kind of silk , or cloth of gold , cloth of tissue , or according as his Commission shall be that he shall send us in the ships , and according to such patterns as he shall send . we do not find the Ambassador now at the last so conformable to reason as we had thought we should . He is very mistrustful , and thinketh every man will beguile him . Therefore you had need to take heed how you have to do with him or with any such , and to make your bargains plain , and to set them down in writing . For they be subtle people , and do not always speak the truth , and think other men to be like themselves . Therefore we would have none of them to send any goods in our ships at any time , nor none to come for passengers , unless the Emperor do make a bargain with you , as is aforesaid , for his own person . 
 Also we charge you not to suffer any of our nation to send any wares to their wives or friends in any of our ships ; but to take their money there to be paid here by the company and not otherwise : and to have consideration how you do take the roble . For although we do rate it after sixteene shillings eight pence of our money , yet it is not worth passed 12. or 13. shillings sterling . Moreover , you had need to send new accounts , for them that came in the 
 391 
 Edward be marred and torn , so that we can make no reckoning by them : and likewise to write us a perfect note of all the goods which you received the last voyage out of the Edward , and herein not to fail . 
 ' Andrew Judde . 
 George Bairn . Anthonie Huse . William Garrard . William Chester . 
 < 557 - 
 John Sedgewick at Novogrode . 
 