The voyage of the foresaid M. Stephen Burrough , An. 1557. from Colmogro to Wardhouse , which was sent to seek the Bona Esperanza , the Bona Confidentia , and the Philip and Marry , which were not herd of the year before . 
 May . 
 Pon Sunday the 23. of May , I departed 23 with the Searchthrift from Colmogro , the latitude whereof is 64. degrees , 25. minutes , and the variation of the compass , 5. degrees , 10 minutes from the North to the East . 
 Wednesday we came to the Island 26 
 called Pozanka , which Island is within foure leagues of the bar Berozova . It flows here at and East and by South moon full sea . 
 Saturday in the morning we departed from Pozanka , 29 and plied to the bar of Berdzova Gooba , whereupon we came to anchor , at a low water , and sounded the said Bar with our two Skiffs , and found in the best upon the shoaldest of the bar 13. foot water by the rule . It higheth upon this bar , in spring streams 3. foot water : and and East Moon makes a full sea upon this bar . 
 Sunday in the morning we departed from the bar 3° of Berozova , and plied along by the shoalds in five fathom , until I had sighed of S. Nicholas road , and then we cast about to the Northwards , and went with a hommocke , which is half a mile to the Eastwards of Coya Reca , which hommocke and S. Nicholas abbey Coia Reca . lie Southsouthwest , and Northnortheast , and between them are 11. leagues . Coia Reca is half a mile to the Eastwards of Coscaynos . Coscaynos & the mids of Coscaynos . the Island called Mondeustova ostrove , which is thwart of the bar of Berozova lies South and by 
 363 
 East , North and by West , and between them are 4. leagues , or as you may say from the Seaboord part of the bar to Coscaynos are 3. leagues and a half . 
 31 Munday at a Northeast and by East sun we were thwart of Coscaynos . 
 Dogs nose lies from Coscaynos Northnorthwest , and between them are eight leagues : and Dogs nose shows like a Gurnerds head , if you be inwardly on both sides of it : on the low point of Dogs nose there stands a cross alone . 
 2 
 Dogs nose . 
 The variation of the Compass 4. degrees . 
 3 
 4 
 June . 
 FRom Dogs nose to Foxenose are three leagues , North and by West . 
 The 2. day of June I went on shore 2. miles to the Northwards of Dogs nose , and had the latitude of that place in 65. degrees , 47. minutes . It flows a shore at this place , at and East Moon full sea , and the ship lay thwart to wend a flood , in the off , at a Southsoutheast moon . So that it is to be understood , that when it is a full sea on the shore , it is two points to ebb , before it be a low water in the off . The variation of the Compass at this place is 4. degrees from the North to the East . 
 This day the Northnorthwest wind put us back again with Dogs nose , where a ship may ride thwart of a salt house , in 4. fathom , or 4. fathom and a half of water , and have Landfange for a North and by West wind : which Salt house is half a mile to the Southwards of Dogs nose . 
 Friday at a Southsouth west Sun , we departed from this Salt house . It is to be noted that foure miles to the Northwards of Dogs nose there grow no trees on the bank by the water side : and the banks consist of fullers earth . Over the cliffs there grow some trees : so that Dogs nose is the better to be known because it is fullers earth , and the like I have not seen in all that Country . 
 364 
 A head of Fox nose a league from the shore there Fox nose . are 15. fathom : betwixt Fox nose and Zolatitsa there are 6 leagues , I mean the Southerly part of Fox nose . 
 Sunday I sounded the bar of Zolatitsa , which the 6 Russes told me was a good harbour , but in the best of it I found but 4. foot water . 
 Munday , I had the latitude in 66. degrees , and then 7 was point Pentecost sixe leagues South of us . Point Pente - 
 Wednesday I went on land at Cross Island , and c^‘ took the latitude , which was 66. degrees 24 minutes . Cross Island . 
 We being one league Northeast of Cross Island , I saw the land on the Eastside , which I judged to be Cape good fortune , and it was then Eastsoutheast of Cape good US 9. leagues . fortune . 
 Cape grace is 7. leagues and a half Northeast from Cape grace . Cross Island . 
 There are 2. Islands 5. leagues Northnortheast from Cape grace , the Southermost of them is a little long Island almost a mile long , and the Northermost a little round Island , and they are both hard aboard the shore . 
 Cape Raze is from the Southermost Island North Cape Raze . and by West , and between them are two leagues , and from that and half a league Northnorthwest , there is another point . Between which point and Cape Raze , the Russes have a Stanavish or harbour for their Lodias : and to the Westwards of the said point , there is a shoal bay . 
 Three leagues and a half to Northwards of Cape 10 
 Raze , we had the latitude on the 10. day of this month in 67. degrees 10. minutes . Riding within half a league of the shore in this latitude I found it to be a full sea at a North and by East moon . I had where we road two and twentie fadoome , and the tallow which is taken up is full of great broken shells , and some stones withal like unto small sand congealed together . 
 From a South sun that we weighed , the wind 
 365 
 being at North and by East , we drived to the windwards half the ebb , with the ships head to the Eastwards . And then when we cast her head to the Westwards , we sounded , and had 22. fathom broken shells , and grey sand ; this present day was very misty , Frost in June , with frost on the shrowds as the missed fell . 
 Friday in the morning at and East sun , the missed brake up a little , the wind being at North and by West a stiff gale , our shrowds and ropes over head being covered with frost , and likely to be a storm : I thought it good to seek and harbour , and so plied room with the Islands which are two leagues to the Southwards of Cape Raze , and within these Islands ( thanks be to God ) we found harbour for us . It higheth at these Islands two fathom water : it flows in the harbour at this place at a Southsoutheast moon full sea : and a sea board it flows at a Southsouthwest moon a full sea . The Russes call 
 Tri Ostrove . this Island , Tri Ostrove . 
 You may come in between the little Island and the great Island , and keep you in the mids of the Found , and if you borrow on any side , let it be on the greatest Island , and you shall have at a low water , foure fathom , and three fathom and a half , and three fathom , until that you be shot so far in as the narrowest , which is between the Northermost point of the greatest Island , and the Southern point of the main which is right against it , and then hale to the Northwards with the cross which stands in the main , and you shall have at a low water 10. foot water , and fair sand . And if you be disposed to go through the Found to the Southwards , keep thee Northwest shore aboard , for on the Island side after you be shot so far in as the cross , it is a shoal of rocks half the found over : which rocks do last unto the Southerly part of the great Island , and rather to the Southwards . And if you be constrained to seek a harbour for Northerly winds , when you come out of 366 
 the sea , hale in with the Southerly part of the great Island , giving the Island a fair birth , and as you shoot towards the main , you shall find road for all Northerly winds , in foure fathom , five , sixe and seven fathom , at a low water . 
 Also within this great Island ( if need be ) you may have a good place to ground a ship in : the great Island is almost a ' mile long and a quarter of a mile over . 
 This storm of Northerly wind lasted until the 16. 16 of this month , and then the wind came Southerly , but we could not get out for Ice . I went on shore Ice . at the cross , and took the latitude , which is 66. degrees , 58. minutes , 30. seconds : the variation of the The variation . Compass 3. degrees and a half from the North to the East . 
 Thursday being fair weather , and the wind at 17 North we plied to the windwards with sails and oars : we stopped the flood this day three leagues to the Northwards of Cape Raze , two miles from the shore , and had twentie fathom water , fair grey and black sand , and broken shells . And when the slake came we 18 weighed and made aboard to the shorewards , and had within two cables length of the shore , eighteene fathoms fair grey and black sand : a man may find road there for a North wind , and so to the Westwards . 
 Two leagues to the Southward of Corpus Christi point , you may have Landfang for a North and by East wind , and from that to the Westwards in 23. fathom almost a mile from shore , and fair sand , and among the sand little young small limpets , or such like as grow upon muscles : and within two cables length and less of the shore are eighteene fathoms , and the sounding aforesaid , but the young limpets more plentiful . It was a full sea where we road , almost a mile from shore , at a South and by West moon : two leagues to the Southwards of Corpus Christi point is the uttermost land , which land and 367 
 Cape Raze lies South and half a point to Westwards , and North and half a point to the Eastwards , 
 19 and between them are sixe leagues . Riding this day sixe leagues to the Northwards of Cape Raze , the wind at Northnorthwest , with missed and frost , at noon the sun appeared through the missed , so that I had the latitude in 67. degrees , 29. minutes . 
 21 Munday we were thwart of Corpus Christi point , GorpusChrlsti fWO leagues and a half from shore , or rather more , ^nt ' where we sounded , and had 36. fathoms and broken code shells , with branny sand , but the broken shells very thick . 
 22 Tuesday in the morning we were shot a head of Cape Gallant . Cape gallant , which the Russes call Sotinoz . And as we were shot almost half a league betwixt it , and Cape comfort , the wind came up at the Northwest , and after to the Northwards , so that we were feign to bear room to seek a harbour , where we found good harbour for all winds , and the least 7. fathom water between S. Johns Islands , and the main . 
 After that we came to and anchor , we took the latitude , which was 68. degrees 1. minute , after noon , the wind at North with plenty of snow . 
 At a West sun there came aboard us certain Lappians in a boat , to the number of sixeteene persons , and among them there were two wenches , and some of them could speak the Russe tongue : I asked them where their abiding was , and they told me that there was a company or herd of them , to the number of 100. men , beside women and children , but a little from us in the river lekonga . 
 They told me that they had be to seek meat among the rocks , saying , If we get no meat , we eat none . I saw them eat rock weeds as hungerly , as a cow doth grass when she is hungry . I saw them also eat fowls eggs raw , and the young birds also that were in the eggs . 
 368 
 I observed certain words of their language , [ 1 . 293J which I thought good to set down for their use , that hereafter shall have occasion to continue this voyage . 
 COwghtie coteat , what call you this . 
 Poddythecke , come hither . 
 Avanchythocke , get the hence . 
 Anna , farewell . 
 Teyrve , good morrow . 
 lomme lemaufes , I thank you . 
 Passevellie , a friend . 
 Olmvelke , a man . 
 Captella , a woman . 
 Alke , a son . 
 Neit , a daughter , or young wench . 
 Oyvie , a head . 
 Cyelme , and eye . 
 Nenna , a nose . 
 Nealma , a mouth . 
 Pannea , teeth . 
 Neughtema , a tongue . 
 Seaman , a beard . 
 Peallee , and ear . 
 Teappat , the neck . 
 Voapt , the hair . 
 Keat , a hand . 
 Soarme , fingers , lowlkie , a leg . 
 Peelkie , the thumb , or great toe . 
 Sarke , woollen cloth . 
 Lein , linen cloth . 
 Payte , a shirt . Tol , fire . Keatse , water . Murr , wood . Vannace , a boat . Arica , and oar . Nurr , a rope . Peyve , a day . Her , a night . Peyvezea , the Sun . Manna , the Moon . Laste , stars . 
 Cozam volka , whither go you . 
 Ottapp , sleep . Tallye , that . Keiedde pieve , a week . Isckie , a year . Kesse , Summer . 
 Talve , Winter , lowksam , cold . Parox , warm . Abrye , rain . Youghang , ice . Keatykye , a stone . Sellowpe , silver . Soldan , gold . Tennae , tin . Veskue , copper . Rowadt , iron . Neybx , a knife . Axshe , a hatchet . 
 369 2 A 
 Leabee , bred , laevegoat , meal . Pencka , the wind . lout , A platter . Kemnie , a kettle . Keestes , gloves . Sapege , shoes . Conde , a wild Dear . Poatsa , the labouring Dear . 
 Their words of number are these as folioweth . 
 fAFte , W Noumpte , 1. 2. 
 Colme , 3 - 
 Nelly e , 4 - 
 Vitte , 5 - 
 Cowte , 6. 
 Keydeem , 7 - 
 Kaffts , 8. 
 Owghchte , Lock , Ostretumbelocke , Cowghtnumbelocke , Colmenonbelocke , N ellynombelocke , Vittie nombelocke , Cowtenombelocke , Keydemnombelocke , Kafts nombelocke , Ought nombelocke , Coffteylocke , Colmelocke , Nelly lock , Vitte lock , Cowtelocke , Keydemlocke , Kaffstelocke , Oughcheteloke , Tewet . 
 9-io . ii . 12. J3-14 . 
 16. U-18 . 1920. 30. 
 40. 
 50. 60. 
 70. 80. 
 90. 
 100. 
 Juana Creos . 
 S. Georges Islands . 
 Cape comfort . 
 25 Friday in the morning we departed from Saint Johns Island : to the Westwards thereof , a mile from the shore , we sounded , and had 36. fathoms , and oazy sand . 
 Juana Creos is from Cape gallant Westnorthwest , and half a point to the Northwards , and between them is 7. leagues . The point of the Island , which is Cape comfort , lies from Juana Creos , Northwest and by North , and almost the 3. part of a point to the Westwards , and between them are 3. leagues . 
 The Eastermost of S. Georges Islands , or the 7. Islands , lies from Juana Creos Northwest , & half a point to the Northwards , and between them are 14. leagues & a half . The uttermost of the 7. Islands , & Cape comfort lies Northwest , & by North , Southeast , and by South . 
 Under the Southermost Island you shall find good road for all Northerly winds from the Northwest to the 37° 
 J557-Northeast . From the Southeast part of the 7. Islands , unto the Northwest part of them , are 3. leagues and a half . 
 From the Northwest part of the Islands aforesaid , unto S. Peters S. Peters Islands , are n . leagues Northwest . Islands . 
 26 S. Peters Islands rise and indifferent low point , not seeming to be and Island , and as if it had a castle upon it . 
 S. Pauls Islands lie from S. Peters Islands North - S. Pauls west and to the Westwards , and between them are Wands . 
 , 6. leagues . Within these Islands there is a fair sandy bay , and there may be found a good road for Northerly winds . 
 Cape Sour beer lies from S. Pauls Islands North - Cape Sour west and by West , and between them are 5. leagues . beere‘ 
 Cape comfort , which is the Island of Kildina , lies from Kildina . Cape Sour beer , 6. leagues West Northwest , and it is altogether a bay between them seeming many Islands in it . 
 From Cape Bonaventure , to Chebe Navoloche are 10. Cape Bona-\ leagues Northwest , and a little to the Westwards . Chebe venture-Navoloche is a fair point , whereon stands a certain black , like and empty butt standing a head . 
 From Chebe Navoloch to Kegor , is 9. leagues and a Kegor . half Northwest , and half a point to the Westwards . Kegor riseth as you come from the Eastwards like 2. round hammocks standing together , and a fair saddle between them . 
 27 It flows where we road this Sunday to the Eastwards of Kegor , at a Southeast and by East moon , a full sea : we road in 15. fathom water within half a mile of the shore : at a Northwest Sun the missed came down so thick , that we were feign to come to and anchor within less then a mile of the point that turns to Dorns Domshaff . have , where we had 33. fathom , and the sounding like to the skurfe of a skalde head . 
 28 Munday at afternoon , we came into the Found of Wardhouse . Wardhouse , although it were very misty . Then I sent a 
 371 
 | | Which were the Bona Esperanza , the Bona confidentia and the Philip and marry . 
 Whereof the two first were lost . 
 | | Or , Trondon . 
 The Philip and marry . The bona Confidentia cast away . 
 man a shore to know some news , and to see whither they could hear any thing of our II ships . 
 29 Tuesday I went on shore , and dined with the Captains deputy , who made me great cheer : the Captain himself was not as yet come from Bergen : they looked for him every hour , and they said that he would bring news with him . 
 At a Northwest and by North sun we departed from Wardhouse , towards Colmogro . 
 30 Wednesday we came to Kegor , where we met with the wind at East Southeast , so that we were feign to go in to a bay to the Westwards of the point Kegor , where a man may moare 2. or 3. small ships , that shall not draw passed 11. or 12. foot water , for all winds , and East Northeast wind is the worst . It is a ledge of rocks , that defendeth the Northerly winds from the place where they moare . When we came into the bay we saw there a bark which was of II Dronton , & three or foure Norway yeaghes , belonging to Northberne : so when I came a shore , I met first with the Dutchmen , among whom was the Borrowmasters son of Dronton , who told me that the Philip and Marry wintered at Dronton , and departed from thence for England in March : and withal he showed me that the Confidence was lost , and that he had bought her sails for his ship . Then the Dutch-men carried me to their Boothe , and made me good cheer , where I saw the Lappians chepen of the said Dutchmen , both silver platters and dishes , spoons , gilded rings , ornaments for girdles of silver & gilded , and certain things made to hang about the neck , with silver chains belonging to them . 
 The Dutchmen bring hither mighty strong beer , I am certain that our English double beer would not be liked of the Kerils and Lappians , as long as that would last . 
 Here I saw the Dutchmen also have course cloth , both blew , green and red , and sad horseflesh colour : And hither they bring also Ottars cases and fox cases , both 372 
 1557-blacke and red : our English fox cases are but counterfeits unto them . 
 They would not let me understand any of their prizes , but as I otherwise understood they bartered 2. load of silver for 100 of stockfish , and 2. load is a doller . And the Dutchmen told me , that they had made a notable good year this present year 1557. They told me that they should be feign to go to Wardhouse with one lading , and lay it on land there , and so come again and fetch another . The Borrowmasters son told me , that he would go to Amsterdam with his lading of stockfish , who gave me a barrel of strong beer , and brought it in aboard our ship himself . 
 After this I went among the Russes and Kerils , who offered me fish to fell , and likewise the Lappians desired me to look upon their fish . I made them answer , that I had now no wares nor money to barter with them , and said that I came only to see if I might meet with our English ships . Then they desired me that I would come thither the next year : I said to them , If I should come the next year , I think here would A gainefidl not be fish enough to serve the Dutchmen and us trade of fishing also . They answered me , that if more ships did at es°r ' resort thither , there would more people labour to kill and make fish : and further they said , that some of them came thither a fishing 8. weeks journey with Dear , which Dear will travail more speedily then horses will . 
 As I was thus in talk with the Kerils and Lappians , the Emperor of Russia his deputy ( who was there to gather the tribute of the Lappians ) sent for me to come to his tent , who after familiar salutations , made me good cheer . He demanded of me , why none of our ships came thither . I answered him , because we knew not the place before now , neither yet herd of any fair that was kept there . Then said he , If you will come hither , here would more people resort to kill fish , I think it good ( said he ) that you make a beginning . I told him , that 
 373 
 by the grace of God the next year , one English ship should come thither . 
 Because I saw the servants of the king of Denmarke there also gathering the tribute , I asked Vasilie Pheodor-vich the Russie deputy , whither the Denmarks would not be a let to us , if we should come to this Kegor . And he said , no , they should not : for this land is my kings , and therefore be bold to come hither . 
 The Kerils and the Lappians sold not fish , until the said deputy had looked upon it , and had given them leave to fell . I asked him what wares were best for us to bring thither , and he said , silver , pearls , cloth , blew , read , and green , meal , strong beer , wine , pewter , fox cases , and gold . 
 The Lappians pay tribute to the Emperor of Russia , to the king of Denmarke , and to the king of Sweden . He told me that the River Cola is little more then 20. leagues to the Southwards of Kegor , where we should have great plenty of salmon , if corn were any thing cheap in Russia : for then poor men would resort thither to kill salmon . 
 The Dutchmen told me that they had made a good year of this , but the Kerils complained of it , because they could not fell all their fish , and that which they sold was as pleased the Dutchmen , and at their own price . I asked the Kerils at what price they sold their fish to the Russes , & they said good cheap : we fell 24. fish for 4. altines . I think they sold little above 20. pence , the 25. fish this year . 
 The Dutchmen told me that the best stockfish is made at Kegor . I saw at Vasilies tent 7. or 8. javelins , and half a dozen of bows bent , with their budgets of arrows , & likewise swords with . other weapons : Otherwise I saw no weapons there . 
 I was also conveyed to their lodgings , which gathered tribute for the king of Denmarke , where I saw a pair of bilboes : and I asked whither they were for the Lappians ( if need were , ) and they said no , but only 
 374 
 1557-for their own company if they should chance to be unruly . 
 The Kerils and the Lappians are not to be trusted , for they will steal as well as the Russes , if they may conveniently come by any thing . 
 Concerning my voyage , because the wind was scant to go back again to Colmogro , I tarried to the Eastwards of the point Kegor , and sent to land , and baked two batches of bred in the ovens that the Kerils have for their provision . 
 