A letter of Thomas Alcocke to the worshipful Richard Grey , and Henrie Lane Agents in Moscovia from Tirwill in Polonia , written in Tirwill the 26. of Aprill 1558. 
 MY duty premised unto your worships , with commendations etc. It may please you to be advertised , ill my last I sent from Smolensco , which I trust you have received wl other letters to diverse of our English men , wherein I certified you of my long retaining there , as also of my departure from thence , and how that I had hired a Totar to bring me to Dansk . We came to a certain village on Satterday the sixe and twentieth of Februarie , and there remained that night and Sunday to refresh our horses , intending to have gone away on 396 
 Munday early . But on Saterday at night one of his neighbours departed to Tirwill , and there declared to the Captain how that at such a place there was a Dutch man that was come from the Mosco , and would ride to Dansk , saying , for the one , I cannot tell what he is . The Captain incontinent rid to the King to show him thereof , so that without any delay there was sent out for me one of the Gentlemen of the Kings house , and one of the Mesnickes of the Town with sixe Officers to take me . They came thither in the night about midnight , and there apprehended me and took all that I had from me : they left me nothing but my clothes to put on my back , and so brought me to Tirwill to the Captains house , where before I dined , I had a pair of fetters clapped on my legs , wherewithal ! I sat until it was Munday in the Easterweeke . On which day , after long and earnest calling to the Captain as he rid by the window , he commanded the Marshal that mine irons should be taken off , but no word I could hear when 1 should be delivered out of captivity till it was Saint George his day : on which day I was had before the Marshal , who declared unto me that the Kings Majesty had showed his mercy and goodness towards me : for his pleasure was that I should be delivered out of prison to depart into England , but no way else . So after I had given thanks for the Kings Majesties goodness showed unto me , I desired him that he would be a mean that I might have the remainder of such things as were taken from me restored unto me again . He made me answer , that I might thank God that I escaped with my head , and that if ever there came any more of us through the land , they should not so do . The week before Easter they delivered me my Corobia again with all things that were therein . They took from me in money nine Hunger's gylderns in gold , five shillings foure pence in Lettoes money , fourtie Altines in Russe money , whereof twentie and more were for tokens , half and angel and a quarter of Master Doctor Standishes , 397 
 Doctor Standish theEmper-ours Phisitlon . 
 with his gold ring . Your two pieces of money ( Master Gray ) that you sent to your wife and daughter , with my two pieces of Boghary money . Of all this I had eight Hunger's gilderns delivered me the thirde week of mine imprisonment to pay for my charges , which stood me in a Doller a week . So that at the day of my delivery 1 had but three gyldernes left me . For the rest I made a supplication , to the Captain and had the like answer given me as the Marshal gave me . So that all the rest of the things before written are lost , and no recovery to be had , which grieveth me more for the tokens sakes then doth mine eight weeks imprisonment . They have also my sword , my boots , my bow and arrows that I bought at Smolensco , which cost me foure marks , my sled , my felt , the comhold , a book of the Flowers of godly prayers , and my book wherein my charges were written . Of all these I can get nothing again , not so much as my two books . 
 After I had remained there five and thirtie days , I was had before the Captain up into a great chamber to be examined for letters and of the cause of my coming through the Country . In the Captains company was one of the Lords of Dansk . They demanded of me where my letters were , I declared unto them that I had none : your Officers ( said I ) took me when I was in my bed , they searched me and took all that I had from me , if there be any they shall find them among my stuff which they have . They asked me then , for what cause I went home over land ? I declared unto them , that the Winter being a warm season , and having intelligence that The frozen Sea was not much frozen , and supposing this Summer it would be navigable , I was only sent to provide a Ship to be sent to pass the said Seas to discover Cataia : which if God granted we might do , it would not only be a commodity to the Realm of Englande , but unto all Christian lands , by the riches that might be brought from thence , if the histories be true that are written thereof . Much other 
 398 
 communication I had with them concerning the same voyage . Then he demanded of me what wares we brought into Russia , and what we carried from thence . I declared the same unto them . Then they burdened me , that we brought thither thousandes of ordinance , as also of harness , swords , with other munitions of war , artificers , copper , with many other things : I made them answer , that we had brought thither about one hundred shirts of mail , such old things new scoured as no man in Englande would wear . Other talk they had with me concerning the trade of Mos-covia too long to commit to writing . 
 At my coming hither here were Ambassadors from the towns of Dansk , Lubeck , and Hamburgh , as also out of Liefland to desire this king to be their Captain and head in their intended voyage , which was to stop - And attempt to all such ships as should go out of England for Mos - t^Mos covia . Whereunto the King granted , and immediately cwia thee they departed to prepare their ships . So that I am Hans towns afraid that either these our enemies , or the great wars W Easterthat we have with France and Scotland will be and occasion I ™ ®-that you shall have no ships at Colmogro this year . 
 To conclude , although I have no tokens to deliver them , that the tokens taken from me were sent unto , yet I will declare unto them that I had tokens for them , with the mischance . And thus I commit you to Almighty God with the rest of the company , who keep you in health to his holy will and pleasure . 
 By yours to command 
 Thomas Alcocke . 
 