The first voyage made by Master Anthonie Jenkinson , from the City of London towards the land of Russia , begun the twelfth of May , in the year 1557. 
 Irst by the grace of God , the day and year above mentioned , I departed from the said City , and the same day at Gravesend embarked my self in a good ship , nam the Primerose , being appointed , although unworthy , chief captain of the same , and also of the 
 other 3 good ships , to say , the John Evangelist , the Anne , and the Trinitie , having also the conduct of the Emperor of Russia his ambassador nam Osep Nepea Gregoriwich , who passed with his company in the said Primerose . And thus our foure tall ships being well appointed , aswell for men as victuals as other necessary furniture , the said twelfth day of the month of May , we weighed our anchors , and departed from the said Gravesend , in the after noon , and plying down the Thames , the wind being Easterly , and fair weather , the 13 day we came a ground with the Primerose , upon a sand called the black tail , where we sat fast until the 14 day in the morning , and then God be praised , she came off : and that day we plied down as far as our Lady of Holland , and there came to and anchor , the wind being Easterly , & there remained until the 20 day : then we weighed and went out at Goldmore gate , and from thence in at Balsey slade , and so into Orwel wands , where we came to and anchor : but as we came out at the said Goldemore gate , the Trinitie came on ground on certain rocks , that lie to the Northward of the said gate , and was like to be bilged and lost . But by the aid of God , at the last she came off again , being very leak : and the 21 day the Primerose remaining at and anchor in the wands , the 
 413 
 other three ships bore into Orwel haven , where I caused the said Trinitie to be grounded , searched , and repaired . So we remained in the said haven , until the 28 day : and then the wind being Westerly , the three ships that were in the haven , weighed and came forth , and in coming forth the John Evangelist came on ground upon a sand , called the Andros , where she remained one tide , and the next full sea she came off again without any great hurt , God be praised . 
 The 29 day in the morning all foure ships weighed in the Wands , and that tide went as far as Qrfordnesse , where we came to and anchor , because the wind was Northerly : And about sixe of the clock at night , the wind vered to the Southwest , and we weighed anchor , and bore clear of the ness , and then set our course Northeast & by North until midnight , being then clear of Yarmouth sands . Then we winded North and by West , June , and Northnorthwest , until the first of June at noon , then it waxed calm , and continued so until the second day at noon : then the wind came at Northwest , with a tempest , and much rain , and we lay close by , and caped Northnortheast , and Northeast and by North , as . the wind shifted , and so continued until the third day at noon : then the wind vered Westerly again , and we went North our right course , and so continued our way until the fourth day , at three of the clock in the afternoon , at which time the wind vered to the Northwest again and blew a fresh gale , and so continued until the seventh day in the morning , we lying with all our ships close by , and caping to the Northwards : and then the wind vering more Northerly , we were forced to put roomer with the coast of England again , and fell overthwart Newcastle , but went not into the haven , 8c so plied upon the coast the eight day 8c the ninth . 
 The tenth day the wind came to the Northnorthwest , 8c we were forced to bear roomer with Flamborow head , where we came to and anchor , and there 414 
 remained until the seventeenth day . Then the wind came fair , and we weighed , and set our course North and by East , and so continued the same with a merry wind until the 21 at noon , at which time we took the sun , and had the latitude in sixty degrees . Then we shifted our course , and went Northnorth east , and Northeast and by North , until the 25 day . Then we discovered certain Islands , called Heilick Islands , lying Heilickls-from us Northeast , being in the latitude of sixtie sixe lands in 66 degrees , 40 minutes . Then we went north and by ^8 ™ 4° West , because we would not come too nigh the land , “ s' and running that course foure hours , we discovered , and had sighed of Rost Islands , joining to the main Rost Islands . land of Finmarke . Thus continuing our course along the coast of Norway and Finmark , the 27 day we took the Sun , being as far shot as Lofoot , and had the latitude in 69 degrees . And the same day in the afternoon appeared over our heads a rainbow , like 
 a semicircle , with both ends upward . Note that there is between the said Rost Islands & Lofoot , a whirl Malestrand a pool called Malestrand , which from half ebb until half flood , makes such a terrible noise , that it shakes ' the rings in the doors of the inhabitants houses of the said Islands tenne miles oflf . Also if there comes any Whale within the current of the samej they make a pitiful cry . Moreover , if great trees be carried into it by force of streams , and after with the ebb be cast out again , the ends and boughs of them have be so beaten , that they are like the stalks of hemp that is bruised . Note , that all the coast of Finmarke is high mountains and hills , being covered all the year with snow . And hard aboard the shore of this coast , there is 100 or 150 fathoms of water in depth . Thus proceeding and sailing forward , we fell with and Island 
 called Zenam , being in the latitude of 70 degrees . Zenam Island . About this Island we saw many Whale's , very monstrous , about our ships , some by estimation of 60 foot long : and being the engendering time they roared and 
 415 
 cried terribly . From thence we fell with and Island , Kettelwike called Kettelwicke . 
 Island . This coast from Rost unto Lofoot lies North and south , and from Lofoot to Zenam Northeast and southwest , and from Zenam to Kettelwike Eastnortheast and Westsouthwest . From the said Kettelwike we sailed East and by North io leagues , and fell with a Inger found , land called Inger found , where we fished , being becalmed , and took great plenty of Cods . Thus plying along The North the coast , we fell with a Cape , called the North Cape , ^aPe - which is the Northermost land that we pass in our voyage to S. Nicholas , and is in the latitude of 71 degrees and ten minutes , and is from Inger found East , and to the Northwards 15 leagues . And being at this North Cape the second day of July , we had the sun at North 4 degrees above the Horizon . The third day we came to Wardhouse , having such mists Wardhouse , that we could not see the land . This Wardhouse is a Castle standing in and Island 2 miles from the main of Finland , subject to the king of Denmarke , and the Eastermost land that he hath . There are two other 
 Cattle fed with fish . 
 The Monastery of Pechinchow . 
 Islands near adjoining unto that , whereon the Castle of Wardhouse stands . The inhabitants of those three Islands live only by fishing , and make much stockfish , which they dry with frost : their most feeding is fish ; bred and drink they have none , but such as is brought them from other places . They have small store of cattle , which are also fed with fish . From Wardhouse we sailed Southsoutheast ten leagues , and fell with a Cape of land called Kegor , the Northermost part of the land of Lappia . And between Wardhouse , and the said Cape is a great Bay , called DommeshafF , in the South part whereof is a Monastery of Monks of the Russes religion , called Pechinchow . Thus proceeding forward and sailing along the coast of the said land of Lappia , winding Southeast , the fourth day through great mists and darkness we lost the company of the other three ships , and met not 
 416 
 with them again , until the seventh day , when we fell with a Cape or headland called Swetinoz , which is the entering into the Bay of S. Nicholas . At this Cape lies a great stone , to the which the barks that passed thereby , were wont to make offerings of butter , meal , and other victuals , thinking that unless they did so , their barks or vessels should there perish , as it hath be oftentimes seen : and there it is very dark and misty . Note that the sixt day we passed Arzina reca by the place where Sir Hugh Willoughbie , with all the n ™ his company perished , which is called Arzina reca , that is to say , the river Arzina . loughbiewas 
 The land of Lappia is and high land , having snow frozen . 
 lying on it commonly all the year . The people of the Country are half Gentiles : they live in the summer time near the sea side , and use to take fish , of the which they make bred , and in the winter they remove up into the country into the woods , where they use ' hunting , and kill Dear , Bears , Wolves , Foxes , and other beasts , with whose flesh they be nourished , and with their skins appareled in such strange fashion , that there is nothing seen of them bore but their eyes . The Lapplans They have none other habitation , but only in tents , covered all removing from place to place , according to the season of the year . They know no art nor faculty , but only shooting , which they exercise daily , as well men as women , and kill such beasts as serve them for their food . Thus proceeding along the coast from Swetinoz aforesaid , the ninth day of July we came to Cape Grace , being in the latitude of 66 degrees and 45 minutes , and is at the entering in of the Bay of S. 
 Nicholas . Aboard this land there is 20 or 30 fathoms water , and sundry grounds good to anchor in . The The current current at this Cape runneth Southwest and Northeast . at£ateZrace ' From this Cape we proceeded along until we came to Cross Island , which is seven leagues from the said Cape Southwest : and from this Island , we set over to the other side of the Bay , and went Southwest , and fell 
 II 417 2D 
 with and headland called Foxenose , which is from the The entering said Island 25 leagues . The entering of this Bay from Cross Island to the nearest land on the other side is seven leagues seven leagues over . From Boxenose proceeding forward broad at thee the twelfth day of the said month of July , all our least . foure ships arrived in safety at the road of Saint Nicholas in the land of Russia , where we anchored , and had sailed from London unto the said road seven hundred and fifty leagues . The Russian ambassador and his com-fl . 312. ] pany with great joy god to shore , and our ships here forthwith discharged themselves : and being laden again , and having a fair wind , departed towards England the August . first of August . The third of the said month I with other of my company came unto the city of Colmogro , being and hundred verstes from the Bay of Saint Nicholas , and in the latitude of 64 degrees 25 minutes . 1 tarried at the said Colmogro until the fifteenth day : and then I departed in a little boat up the great river of Dwina , which runneth very swiftly , and the self same day Pinegs river , passed by the mouth of the river called Pinego , leaving it on our left hand fifteene verstes from Colmogro . On both sides of the mouth of this river Pinego is high land , great rocks of Alabaster , great woods , and Pineapple trees lying along within the ground , which by report have lain there since Noes flood . And thus proceeding forward the nineteenth day in the morning , The town of I came into a town called Yemps , and hundred verstes Temps . from Colmogro . All this way along they make much tar , pitch and ashes of Aspen trees . From thence I came to a place called Ustiug , and ancient city the last day of August . At this city meet two rivers : the one called Jug , and the other Sucana , both which fallen into the aforesaid river of Dwina . The river Jug hath his spring in the land of the Tartars called Chere-mizzi , joining to the country of Permia : and Succana hath his head from a lake not far from the city of Ustiug . Vologda . Thus departing from Ustiug , and passing by the river Succana , we came to a town called Totma . 
 418 
 About this place the water is very shallow , and stony , and troublesome for Barks and boats of that country , which they call Nassades , and Dosneckes , to pass that way : wherein merchandise are transported from the aforesaid Colmogro to the city of Vologhda . These descripvessels called Nassades , are very long built , broad made , and close above , flat bottomed , and draw not above foure foot water , and will carry two hundred tons : they have none iron appertaining to them but all of timber , and when the wind serves , they are made to sail . Otherwise they have many men , some to hale and draw by the necks with long small ropes made fast to the said boats , and some set with long poles . There are many of these barks upon the river of Dwina : And the most part of them belongeth unto the ci tie of Vologhda : for there dwell many merchants , and they occupy the said boats with carrying of salt from the sea side unto the said Vologhda . The twentieth of September I came unto Vologhda , which is a great city , and the river passes through the midst of the same . The houses are built with wood of Fir trees , joined one with another , and round without : the houses are foure square without any iron or stone work , covered with birch barks , and wood over the same : Their Churches are all of wood , two for every parish , one to be heated for Winter , and the other for Summer . 
 On the tops of their houses they say much earth , for fear of burning : for they are soar plagued with fire . This Vologhda is in 59 degrees , eleven minutes , and is from Colmogro , 1000 verstes . 
 All the way I never came in house , but lodged in the wilderness , by the rivers side , and carried provision for the way . And he that will travel those ways , must Good counsel ! carry with him and hatchet , a tinder box , and a kettle , for tO ™ ™ 116 ™ ' to make fire and seethe meat , when he hath it : for there is small succour in those parts , unless it be in towns . 
 419 
 The first day of December , I departed from Vologhda in post in a sled , as the manner is in Winter . And the way to Moscua is as follows . From Vologhda to Commelski , 27 verstes , so to Olmor 25 verstes , so to Teloytske 20 verstes , so to Ure 30 verstes , so to Voshan-sko 30 verstes , then to Yeraslave 30 verstes , which stands upon the great river Volga , so to Rostove , 50 verstes , then to Rogarin 30 verstes , so to Peraslave 10 verstes , which is a great town , standing hard by a fair lake . From thence to Dowbnay 30 verstes , so to Godo-roke 30 verstes , so to Owchay 30 verstes , and last to the Mosco 25 verstes , where I arrived the sixt day of December . December . 
 There are 14 posts called Yannes between Vologhda and Mosco , which are accounted 500 verstes asunder . 
 The 10 day of December I was sent for to the Emperor's Castle by the said Emperor , and delivered my letters unto the Secretary , who talked with me of diverse matters , by the commandment of the Emperor . And after that my letters were translated , I was answered that I was welcome , and that the Emperor would give me that I desired . 
 The 25 day , being the day of the nativity , I came into the Emperor's presence , and kissed his hand , who sat aloft in a goodly chair of estate , having on his head a crown most richly decked , and a stafFe of gold in his hand , all appareled with gold , and garnished with precious stones . 
 There sat distant from him about two yards his brother , and next unto him a boy of twelve years of age , who was inheritor to you Emperor of Casan , conquered by this Emperor 8 years past . Then sat his nobility round about him , richly appareled with gold and stone . And after I had done obeisance to the Emperor , he with his own mouth calling me by my name , bade me to dinner , and so I departed to my lodging till dinner time , which was at sixe of the clock , by candle light . 
 The Emperor dined in a fair great hall , in the midst 420 
 whereof was a pillar foure square , very artificially made , about which were diverse tables set , and at the uppermost part of the hall , sat the Emperor himself , & at his table sat his brother , his Uncles son , the Metropolitan , the young Emperor of Casan , and diverse of his noble men , all of one side . There were diverse Ambassadors , & other strangers , as well Christians as heathens , diversely appareled , to the number of 600 men , which dined in the said hall , beside 2000 Tartars , men of war , which were newly come to render themselves to the Emperor , and were appointed to serve him in his wars against the Lieflanders , but they dined in other hals . I was set at a little table , having no stranger with me , directly before the Emperor's face . Being thus set and placed , the Emperor sent me diverse bowls of wine , and mead , & many dishes of meat from his own hand , which were brought me by a Duke , and my table served all in gold and silver , and so likewise on other tables , there were set bowls of gold , set with stone , worth by estimation 400 pounds sterling one cup , beside the plate which served the tables . 
 There was also a Cupboard of plate , most sumptuous and rich , which was not used : among the which , was a piece of gold of two yards long , wrought in the top with towers , and dragons heads , also diverse barrels of gold and silver , with Castles on the bungs , richly and artificially made . The Emperor and all the hall throughout was served with Dukes : and when dinner was ended , the Emperor called me by name , & gave me drink with his own hand , & so I departed to my lodging . 
 Note , that when the Emperor drinketh , all the company stand up , and at every time he drinketh or tasteth of a dish of meat he blesses himself . Many other things I saw that day , not here noted . 
 The 4 of January , which was Twelftide with them , the Emperor , with his brother and all his nobles , all most richly appareled with gold , pearls , precious stones , and 
 421 
 A.D. 
 I558 - 
 costly furs , with a crown upon his head , of the Tartarian fashion , went to the Church in procession , with the Metropolitan , and diverse bishops and priests . That day I was before the Emperor again in Russe apparel , and the Emperor asked if that were not I , and his Chancellor answered yea . Then he bade me to dinner : then came he out of the church , and went with the procession upon the river , being all frozen , and there standing bore headed , with all his Nobles , there was a hold made in the ice , and the Metropolitan hallowed the water with great solemnity and service , and did cast of the said water upon the Emperor's son and the Nobility . That done , the people with great thronging filled pots of the said water to carry home to their houses , and diverse children were thrown in , and sick people , and plucked out quickly again , and diverse Tartars christened : all which the Emperor beheld . Also there were brought the Emperors best horses , to drink at the said hallowed water . All this being ended , he returned to his palace again , and went to dinner by candle light , and sat in a wooden house , very fairly gilded . There dined in the place , above 300 strangers , and I sat alone as I did before , directly before the Emperor , and had my meat , bred and drink sent me from the Emperor . 
 The city of Mosco is great , the houses for the most part of wood , and some of stone , with windows of iron , which serve for summer time . There are many fair Churches of stone , but more of wood , which are made hight in the winter time . The Emperor's lodging is in a fair and large castle , walled foure square of brick , high , and thick , situated upon a hill , 2 miles about , and the river on the Southwest side of it , and it hath 16 gates in the walls , & as many bulwarks . His palace is separated from the rest of the Castle , by a long wall going north and south , to the river side . In his palace are Churches , some of stone and some of wood , with round towers fairly gilded . In the Church doors and within the Churches are images of gold : the chief markets for all 422 
 things , are within the said Castle , and for sundry things sundry markets , and every science by it self . And in the winter there is a great market without the castle , upon the river being frozen , and there is sold corn , earthen pots , tubs , sleds , etc. The castle is in circuit 2900 pases . 
 The country is full of marish ground , & plain , in woods and rivers abundant , but it brings forth good plenty of corn . This Emperor is of great power : for he hath conquered much , as well of the Lieflanders , Poles , Lettoes , and Swethens , as also of the Tartars , & Gentiles , called Samoeds , having thereby much enlarged his dominions . He keepeth his people in great subjection : all matters pass his judgement , be they never so small . The law is sharp for all offenders . 
 The Metropolitan deals in matters of religion , as himself lists , whom the Emperor greatly honoureth . They use the ceremonies , and order of the Greek Church . They worship many images painted on tables , and specially the image of S. Nicholas . Their Priests be married , but their wives being dead , they may not marry the second time , and so become Monks , whereof there are a great number in the land . 
 They have foure Lents in the year , and the week before Shrofetide , they call the Butter week , etc. 
 They have many sorts of meats and drinks , when they banquet and delight in eating of gross meats , and stinking fish . Before they drink they use to blow in the cup : their greatest friendship is in drinking : they are great talkers and liars , without any faith or trust in their words , flatterers and dissemblers . The women be there very obedient to their husbands , & are kept straightly from going abroad , but at some seasons . 
 At my being there , I herd of men and women that drunk away their children , and all their goods at the Emperor's tavern , and not being able to pay , having impaned himself , the Taverner brings him out to the high way , and beats him upon the legs : then they that 
 423 
 pass by , knowing the cause , and having peradventure compassion upon him , give the money , and so he is ransomed . 
 In every good town there is a drunken Tavern called a Cursemay , which the Emperor sometime lets out to farm , & sometime bestoweth for a year or two on some duke or gentleman , in recompense of his service : and for that time he is Lord of all the town , robbing and spoiling , and doing what pleases him : and then he being grown rich , is taken by the Emperor , and sent to the wars again , where he shall spend all that which he hath got by ill means : so that the Emperor in his wars is little charged , but all the burden lies upon the poor people . 
 They use saddles made of wood & sinews , with the tree gilded with damask work , & the seat covered with cloth , sometime of gold , and the rest Saphian leather , well stitched . They use little drums at their saddle bows , by the found whereof their horses use to run more swiftly . 
 The Russe is appareled in this manner : his upper garment is of cloth of gold , silk , or cloth , long , down to the foot , and buttoned with great buttons of silver , or else laces of silk , set on with brooches , the sleeves thereof very long , which he weareth on his arm , ruffed up . Under that he hath another long garment , buttoned with silk buttons , with a high collar standing up of some colour , and that garment is made straight . Then his shirt is very fine , and wrought with read silk , or some gold , with a collar of pearl . Under his shirt he hath linen breeches , upon his legs , a pair of hose without feet , and his boots of read or yellow leather . On his head he weareth a white Colepecke , with buttons of silver , gold , pearl , or stone , and under it a black Fox cap , turned up very broad . 
 When he rides on horseback to the wars , or any journey , he hath a sword of the Turkish fashion , and his bow and arrows of the same manner . In the town he 
 424 
 weareth no weapon , but only two or three pair of knives , having the hafts of the tooth of a fish , called the Morse . 
 In the Winter time , the people travel with sleds , in town and country , the way being hard , and smooth with snow : the waters and rivers are all frozen , and one horse with a sled , will draw a man upon it 400 miles , in three days : but in the Summer time , the way is deep with mire , and traveling is very ill . 
 The Russe , if he be a man of any ability , never goes out of his house in the winter , but upon his sled , and in Summer upon his horse : and in his sled he sits upon a carpet , or a white Bears skin : the sled is drawn with a horse well decked , with many Foxes and Wolves tails at his neck , & is conducted by a little boy upon his back : his servants stand upon the tail of the sled etc. 
 A.D. 
 1557 - 
 