A compendious and brief declaration of the journey of M. Anth. Jenkinson , from the famous city of London into the land of Persia , passing in this same journey thorough Russia , Moscovia , and Mare Caspium , alias Hircanum , sent and employed therein by the right worshipful Society of the Merchant's Adventurers , for discovery of Lands , Islands , etc. Being begun the foureteenth day of May , Anno 1561 , and in the third year of 1561. the reign of the Queens Majestic that now is : this present declaration being directed and written to the foresaid Society . 
 Irst embarking my self in a good ship of yours , nam the Swallow , at Gravesend , having a fair and good wind , our anchor then weighed , and committing all to the protection of our God , having in our sailing diversi tie of winds , & thereby forced to direct and observe sundry 
 courses ( not here rehearsed , because you have be thereof heretofore amply informed ) on the fourteenth day of July , the year aforesaid I arrived in the bay of S. Nicholas in Russia : and the sixe and twentieth day of the same month , after conference then had with your Agents there , concerning your worships affairs , I departed from thence , passing thorough the country of Vago , and on the eight day of August then following , I came to Vologda , which is distant from Colmogro , seven hundred miles , where I remained foure days , attending the arrival of one of your boats , wherein was laden a chest of jewels with the present , by your worships appointed for the Emperor's Majesty : which being arrived , and the chest received , I therewith departed towards the city of Mosco , and came thither the twentieth 
 The Queens letters to the Emperor of Russia . 
 day of the same month , where I immediately caused my coming to be signified unto the Secretary of the Imperiali Majesty , with the Queens Highness letters addressed unto the same his Majesty , who informed the Emperor thereof . But his Highness having great affairs , and being at that present ready to be married unto a Lady of Chircassi , of the Mahometicall law , commanded that no stranger , Ambassador , nor other , should come before him for a time , with further straight charge , that during the space of three days that the same solemn feast was celebrating , the gates of the city should be shut , and that no person , stranger or native ( certain of his household reserved ) should come out of their said houses during the said triumph , the cause thereof unto this day not being known . 
 The sixt of September following , the Emperor made a great feast , whereunto were called all Ambassadors and strangers being of reputation , and having affairs : among whom I was one , but being willed by the Secretary first to come , and to show him the Queens Majesties letters , I refused so to do , saying I would deliver the same unto the Emperors own hands , and not otherwise : which herd , the Secretary answered , that unless he might first peruse the said letters , I should not come into the Emperor's presence , so that I was not at the feast . Nevertheless , I was advertised by a noble man that I was inquired for by the Emperors Majesty , although the cause of my absence was to his Majesty unknown . The next day following , I caused a supplication to be made , and presented it to his Highness own hands , and thereby declared the cause of my coming , signified by the Queens Majesties letters , and the answer of his said Secretary , most humbly beseeching his Grace that he would receive and accept the same her Highness letters , with such honour and friendship , as his letters sent by Osep Napea were received by the hands of our late Sovereign Lady Queen Marry , or else that it would please his Highness 
 to dismiss me , saying that I would not deliver the said letters but unto his own hands , for that it is so used in our country . Thus the matter being pondered , and the effect of my supplication well digested , I was forthwith commanded to come with the said letters before his Majesty , and so delivered the same into his own hands ( with such presents as by you were appointed ) according to my request , which were gratefully accepted , & the same day I dined in his Graces presence , with great entertainment . Shortly after , I desired to know whither I should be licenced to pass thorough his Highness dominions into the land of Persia , according to the Queens Majesties request : hereunto it was answered , that I should not pass thither , for that his Majesty meant to send and army of men that way into the land of Chircassi , whereby my journey should be both dangerous & troublesome , and that if I should perish therein , it would be much to his Graces dishonour , but he doubted other matters , although they were not expressed . Thus having received his answer , neither to my expectation , nor yet contentation , and there remaining a good part of the year , having in that time sold the most part of your kersies and other wares appointed for Persia , when the time of the year required to return for England , I desired passport , and post horses for money , which was granted : but having received my passport , ready to depart , there came unto our house there Osep Napea , who persuaded me that I should not depart that day , saying that the Emperor was not truly informed , imputing great fault to the frowardness of the Secretary , who was not my friend : before whom coming again the next day , and finding the same Secretary and Osep Napea together , after many allegations and objections of things , and perceiving that I would depart , I was willed to remain until the Emperors Majesty were spoken with again touching my passage : wherewith I was content , & within three days after sending for me , he declared that the Emperors pleasure was , that I should 
 in 17 b 
 Request to pass into Persia thorough Moscovie . 
 Osep Napea Ambassador from the Emperor of Russia to Q. Marry . 
 not only pass thorough his dominions into Persia , but also have his Graces letters of commendations to foreign princes , with certain his affairs committed to my charge , too long here to rehearse : whereupon I appointed my self for the voyage , & the 15 day of March , the year aforesaid , I dined again in his Majesties presence in And ambassa - company of and Ambassador of Persia and others , and dor of Persia , receiving a cup of drink at his Majesties hands , I took my leave of his Highness , who did not only give me letters , as aforesaid , but also committed matter of importance and charge unto me , to be done when I should arrive in those countries' whither I intended to go , and having all things in readiness for the same voyage , I departed from the city of Mosco the 27 day of April 1562 , down by the great river of Volga , in company of the said Ambassador of Persia , with whom I had great friendship and conference all the way down the same Astracan . river unto Astracan , where we arrived all in health the 
 10 day of June . 
 And as touching the situations of the cities , towns , castles and countries' , aswell of Mahometans as also of Gentiles adjoining to the same , whereby I passed from Mosco unto Astracan , I omit in this breviate to rehearse , for that I heretofore have declared the same most amply M. Jenkinsons unto you in my voyage to Boghar . Thus being arrived voyage to Bog - at Astracan , as is aforesaid , I repaired unto the captain ’ there , unto whom I was commended from the Emperors Majesty , with great charge that he not only should aid and succour me with all things needful during my abided there , but also to safeconduct me with 50 gunners well appointed in two stroogs or brigantine into the Caspian sea , until I had passed certain dangerous places which pirates & rovers do accustom to haunt , and having prepared my bark for the sea , the Ambassador of Persia being before departed in a bark of his own the 15 day of July , the year aforesaid , I and my company took Hepasseth the our voyage from the said Astracan , and the next day Caspian sea . at a West sun , passed the mouth of the said river 18 
 being twenty miles distant , lying next Southeast . The 18 at a Southwest sun , we passed by three Islands being distant nine miles from the said mouth of Volga , and Southsouthwest from thence , sailing South southwest the next day , at a West 8c by North sun we fell with the land called Challica Ostriva , being foure round Islands together , distant from the said three Islands forty miles . From thence sailing the said course the next day , we had sighed of a land called Took , in the country of The country Tumen , where pirates and rovers do use : for fear of whom we haled off into the sea due East forty miles , and fell upon shallows out of the sighed of land , and there were like to have perished , escaping most hardly : 
 then the 22 day we had sighed of a goodly Island called The Island of Chatalet , distant from the said Challica Ostriva and hundred Chatakt . miles , the wind being contrary , and a stiff gale , we were not able to seize it : but were forced to come to and anchor to the leeward of the same sixe miles off in three or foure fathom water , being distant from the main land to the Westward of us , which was called Skafcayl or Connyk a country of Mahometans , about miles , and so riding at two anchors a head , having no other provision , we lost one of them , the storm and sea being grown very soar , and thereby our bark was so full of leaks , that with continual pumping we had much ado to keep her above water , although we threw much of our goods overboard , with loss of our boat , and our selves thereby in great danger like to have perished either in the sea or else upon the lee shore , where we should have fallen into the hands of those wicked infidels , who attended our shipwreck : and surely it was very unlike that we should have escaped both the extremities , but only by the power and mercy of God , for the storm continued seven days , to wit , until the thirtieth day of the same month : and then the wind coming up at the West with fair weather , our anchor weighed , and our sail displayed , lying South , the next day haling to the shore with a West sun , we were nigh a land 
 A mighty wall . 
 Or Tiphlis . 
 Fortie one degrees . 
 Shabran . 
 Alcan Murcy the gpvemour . 
 called by the inhabitants Shyrvansha , and there we came again to and anchor , having the wind contrary , being distant from the said Chatalet 150 miles , and there we continued until the third day of August , then having a fair wind , winding Southsoutheast , and sailing threescore miles , the next day at a Southeast sun we arrived at a city called Derbent in the king of Hircans dominion , where coming to land , and saluting the captain there with a present , he made to me and my company a dinner , and there taking fresh water I departed . 
 This city of Derbent is and ancient town having and old castle therein , being situated upon and hill called Castow , built all of free stone much after our building , the walls very high and thick , and was first erected by king Alexander the great , when he warred against the Persians and Medians , and then he made a wall of a wondered height and thickness , extending from the same city to the Georgians , yea unto the principali city thereof nam Tewflish , which wall though it be now rased , or otherwise decayed , yet the foundation remains , & the wall was made to the intent that the inhabitants of that country then newly conquered by the said Alexander should not lightly flee , nor his enemies easily invade . This city of Derbent being now under the power of the Sophy of Persia , bordereth upon the sea , adjoining to the foresaid land of Shalfcall , in the latitude of 41 degrees . From thence sailing Southeast and Southsoutheast about 80 miles , the sixt day of August , the year aforesaid , we arrived at our landing place called Shabran , where my bark discharged : the goods laid on shore , and there being in my tent keeping great watch for fear of rovers , whereof there is great plenty , being field people , the governor of the said country nam Alcan Murcy , coming unto me , entertained me very gently , unto whom giving a present , he appointed for my safeguard forty armed men to watch & ward me , until he might have news from the king of Shirvan . The 12 day of the same month news 
 did come from the king , with order that I should repair unto him with all speed : and for expedition , aswell camels to the number of five and forty to carry my goods , as also horses for me and my company were in readiness , so that the goods laden , and taking my journey from thence the said twelft day , on the 18 of the same month I came to a city called Shamaky , in the said country of Hircan , otherwise called Shirvan , and there the king hath a fair place , where my lodging being appointed , the goods were discharged : the next day being the 19 day , I was sent for to come to the king , nam Obdolowcan , who kept his court at that KingObdo-time in the high mountains in tents , distant from the lowcan-said Shamaki twentie miles , to avoid the injury of the heat : and the 20 day I came before his presence , who gently entertained me , and having kissed his hands , he bade me to dinner , and commanded me to fit down 
 not far from him . This king did fit in a very rich majesty pavilion , wrought with silk & gold , placed very J ? at&re °f pleasantly , upon a hill side , of sixteene fathom long , ° and sixe fathom broad , having before him a goodly fountain of fair water : whereof he & his nobility did drink , he being a prince of a mean stature , and of a fierce countenance , richly appareled with long garments of silk , and cloth of gold , embroidered with pearls and stone : upon his head was a tolipane with a sharp end standing upward half a yard long , of rich cloth of gold , wrapped about with a piece of India silk of twentie yards long , wrought with gold , and on the left side of his tolipane stood a plume of feathers , set in a trunk of gold richly inameled , and set with precious stones : his earrings had pendants of gold a handful long , with two great rubies of great valve , set in the ends thereof : all the ground within his pavilion was covered with rich carpets , & under himself was spread a square carpet wrought with silver & gold , and thereupon was laid two suitable cushions . 
 Thus the king with his nobility sitting in his pavilion 
 with his legs a cross , and perceiving that it was painful for me so to fit , his highness caused a stool to be brought in , & did will me to fit thereupon , after my fashion . Dinner time then approaching , diverse clothes were spread upon the ground , and sundry dishes served , and set in a rank with diverse kinds of meats , to the number of 140 dishes , as I numbered them , which being taken away with the table clothes , and others spread , a banquet of fruits of sundry kinds , with other banqueting meats , to the number of 150 dishes , were brought in : so that two services occupied 290 dishes , and at the end of the said dinner & banquet , the king said unto me , Quoshe quelde , that is to say , Welcome : and called for a cup of water to be drawn at a fountain , and tasting thereof , did deliver me the rest , demanding how I did like the same , and whither there were so good in our country or not : unto whom I answered in such sort , that he was therewith contented : then he proponed unto me sundry questions , both touching religion , and also the state of our countries' , and further questioned whither the Emperor of Almain , the Emperor of Russia , or the great Turke , were of most power , with many other things too long here to rehearse , to whom I answered as I thought most meet . Then he demanded whither I intended to go any further , and the cause of my coming : unto that I answered , that I was sent with letters from the Queens most excellent Majesty of England unto the great Sophy , to entreat friendship and free passage , and for his safeconduct to be granted unto English merchant's to trade into his Seignories , with the like also to be granted to his subject's , when they should come into our countries' , to the honour and wealth of both realms , and commodity of both their subject's , with diverse other words , which I omit to rehearse . This said king much allowing this declaration said , that he would not only give me passage , but also men to safeconduct me unto the said Sophy , lying from the foresaid city of Shamaki thirtie days 
 journey , up into the land of Persia , at a castle called Casbin : so departing from the king at that time , within Casbin . three days after , being the foure and twentieth day of August the year aforesaid , he sent for me again : unto whom I repaired in the morning , and the king not being risen out of his bed ( for his manner is , that Multitude of watching in the night , and then banqueting with his ctncu^ines-women , being and hundred and forty in number , he sleepeth most in the day ) did give one commandment that I should ride on hawking with many Gentlemen of his Court , and that they should show me so much game and pastime as might be : which was done , and many cranes killed . We returned from hawking about three of the clock at the afternoon : the king then risen , and ready to dinner , I was invited thereunto , and approaching nigh to the entering in of his tent , and being in his sighed , two gentlemen encountered me with two garments of that country fashion , side , down to the ground , the one of silk , and the other of silk and gold , sent unto me from the king , and after that they caused me to put off my upper garment , being a gown of black velvet furred with Sables , they put the said two garments upon my back , and so conducted me unto the king , before whom doing reverence , and kissing his hand , he commanded me to fit not far from him , and so I dined in his presence , he at that time being very merry , and demanding of me many questions , and among other , how I like the manner of their hawking . 
 Dinner so ended , I required his highness safeconduct for to depart towards the Sophy , who dismissing me with great favour , and appointing his Ambassador ( which returned out of Russia ) and others , to safeconduct me , he gave me at my departure a fair horse with all furniture , and custom free from thence with all my goods . So I returned to Shamaki again , where I remained until the sixt of October , to provide camels , horses , and other necessaries for my said intended journey . 
 Danger by diversity in religion . 
 Barbarous cruelty . 
 The ci tie of Arrash or Erex . 
 The commodities of this country . 
 But now before I proceed further , I purpose to write something of this country of Hircan , now called Shirvan , with the towns and commodities of the same . This country of Hircan in times past was of great renown , having many cities , towns , and castles in it : and the kings thereof in time of antiquity were of great power , able to make wars with the Sophies of Persia : but now it is not only otherwise ( for that the cities , towns , and castles be decayed ) but also the king is subject to the said Sophy ( although they have their proper king ) and be at the commandment of the said Sophy , who conquered them not many years passed , For their diversity in religion , and caused not only all the nobility & gentlemen of that country to be put to death , but also over and beside , rased the walls of the cities , towns , and castles of the said realm , to the intent that there should be no rebellion , and for their great terror , caused a turret of free stone and flints to be erected in the said city called Shamaki , and in a rank of flints of the said turret , did set the heads of the said nobility and gentlemen , then executed . This city is distant from the sea side , with camels , seven days journey , but now the same being much decayed , & chiefly inhabited with Armenians , another city called Arrash , bordering upon the Georgians , is the chiefest and most opulent in the trade of merchandise , & thereabouts is nourished the most abundant growth of raw silk , and thither the Turks , Syrians , and other strangers do resort and traffic . There be also diverse good and necessary commodities to be provided & had in this said realm : viz. galls rough and smooth , cotton wool , allome , and raw silk of the natural growth of that country : beside , never all kind of spices and drug , and some other commodities , which are brought thither from out of East India , but in the less quantity , for that they be not assured to have vent or utterance of the same : but the chiefest commodities be there , raw silks of all sorts , whereof there is great plenty . Not far from the said 
 1562. city of Shamaki , there was and old castle called Gulli - The strong stone , now beaten down by this Sophy , which was c “ stle esteemed to be one of the strongest castles in the world , u e^ace ’ and was besieged by Alexander the great , long time before he could win it . And not far from the said castle was a Nunry of sumptuous building , wherein was buried a kings daughter , nam Ameleck Channa , who slew herself with a knife , for that her father would have forced her ( she professing chastity ) to have married with a king of Tartarie : upon which occasion the maidens of that country do resort thither once every year to lament her death . 
 Also in the said country there is and high hill called Quiquifs , upon the top whereof ( as it is commonly reported ) did dwell a great Giant , nam Arneoste , having upon his head two great homes , and ears , and eyes like a Horse , and a tail like a Cow . It is further said , that this monster kept a passage thereby , until there came and holy man , termed Haucoir Hamshe , a kinsman to one of the Sophies , who mounted the said hill , and combating with the said Giant , did bind not only him in chains , but also his woman called Lami-sache with his son nam After : for which victory they of that country have this holy man in great reputation , and the hill at this day ( as it is bruited ) savoureth so ill , that no person may come nigh unto it : but whither it be true or not , I refer it to further knowledge . 
 Now to return to the discourse of the proceeding in my voyage towards the great Sophy . The 6 of October in the year aforesaid , I with my company departed from Shamachi aforesaid , and having journeyed threescore miles , came to a town called Yavate , wherein The town of the king hath a fair house , with orchards and gardens Yavate . well replenished with fruits of all sorts . By this town passes a great river called Cor , which springs in the mountains of the Georgians , & passing thorough the country of Hircania aforesaid , falls into the Case - 
 pian or Hircan sea , at a place between two ancient towns called Shabran and Bachu , situate within the realm of Hircane , and from thence issueth further , passing thorough a fruitful country , inhabited with pasturing people , which dwell in the Summer season upon mountains , and in Winter they remove into the valleys without resorting to towns or any other habitation : and when they remove , they do journey in caravans or troops of people and cattle , carrying all their wives , children and baggage upon bullocks . Now passing this wild people ten days journey , coming into no town or house , the sixteenth day of October we arrived 
 The city of at a city called Ardouill , where we were lodged in and Ardouil . hospitali built with fair stone , and erected by this 
 Sophies father nam Ismael , only for the succour and lodging of strangers and other travellers , wherein all men have victuals and feeding for man and horse , for three days and no longer . This foresaid late prince Ismael lies buried in a fair Meskit , with a sumptuous sepulchre in the same , which he caused to be made in his life time . This town Ardouill is in the latitude of eight and thirtie degrees , and ancient city in the province of Aderravgan , wherein the Princes of Persia are commonly buried : and there Alexander the great did keep his Court when he invaded the Persians . 
 The city Foure days journey to the Westward is the city Tebris ^aur ' °1 ' * n °^e t’me ca^e < ^ Tauris , the greatest ci tie in Persia , auns ' but not of such trade of merchandise as it hath be , or as others be at this time , by mean of the great invasion of the Turke , who hath conquered from the Sophy almost to the said city of Tauris , which the said Turke once sacked , and thereby caused the Sophy 
 to forsake the same , and to keep his court ten days journey from thence , at the said city of Casbin . 
 The 21 day we departed from Ordowil aforesaid , traveling for the most part over mountains all in the night season , and resting in the day , being destitute of wood , and therefore were forced to use for fuel the 
 dung of horses & camels , which we bought deer of the pasturing people . Thus passing ten days journey the M. Jenkinsons year aforesaid , the second day of November we arrived arrival at thee at the foresaid city of Casbin , where the said Sophy Number , keepeth his court , and were appointed to a lodging not 1562. far from the kings palace , and within two days after the Sophy commanded a prince called Shalli Murzey , son to Obdolowcan king of Shirvan aforesaid , to send for me to his house , who asked me in the name of the said Sophy how I did , and whither I were in health , and after did welcome me , and invited me to dinner , whereat I had great entertainment , and so from thence I returned to my lodging . The next day after I sent my interpreter unto the Sophies Secretary , declaring that I had letters directed from our most gracious Sovereign lady the Queens most excellent Majesty of the Realm of England , unto the said Sophy , and that the cause of my coming was expressed in the same letters , desiring that at convenient time I might come into his Majesties presence , who advertising the Sophy thereof , shortly after answered me that there were great affairs in hand : which being finished , I should come before his presence , willing me in the mean time to make ready my present if I had any to deliver . 
 At this time , the great Turkes Ambassador arrived The Turkes foure days before my coming , who was sent thither ardour to conclude a perpetuali peace betwixt the same great t0 f e you Turke and the Sophy , and brought with him a present in gold , and fair horses with rich furnitures , and other gifts , esteemed to be worth forty thousand pound . And thereupon a peace was concluded with joyful feasts , triumphs and solemnities , corroborated with strong oaths , by their law of Alkaron , for either to observe the same , and to live always after as sworn brothers , aiding the one the other against all princes that should war against them , or either of them . And upon this conclusion the Sophy caused the great Turkes son nam Baiset Sultan , a valiant Prince ( who being fled from 
 his father unto the Sophy , had remained in his Court the space of foure years ) to be put to death . In which time the said Turkes son had caused mortal ! wars betwixt the said Princes , and much prevailed therein : the Turke demanded therefore his son to be sent unto him , & the Sophy refused thereunto to consent . But now being slain according to the Turks will , the Sophy sent him his head for a present , not a little desired , and acceptable to the unnatural father . Discoursing at my first arrival with the king of Shirvan of sundry matters , and being entertained as hath be before declared , the said king nam Obdolocan , demanding whither that we of England had friendship with the Turks or not : I answered , that we never had friendship with them , and that therefore they would not suffer us to pass thorough their country into the Sophy his dominions , and that there is a nation nam the Venetians , not far distant from us , which are in great league with the said Turks , who trade into his dominions with our commodities , chiefly to barter the same for raw silks , which ( as we understand ) come from thence : and that if it would please the said Sophy and other Princes of that country , to suffer our merchant's to trade into those dominions , and to give us passport and safe conduct for the same , as the said Turke hath granted to the said Venetians , I doubted not but that it should grow to such a trade to the profit of them as never before had been the like , and that they should be both furnished with our commodities , and also have utterance of theirs , although there never came Turke into their land , persuading with many other words for a trade to be had . This king understanding the matter liked it marvellously , saying , that he would write unto the Sophy concerning the same : as he did in very deed , assuring me that the Sophy would grant my request , and that at my return unto him he would give me letters of safe conduct , and privileges . The Turks Ambassador was not then come 
 1562. into the land , neither any peace hoped to be concluded , but great preparation was made for war , which was like much to have furthered my purpose , but it chanced otherwise . For the Turks Ambassador being arrived , The Turkes and the peace concluded , the Turkish merchant's there me^^un^s at that time present , declared to the same Ambassador , that my coming thither ( naming me by the name of Franke ) would in great part destroy their trade , and that it should be good for him to persuade the Sophy not to favour me , as his Highness meant to observe the league and friendship with the great Turke his master , which request of the Turkish merchant's the same Ambassador earnestly preferred , and being afterwards dismissed with great honour , he departed out of the Realm with the Turks sons head as aforesaid , and other presents . 
 The 20 day of November aforesaid , I was sent for Shaw Thomas to come before the said Sophy , otherwise called Shaw Sophies Thomas , and about three of the clock at afternoon I came to the Court , and in lighting from my horse at the Court gate , before my feet touched the ground , a pair of the Sophies own shoes termed in the Per - sian tongue Basmackes , such as he himself weareth when he arises in the night to pray ( as his manner is ) were put upon my feet , for without the same shoes I might not Ge sufired to tread upon his holy ground , being a Christian , and called among them Gower , that is , unbeliever , and unclean : esteeming all to be infidels and Pagans which do not believe as they do , in their false filthy prophets , Mahomet and Murtezalli . At the said Court gate the things that I brought to present his Majesty with , were divided by sundry parcels to sundry servitors of the Court , to carry before me , for none of my company or servants might Ge suffered to enter into the 
 Court with me , my interpreter only excepted . Thus The Queens coming before his Majesty with such reverence as I thought meet to be used , I delivered the Queens ae w re ' Majesties letters with my present , which he accepting , 
 demanded of me of what country of Franks I was , and what affairs I had there to do ? Unto whom I answered that I was of the famous City of London within the noble Realm of England , and that I was sent thither from the most excellent and gracious sovereign Lady Elizabeth Queen of the said Realm for to treat of friendship , and free passage of our Merchant's and people , to repair and traffic within his dominions , for to bring in our commodities , and to carry away theirs to the honour of both princes , the mutual commodity of both Realms , and wealth of the Subject's , with other words here omitted . He then demanded me in what language the letters were written , I answered , in the Latin , Italian and Hebrew : well said he , we have none within our Realm that understand those tongues . Whereupon I answered that such a famous and worthy prince ( as he was ) wanted not people of all nations within his large dominions to interpret the same . Then he questioned with me of the state of our Countries' , and of the power of the Emperor of Almain , king Philip , and the great Turke , and which of them was of most power : whom I answered to his contentation , not dispraising the great Turke , their late concluded friendship considered . Then he reasoned with me much of Religion , demanding whither I were a Gower , that is to say , and unbeliever , or a Muselman , that is , of Mahomets law . Unto whom I answered , that I was neither unbeliever nor Mahometan , but a Christian . What is that , said he unto the king of the Georgians son , who being a Christian was fled unto the said Sophy , and he answered that a Christian was he that believeth in Jesus Christus , affirming him to be the Son of God , and the greatest Prophet . Dost thou believe so , said the Sophy unto me ? Yea that I do , said I : O thou unbeliever , said he , we have no need to have friendship with the unbelievers , and so willed me to depart . I being glad thereof did reverence and went my way , being accompanied with many of his gentlemen and others , and after me followed a man with a Basanet of 
 1562. sand , sifting all the way that I had gone within the said palace , even from the said Sophies sighed unto the court gate ..... 
 Thus I repaired again unto my lodging , and the said Thecurtesieof night Shally Murzey son to the king of Hircan afore - Mur~ said , who favoured me very much for that I was come - z^ ' mended unto him from his father , willed me not to doubt of any thing , putting me in hope that I should have good success with the Sophy , and good entertainment . 
 Thus I continued for a time , daily resorting unto me diverse gentlemen sent by the Sophy to confer with me , especially touching the affairs of the Emperor of Russia , and to know by what way I intended to return into my country , either by the way that I came , or by the way of Ormus , and so with the Portingals ships . Unto whom I answered , that I durst not return by the way of Ormus , the Portingals and we not being friends , fully perceiving their meaning : for I was advertised that the said Sophy Wars inmeant to have wars with the Portingals , and would have tended against charged me that I had be come for a spy to pass * e 01ttn^a • through his dominions unto the said Portingals , thinking them and us to be all one people , and calling all by the name of Franks , but by the providence of God this was prevented . 
 After this the said Sophy conferred with his nobility and counsel concerning me , who persuaded that he should not entertain me well , neither dismiss me with letters or gifts , considering that I was a Franke , and of that nation that was enemy to the great Turke his brother , persuading that if he did otherwise , and that the news thereof should come to the knowledge of the Turke , it should be a mean to break their new league and friendship lately concluded : dissuading further because he had no need , neither that it was requisite for him to have friendship with unbelievers , whose Countries' lay far from him , and that it was best for him to send me with my letters unto the said great Turke for a present , which he was 
 The king of Hircans second letters in M. Jenkinsons behalf . 
 Conference with Indian Merchant's . 
 M. Jenkinsons return . 
 fully determined to have done at some meet time , meaning to send his Ambassador unto the said great Turke very shortly after . 
 But the king of Hircanes son aforesaid , understanding this deliberation , sent a man in post unto his father , for to declare and impart the purpose unto him , who as a gracious prince , considering that I had passed through his dominions , and that I had journeyed for a good intent , did write to the Sophy all that which he understood of his said determination , & that it should not stand with his Majesties honour to do me any harm or displeasure , but rather to give me good entertainment , seeing I was come into his land of my free will , and not by constraint , and that if he used me evil , there would few strangers resort into his country , which would be greatly unto his hindrance , with many other persuasions : which after that the said Sophy had well and thoroughly pondered and digested ( much esteeming the same king of Hircane , being one of the valiantest princes under him and his nigh kinsman ) changed his determined purpose , and the twentieth of March 1562. he sent to me a rich garment of cloth of gold , and so dismissed me without any harm . 
 During the time that I sojourned at the said City of Casbin , diverse merchant's out of India came thither unto me , with whom I conferred for a trade of spices : whereunto they answered that they would bring of all sorts so much as we would have , if they were sure of vent , whereof I did promise to assure them , so that I doubt not but that great abundance thereof may from time to time be there provided and had . 
 The same twentieth day of March I returned from the said City of Casbin where I remained all the Winter , having sent away all my Camels before , and the thirtieth day I came to the said City of Ardouil , and the fifteenth of April unto Zavat aforesaid , where king Obdolowcan was at that present , who immediately sent for me , and demanding of me many questions , declared that if it had 32 
 not be for him , I had be utterly cast away , and sent to the great Turke for a present by the Sophy , through the evil persuasion of his wicked counsel ! , that the Zieties and holy men were the chief and principal procurers and movers thereof : but the Sophy himself meant me much good at the first , and thought to have given me good entertainment , and so had done , had not the peace and league fortuned to have be concluded between them and the great Turke . Nevertheless , said he , the Sophy hath written unto me to entertain you well , and you are welcome into my Country , and so he entreated me very gently , in whose Court I remained seven days , and obtained of him letters of safe conducts Privileges and privileges in your names to be free from paying custom , which I delivered unto your servants Thomas are ’ Alcocke and George Wren , at their departure towards hereafter an-Persia for your affairs : and his highness did give me nexed . two garments of silk , ' and so dismissed me with great favour , sending with me his Ambassador again unto the Emperor of Russia , and committed the chiefest secret of his affairs unto me , to declare the same unto the Emperors Majesty at my return : and thus departing the tenth day of April , I came to the City of Shamachi , and there remaining certain days for provision of Camels down to the Sea side , I sent from thence before men to repair my Bark , and to make her in a readiness . And during my abided in Shammachi , And Armenian there came unto me and Armenian sent from the king of MfuM . Jen-Georgia , who declared the lamentable estate of the same oj king , that being enclosed betwixt those two cruel tyrants Georgia . and mighty princes , the said great Turke and the Sophy , he had continual wars with them , requiring for the love of Christ and as I was a Christian , that I would send him comfort by the said Armenian , and advice how he might send his Ambassador to the said Emperor of Russia , and whither I thought that he would support him or not : and with many other words required me to declare his necessity unto the same Emperor at my 
 in 33 c 
 return : adding further that the said king would have written unto me his mind , but that he doubted the safe passage of his messenger . Unto whom I did likewise answer by word of mouth , not only persuading him to send his Ambassador to Russia , not doubting but that he should find him most honourable and inclined to help him , but also I directed him his way how the said king might send by the Country of Chircassi , through Teneruk king the favour of Teneruk king of the said Country , whose of Chircassi . daughter the said king had lately married . And thus dismissing the said Armenian , within two days after I sent Edward Clark your servant unto the City of Arrash , where the most store of Silks is to be had , giving him Commission to have passed further into the said Country of Georgia , and there to have repaired unto the said king . And after my commendations premised , and my mind declared to have pursued for safeconduct of the same Prince for our Merchant's to trade into his dominions , and that obtained to have returned again with speed . The same your servant journeying to the said City of Arrash , and there finding certain Merchant's Armenians , which promised to go to the said City of Georgia , coming to the borders thereof , was perceived by a Captain there , that he was a Christian , and thereupon demanded whither he went , and understanding that he could not pass further without great suspicion , answered that he came thither to buy Silks , and showed the king of Hircanes letters which he had with him , and so returned back again , and the fifteenth of April came to Shamachi : from whence I departed the sixteene of the same month , and the one and twentie thereof coming to the Seaside , and finding my bark in a readiness , I caused your goods to be laden , and there attended a fair wind . 
 Lk 35 ’• ] But before I proceed any further to speak of my return , I intend with your favours somewhat to treat of the country of Persia , of the great Sophy , and of his country , laws and religion . 
 This land of Persia is great and ample , divided into The descrip-many kingdoms and provinces , as Gillan , Corasan , cion of Persia . Shirvan , and many others having diverse Cities , towns and castles in the same . Every province hath his several King , or Sultan , all in obedience to the great Sophy . 
 The names of the chiefest Cities be these : Teveris , The chief Ci-Casbin , Keshan , Yesse , Meskit , Heirin , Ardovill , Sham - ties °f Persia . achi , Arrash with many others . The country for the most part towards the sea side is plain and full of pasture , but into the land , high , full of mountains , and sharp . To the South it bordereth upon Arabia and the East Ocean . To the North upon the Caspian sea and the lands of Tartaria . To the East upon the provinces of India , and to the West upon the confines of Chaldea , Syria , and other the Turkes lands . All within these dominions be of the Sophies , nam Shaw Thamas , son to Ismael Sophie . This Sophy that now reigneth is nothing valiant , although his power be great , and his people martial : and through his pusillanimity the Turke hath much invaded his countries' , even nigh unto the City of Teveris , wherein he was wont to keep his chief court . And now having forsaken the same , is chiefly resident at Casbin aforesaid , and always as the said Turke pursueth him , he not being able to withstand the Turke in the field , trusting rather to the mountains for his safeguard , then to his forts and castles , hath caused the same to be rased within his dominions , and his ordinance to be melted , to the intent that his enemies pursuing him , they should not strengthen themselves with the same . 
 This prince is of the age of fiftie years , and of a reasonable stature , having five children . His eldest son he keepeth captive in prison , for that he fears him for his valiantness and activity : he professes a kind of holiness , and says that he is descended of the blood of Mahomet and Murtezalli : and although these Persians be Mahometans , as the Turkes and Tartars bee , yet honour they this false feigned Murtezalli , 35 
 saying that he was the chiefest disciple that Mahomet had , cursing and chiding daily three other disciples that Mahomet had called Ovear , Usiran , and Abebeck , The difference and these three did slay the said Murtezalli , for which tfreli^m . cause and other differences of holy men and laws , they have had and have with the Turkes and Tartars mortali wars . To entreat of their religion at large , being more or less Mahomets law and the Alkaron , I shall not need at this present . These persons are comely and of good complexion , proud and of good courage , esteeming themselves to be best of all nations , both for their religion and holiness , which is most erroneous , and also for all other their fashions . They be martial , delighting in fair horses and good harness , soon angry , crafty and hard people . Thus much I have thought good to treat of this nation , and now I return to discourse the proceeding of the rest of my voyage . 
 My bark being ready at the Caspian sea as aforesaid , having a fair wind , and committing our selves The 30. off unto God the 30. day of May 1563. we arrived at 
 21 / 1563 . Astracan , having passed no less dangers upon the Sea in our return , then we sustained in our going forth , and remaining at the said Astracan , until the tenth day of June , one hundred gunners being there admitted unto me for my safeguard up the river Volga , the fifteenth of July I arrived at the City of Cazan , where the Captain entertained me well , and so dismissing me , I was conducted from place to place unto the City of Mosco , where I arrived the twentieth day of August 1563. in safety , thanks be to God , with all such goods , merchandizes , and jewels , as I had provided as well for the Emperors stock and account , as also of yours , all which goods I was commanded to bring into the Emperors treasury before it was opened , which I did , and delivered those parcels of wares which were for his Majesties account , videlicet , precious stones , and wrought silks of sundry colours and sorts , much to his high-36 
 ... I564 " ness contentation , and the residue belonging to you , viz. Crasko , and raw silks , with other merchandizes , ( as by account appears ) were brought unto your house , whereof part there remained , and the rest was laden in your ships lately returned . 
 Shortly after my coming to the Mosco , I came before the Emperors Majesty , and presented unto him the apparel given unto me by the Sophy , whose highness conferred with me touching the princes affairs which he had committed to my charge : and my proceedings therein it pleased him so to accept , that they were much to his contentation , saying unto me , I have perceived your good service , for the which I do thank you , and will recompense you for the same , wishing that I would travel again in such his other affairs , wherein he was minded to employ me : to whom I answered , that it was to my hearty rejoicing that my service was so acceptable unto his highness , acknowledging all that I had done to be but of duty , humbly beseeching his grace to continue his goodness unto your worships , and even at that instant I humbly requested his Majesty to vouchsafe to grant unto you a new privilege more ample then the first , which imme - Newfrivi-diately was granted , and so 1 departed . And afterwards ^es having penned a brief note how I meant to have the iow^g J same privileges made , I repaired daily to the Secretary for the perfecting of the same , and obtained it under his Majesties broad seal , which at my departure from thence , I delivered unto the custody of Thomas Glover your Agent there . The copy whereof , and also of the other privileges granted and given by the king of Hircan , I have already delivered unto you . Sojourning all that winter at Mosco , and in the mean time having bargained with the Emperors Majesty , I sent away your servant Edward Clarke hither overland with advice , and also made preparation for sending again into Persia in meet time of the year . And committing the charge thereof unto your servants Thomas Alcocke , George 
 Wren , and Richard Cheinie , the 28. of June last , I departed in post from the said Mosco , and coming to Colmogro and so down to the Sea side , I found your ships laden and ready to depart , where I embarked my self in your good ship called the Swallow , the 9. of July , one thousand five hundred sixtie foure , and having passed the Seas with great and extreme dangers of loss 28. Septemb. of ship , goods and life , the 28. day of September G6 ! - last ( God be praised ) we arrived here at London in safety . 
 Thus knowing that the courageous and valiant soldier , which adventureth both fame , member and life , to serve faithfully his sovereign , esteems not the perils and dangers passed ( the victory once obtained ) neither for his guerdon desires any thing more , then that his service be well taken of him for whom he enterprised it : So I perceiving your favourable benevolence to me extended in accepting my travels in good part to your contentations , do think my self therewith in great part recompensed : beseeching Almighty God so to prosper your adventures , from time to time hereafter to be made for reaping the fruits of my travels ( at your great charges , and to my no small dangers ) that you may plentifully gather in and enjoy the same , to the illustrating of the Queens most excellent Majesty , the honour and commodity of this her highness Realm , and to the ample benefit and abundant enriching of you and your succession , & posterity for ever . 
 