[ L 353. J The second voyage into Persia made by Tho. Alcock , who was slain there , and by George Wren , & Ric. Cheinie servants to the worshipful company of Moscovie merchant's in Anno 1563. written by the said Richard Cheinie . 
 A rubble is a mark English . 
 TO may please your worships to understand , that in the year 1563. I was appointed by M. Antho. Jenkinson , and M. Thomas Glover your Agent in Russia , to go for Persia in your worships affairs , one Thomas Alcock having the charge of the voyage committed to him , and I one 
 of your worships servants being joined with him in your business , having with us , as they said 1500. rubbles . And if it shall please you I cannot tell certainly what sum of money we had then of the Emperor's : for I received none , nor disbursed any of it in wares for the voyage . Also , God I take to record , I could not tell what stock your worships had there , for the books were kept so privily that a man could never see them . The 10. of 40 
 May anno 1563. we departed from a town called Yeraslave upon our voyage towards Persia . The 24. of July we arrived at Astracan : and the second of August we departed from Astracan , and the 4. of the same month we came to the Caspian sea , and the 11. day of the said month we arrived at our port in Media : and the 21. of the said August we arrived at Shammaki , whereas the king Obdolocan lay in the field . We were well entertained of heathen people , for the thirde day after our arrival at Shammaki we were called before the king : we gave him a present , and he entertained us very well . 
 At our coming to the Court we were commanded to come before the king , who sat in his tent upon the ground with his legs a cross , and all his dukes round about his tent , the ground being covered with carpets : we were commanded to fit down , the King appointing every man his place to fit . And the king commanded the Emperor of Russelands Merchant's to rise up , and to give us the upper hand . The 20. of October Thomas Alcock departed from Shammaki towards Casbin , Casbin . leaving me at Shammaki to recover such debts as the dukes of Shammaki ought for wares which they took of him at his going to Casbin . In the time I lay there I could recover but little . And at Thomas Alcocks coming from Casbin , who arrived at a town called Leuvacta , Leuvacta . whereas the king Obdolocan lay , a day and a halves journey from the town whereas I lay , I hearing of his arriving there , departed from Shammaki , finding him there in safety with all such goods as he had with him . During his abided there for seven days he made suit to the king for such money as the dukes ought him . But the king was displeased for that the Emperor of Russelands merchant had slain a Boserman at his going to ABosermanis Casbin . Thomas Alcocke seeing the king would show a Remgro-us no favour , and also hearing from Shammaki , that the Russes sent their goods to the sea side , for that they feared that the king of Persia should have knowledge of 
 Thomas Alcocke slain in the way between Leuvacta and Shammaki . 
 Keselbash , or Jeselbash . 
 the death of the Boserman , willed me to depart to Shammaki with all such goods as he had brought with him from Casbin , I leaving him at the Court . 
 The thirde day after mine arrival at Shammaki , I had news that Thomas Alcocke was slain coming on his way towards me . Then the king Obdolocan understanding of his death , demanded whither he had ever a brother . Some said I was , some said I was not his brother . When this fell out , your worships had no other servant there but me among those heathen people . Who having such a sum of goods lying under my hands , and seeing how the Russes sent their goods with as much haste as they might to the sea side , and having but foure men to send our wares to the sea side , I used such diligence , that within two days after Thomas Alcocke was slain , I sent in company with the Russes goods , all your worships goods with a Mariner , William August , and a Swethen , for that they might the safer arrive at the seaside , being safely laid in . All which goods afterwards arrived in Russeland in good condition , Master Glover having the receipt of all things which I sent then out of those parties into Russeland . Concerning my self , I remained after 1 had sent the goods into Russeland sixe weeks in Shammaki , for the recovery of such debts as were owing , and at last with much trouble recovered to the sum of fiftene hundreth rubbles or there about , which M. Glover received of me at my coming to Mosco , and all such goods as I brought with me out of Keselbash , as by a note of my hand that he hath shall appear . Also he having the receipt of all such goods as I sent into Russeland by these two above nam , he then had that voyage in venture of his own better then and hundreth rubbles , one Richard Johnson twentie rubles , one Thomas Pette fiftie rubles , one Evan Chermisin a Tartar seven tie rubles . All these had their return : M. Glover allowed himself God knoweth how , I then being in Persia in your worships affairs . 
 And whereas he says , the Emperor had but for his part a dobble , as far as I can see , knowing what the wares cost in those parts , he had triple . If they gave him so much wares , all charges turned to your worships , as well of the Emperors as of their own returns . I have sown the seed , and other men have gathered the harvest : I have travailed both by land and by water full many a time with a sorrowful heart , aswell for the safeguard of their goods as yours , how to frame all things to the best , and they have reaped the fruits of my travail . But ever my prayer was to God , to deliver me out of those misery's which I suffered for your service among those heathen people . Therefore knowing my duty which I have done , as a true servant ought to do , I beseech your worships ( although I have but small recompense for my service , ) yet let me have no wrong , and God will prosper you the better . 
 Also , to inform your worships of your Persian voyage what I judge : it is a voyage to be followed . The king of Gillan , whereas yet you have had no traffic , lives all by merchandise : and it is near Casbin , and not passed six weeks travail from Ormus , whither all the spices be brought : and here , ( I mean at Gillan ) a trade may be established : But your worships must send such men as are no riotous livers , nor drunkards . For if such men go , it will be to your dishonour and great hindrance , as appeared by experience the year 1565. when as Richard Johnson went to Persia , whose journey had be better stayed then set forward . For whereas before we had the name among those heathen people to be such merchants as they thought none like in all respects , his vicious living there hath made us to be counted worse then the Russes . 
 Again , if such men travail in your affairs in such a voyage , you shall never know what gain is to be got . For how can such men employ themselves to seek the trade , that are inclined to such vices ? or how 
 43 
 A.D. 
 1565. 
 [ I - 354-1 
 Gillan in Per sia . 
 can God prosper them in your affairs ? But when a trade is established by wise and discreet men , then will it be for your worships to traffic there , and not before : for a voyage or market made evil at the first , is the occasion that your worships shall never understand what gain is to be got thereby hereafter . 
 