The Queens Majesties Letters to the great Sophy of Persia , sent by M. Anthonie Jenkinson , 1561. 
 Lizabetha Dei gratia , Angliae , Francias , & Hiberniae Regina , etc. Potentissimo & invictissimo Principi , Magno Sophi Persarum , Medorum , Parthorum , Hir-canorum , Carmanorum , Margianorum , populorum cis & ultra Tygrim fluvium , & omnium intra Mare Caspium , & Per - 
 sicum sinum nationum atque Gentium Imperatori salutem , & rerum prosperarum felicissimum incrementum . Summi Dei benignitate factum est , ut quas gentes , non solum immensa terrarum spacia , & insuperabiles marium vastitates , sed & ipsi etiam coelorum cardines longissime disjunxerunt , ipsae tamen literarum bono & mentis certa cogitata , & humanitatis grata officia , & intelligentiae mutuae multa commoda facile inter se & opportune possint communicare . Itaque cum perdi-lectus , & fidelis noster famulus Antonius Jenkinson , qui has literas nostras perfert , cum bona venia , favore , & gratia nostra hoc Angliae nostrae regnum excedere , & in Persiam usque , vestrisque alias ditiones Dei benignitate penetrare constituerit , hoc illius institutum perlaudabile quidem grato nostro favore prosequi , & promovere studuimus : id quod eo nos libentiis facimus , quoniam hoc ejus propositum ex honesto study commercii constituendi potissimum chm vestris subditis , aliisque peregrinis hominibus , ad vestra regna confluentibus , omnino exortum sit . Propterei nobis & scribendum ad vestram Majestatem , ab eaque petendum esse duximus , ut nostro rogatu dignetur concedere huic famulo nostro Antonio Jenkinson literas publicae fidei , & salvi conductus , quarum authoritate atque praesidio , licitum , liberdmque sit illi , una cum suis familiaribus , servis , sarcinis , mercibus & bonis universis , per vestra regna , domicilia , 
 1561. ditiones , atque provincias liberi , & sine impedimento proficisci , ire , transire , redire , abire , & istic morari , quamdiu placuerit , & inde recedere , quandocunque illi vel suis lubitum fuerit . Si haec sancta hospitalitatis jura & dulcia communis humanitatis officia , inter nos , nostra regna , nostrosque subditos libenter constitui , sincere coli , & constanter conservari queant , speramus nos , Deum Optimum Maximum effecturum , ut ab hiis parvis initiis , grandiora rerum momenta , nobis ad magna ornamenta atque decus , nostris ad summa commoda atque usus , aliquando sint oritura : siquidem , ut non terra , non mare , non coelum , ad nos longissime seperandos , quam divina ratio communis humanitatis , & mutuae benevolentiae ad nos firmissime conjungendos plus virium habuisse videatur . Deus salutem omnem , & foelicem in terris , & perpetuam in coelis , vestrae concedat Majestati . Datum in Anglia , in celebri nostra urbe Londino , 25 die mensis Aprilis , anno mundi , 5523 , Domini ac Dei nostri Jesu Christi , 1561 , regnorum vero nostrorum tertio . 
 The same in English . 
 ELizabeth , by the grace of God , Queen of England , This letter etc. To the right mighty , and right victorious 
 Prince , the great Sophy , Emperor of the Persians , Medes , Parthians , Hircans , Carmanians , Margians , of the people on this side , and beyond the river of Tygris , and of all men , and nations , between the Caspian sea , and the gulf of Persia , greeting , and most happy increase in all prosperity . By the goodness of the Almighty God it is ordained , that those people , which not only the huge distance of the lands , and the invincible wideness of the seas , but also the very quarters of the heavens do most far separate , and set asunder , may nevertheless through good commendation by writing , both ease , and also communicate between them , not only the conceived thoughts , or deliberations , and grateful offices of humanity , but also many commodities of mutual intelligence . Therefore whereas our faithful , 7 
 and right well-beloved servant Anthonie Jenkinson , bearer of these our letters , is determined with our licence , favour , and grace , to pass out of this our Realm , and by Gods sufferance to travel even into Persia , and other your jurisdictions : we mind truly with our good favour , to set forward , and advance that his right laudable purpose : and that the more willingly , for that this his enterprise is only grounded upon and honest intent , to establish trade of merchandise with your subject's , and with other strangers trafficking in your realm es . Wherefore we have thought good , both to write to your Majesty , and also to desire the same , to vouchsafe at our request , to grant to our said servant , Anthonie Jenkinson , good passports , and safe conducts , by means , and authority whereof , it may be free and lawful for him , together with his familiars , servants , carriages , merchandise , and goods whatsoever , thorough your Realms , Dominions , Jurisdictions , and Provinces , freely , and without impeachment , to journey , go , pass , repass , and tarry so long as he shall please , and from thence to return whensoever he or they shall think good . If these holy duties of entertainment , and sweet offices of natural humanity may be willingly concluded , sincerely embraced , and firmly observed between us , and our Realms , and subject's , then we do hope that the Almighty God will bring it to pass , that of these small beginnings , greater moments of things shall hereafter spring , both to our furniture and honours , and also to the great commodities , and use of our peoples : so it will be known that neither the earth , the seas , nor t^e heavens , have so much force to separate us , as the godly disposition of natural humanity , and mutual benevolence have to join us strongly together . God grant unto your Majesty long and happy felicity in earth , and perpetuali in heaven . Dated in England , in our famous city of London , the 25 day of the month of April , in the year of the creation of the world , 5523 , and of our Lord and God Jesus Christ , 1561 , and of our reign the third . 
 