The thirde voyage into Persia , begun in the year 1565 - l5f > 5 - by Richard Johnson , Alexander Kitchen , 
 and Arthur Edwards . 
 A letter of Arthur Edwards to M. Thomas Nicols , Secretary to the worshipful company trading into Russia and other the North parts , concerning the preparation of their voyage into Persia . 
 Jeraslave a towns upon the riverofVolga . 
 Richard Johnson chief of the third voyage into Persia . 
 Aster Nicols , my bounden duty remembered , with desire of God for the preservation of you and yours : you shall understand that the second of March I was sent by M. Thomas Glover ( your Agent ) unto Jeraslave , appointed to receive such goods as should come from 
 Vologhda , as also such kind of wares as should be bought and sent from Mosco by your Agent , and M. Edward Clarke , thought meet for your voyage of Persia . And further , I was to provide for biscuit , beer , and beef , and other victuals , and things otherways needful according to advice . Thus I remained here until the coming of your Agent , which was the 12. of May , who tarried here three days , to see us set forward on our voyage , and then he departed towards Colmogro , having appointed ( as chief for your voyage of Persia ) Richard Johnson . For my part I am willing , as also have be & shall content to submit my self under him , whom the Agent shall appoint , although he were 44 
 such a one as you should think in some respects unmeet . Thirtie two packs of carseis are all of that kind of cloth that we shall have with us . The other 18. 
 packs that should have gone , were sold in Mosco . What other goods are shipped for our voyage , you shall understand by your Agents letters . Whereas Edward Clarke ( being and honest man ) was appointed Agent for Persia , as one for those parts more fit then any I do know here , God hath taken him unto his mercy , who departed this present life the 16. of March last passed . I wished of God for my part he had lived : for my desire was in his company to have traveled into Persia . Your bark or craer made here for the river of Volga and the Caspian sea is very little , of the burden of 30. tons at the most . It is handsomely made after the English fashion : but I think it too little for your goods and provision of victuals . If the worshipful company would send hither a Shipwright , being skilful to make one of the burden of 60. tons or more , drawing but sixe foot water at the most when it is laden , I think it should be profitable . For if your own goods would not lade the same , here be Merchants that would be glad and feign to give great fraught to lade their goods with us , whereby your charges would be much lessened : And so it may happen , the wages of your men hired here may be saved , and your servants and goods in far greater assurance : for their boats here are dangerous to sail with and to pass the Caspian sea . There be Carpenters here that will do well enough having one to instruct them . Your wares bought here , and order taken for those that go for your voyage of Persia are yet unknown unto me : wherefore I cannot ( as I would at this present ) write to you thereof . Yet , ( as you do know ) it was the Governors mind I should be acquainted with greater affairs then these . Howbeit I doubt not but I shall be informed of them 
 A bark of thy . tons made at Jeraslave 
 to pass the Caspian seas . 
 that are appointed , and all things shall be bought when they shall see time and have more laisure . Thus in haste ( as appears ) I commit you and yours into the hands of 
 almighty God ; who preserve you in perfect health with increase of worship . 
 From Jeraslave the 15. of May 1565. 
 By yours to command here or elsewhere during life . Arthur Edwards . 
 Another letter of the said M. Arthur Edwards , 1566. written thee 26. of April 1566. in Shamaki 
 in Media , to the right worshipful Sir Thomas Lodge Knight and Aiderman : and in his absence to M. Thomas Nicols , Secretary to the right worshipful company trading into Russia , Persia , and other the North and East parts , touching the success of Richard Johnson in the third voyage into Persia . 
 Worshipful Sir , my bounden duty remembered , with hearty prayer unto God for the preservation of you and yours in perfect health with increase of worship . It may please you that my last letter I sent They departed you was from Astracan the 26 of July 1565. From from Astracan whence Richard Johnson , my self , and Alexander Khchin , departed as the 30 of the same . And by means of contrary winds , it was the 23 of August before we came to our desired port nam Nazavoe . There , after we had got your goods on land , with much labour and strength of men , as also windlesses devised and made , we haled your bark over a bar of beach or peeble stones into a small River , sending your ships apparel with other things to and house hired in a village thereby . And as soon as we might get camels , September . being the fift of September we departed thence , and came to this town of Shamaki the 11. of the same : and the Presents to thee . day following , we presented unto Abdollocan the king k^qidolow of this country , one timber of Sables , one tun or nest ‘ of silver cups parsill gilded , three Morses teeth , 4. Arshines of scarlet , 3. pieces of karseis , with 40. read foxes . 
 He received our presents with giving us thanks for our good wills , demanding if M. Jenkinson were in good health , and whither he would return into these parts again . He willed us also himself to fit down before him the distance of a quoits cast from his tent , where he sat with diverse of his counsel and nobility , sending us from his table such meat as was before him : And after certain talk had with us , he said , if he might perceive or know any manner of person to do us any wrong , he would punish them in example of others , whereby we should live in quietness , and have no cause to complain , giving us a little house for the time , until a better might be provided in such place as we should think most meet , never willing us to rise or depart , until such time as we of our selves thought it convenient . At the taking of our leave , he willed us to put our whole minds and requests in writing , that he might further understand our desires . But while we were about to do so , God took this good king our friend out of this present life the 2. of October past . The want of him hath be the cause that as yet we cannot receive certain debts . Howbeit , we doubt not but we shall recover all such sums of money as are owing us for this voyage . As for Thomas Alcocks debts they are passed hope of recovery , which had not be lost if the king had lived . We trust in the place of him , God will send as friendly a king towards us : who by report ( and as we be credibly informed , ) shall be his son nam the Mursay : who since the death of his father , at our being with him , promised to show us more friendship then ever we found : God grant the same . 
 Great troubles have chanced in these parts . Of those which were of the old kings counsel or bore any rule about him in these quarters , some are in prison , some are pinched by the purse , and other sent for unto the Shaugh . These troubles have partly be the let that wares were not sold as they might , to more profit . Your Agent Richard Johnson bought foure horses , minding to have 47 
 A house given our men in Zhamaki by the king . 
 The death of Abdollocan the 2. of October 1565. 
 Mursay the new king of Media . 
 The death of Alexander Kitchen the 23. of October 1565. 
 The Caspian sea veryshoald in diverse places . 
 sent to Casbin Alexander Kitchen , whom God took to his mercy the 23. of October last : and before him departed Richard Davis one of your Mariners , whose souls I trust the Lord hath received to his mercy . We are now destitute of others to supply their rooms . Foure Mariners were few enough to sail your bark , whereof at this present we have but one , whose name is William Smith , and honest young man , and one that doth good service here . For want and lack of Mariners that should know their labours , we all were like to be cast away in a storm . For all the broad side of our bark lay in the water , and we had much ado to recover it , but God of his mercy delivered us . Mariners here may do you good service all the winter otherways : and merchant's here will be gladder to ship their goods in us giving good fraught . One merchant at this present is content to pay 20. rubbles for twentie camels lading fraught to Astracan . Such barks as must pass these seas , may not draw above five foot of water , because that in many places are very shallow waters . we mind hereafter to make the Russian boats more strong , and they shall serve our turns very well . 
 And whereas some in times past took great pains , travel and care , and could not have their desire in the getting of the Shaughs letters or privilege : Now , I trust ( with Gods help ) they may be obtained : which being had , will be beneficial to the company , and great quietness to those that shall remain here , although heretofore things have chanced ill , as the like in other countries hath be . But I doubt not , this privilege once got and obtained , we shall live in quietness and rest , and shall shortly grow into a great trade for silks both raw and wrought , with all kind of spices and drugs , and other commodities here , as to M. Anthonie Jenkinson is well known , who ( I doubt not ) hath long ago thoroughly advertised the Company thereof . 
 The truth of the slaughter of Thomas Alcock your The murther-servant , is not certainly known . Some think it was ing < f Thomas by the means of a noble man , with whom your said Alcock ' servant was earnest in demanding of your debts : upon whose words he was so offended , that he procured his death . But other do think verily , that in riding from the Court without company , false knaves lay in wait , thinking he had much about him , and so slew him . 
 I doubt not though this misfortune hath chanced , that things shall come well to pass , and that we shall be better beloved when we shall be more known . 
 Honest merchant's are glad of our being here , and seek to grow in acquaintance with us , being glad to further us in that they may , & have spoken in our favours to the chiefest of this Country : one being a noble man , with whom your Agent and I are entered into friendship , who is at this time in great favour with the Shaugh . He hath here and in other places of these parts set a good stay in things since the kings death : he is well known to M. Jenkinson , his name Cozamomet a is Cozamomet . Also another Duke nam Ameddin-beck is our great friend : And his sister is the Shaughes wife . These two have promised your Agent by their law , not only to procure to get the Shaughes privilege , but also that I shall have the debts paid me of those that went from hence to Casbin , if we would send one with them . In consideration whereof , I was upon short warning ( for want of a better ) appointed by your Agent M. Richard Johnson , all excuses laid apart , presently to put my self in readiness , and to depart in company with these noblemen : with charge , when God should send me to Casbin , to use my discretion with their advice , for the recovering of your debts and privilege . I shall have with me one interpreter and two bought servants : one of which partly understands this tongue , and may be put in trust whatsoever should become of me . I have received 6. The valve of tumens in ready money , 200. shaughs is a tumen , atumen - 
 in 49 worser 
 reckoning every shaugh for sixe pence Russe . I have further received two timbers of Sables , one to be sold , the other to be given to Thomas the Shaugh : and have order further to give as I shall see good to those that shall further my suit , and as occasion serves . And forasmuch as I am commanded to go , I shall willingly do my best , putting my trust in God that he will send me well to speed in this journey . 
 For all kind of wares bought or sold , you shall thoroughly be advertised by your Agent Richard Johnson , whose reckonings or accounts at no hands I might see or be privy unto . Your karseis were good and well sorted , they are and will be sold from 150. shaughs , to 160. the piece . Two hundred pieces were sold under , that needed not : one 100. pieces at 146. and 147. the piece but more would have be given , if circumspection had be used . They were sold to those noble men aforesaid , when as yet it was not known that I should have gone with them . They may stand us much in stead , as they have promised us their good wills in that they may do . Here is at this time bought for England 11. packs of raw silk , 25. and 26. batmans being in every pack : The batman being 7. pound , which may be 6. pound and a half of English weight , being bought here from 66. to 70. shaughes the batman . It is fine and good , little course at this time was to be had . And where course silk might be had being at Grosin , we could not send thither : for that time was neglected at the first . When we shall have lidgers here to remain in Summer , we may buy it at the first hand of the country people that bring it to fell hither , and to other places . I would to God the Company could find the means to have a vent to make sales for the one half that we may buy here . The Company may have for 30. or 40. thousand pounds yearly . And as appears by your Agents words being at Varas , he and others saw there so great abundance , that by report of diverse , 5° 
 JOHNSON , KITCHIN AND EDWARDS a.d. 1566. you may bestow ( if it were not for the Turkes ) for a two hundred thousand pounds : beside silk of all colours died in grain , bound up in pound weights , I think 15. of our ounces to their pound weight , and here sold for 23. shaughs , at 6.d . the shaugh , may be ii . s . 6 . pence . 
 From Astracan in 7. or 8. days , we may sail with Gilan i-dayes our bark to a place nam Gilan : the which place in time to come , ( I think ) shall serve our purpose best ’ to go unto . Atom is there good cheap , being brought Atom . from thence hither to Shamaki , and sold here for two bists their batman , which may be 5. pence in our money : and so I have bought to be sent home 223. batmans for example . And at Gilan there is raw silk enough for the companies stock . I believe , if any great store of wares be sent from you , that must be the place : & from thence a man may travel in 4. Gilan days days to Casbin , and there make quick and better sales , at which place your commodities are to be sold . 
 For there be the chief and best merchant's , and diverse other cities round about , to wit , Teveris , Ardouil , and Caishan , being the heart of the country , where there is more civility and merchant's are better used . Concerning this point I have inquired of diverse merchant's both Russes and others that have be in those parts , and found them all agreeing in one tale , and perceive the same to be true , and that all kind of wares come from thence into these parts . And from Casbin to Ormus , is about Gasbin 30. days traveling with camels . I have written the princes of wares in my letter to the governor both for ajM camels . spices and some drugs which I do know . 
 Also you shall understand here is plenty of yew for bowstaves . I caused three horse loads to be bought us for to know the truth : but they were cut out of season this month of April , the sap being in them . Three months I never left speaking to the Country men to bring some . Your Agent will send some home for example . 
 This day being the 26. of Aprili I departed towards Casbin : God give me a good hour and well to speed , with a merry heart in returning again , as my hope is I shall . I have written my mind to M. Glover your Agent , what Russian wares I think best to be bought for this Country , and to send some one hither that hath the Russe tongue , for we have need . And the company shall do well hereafter in taking of servants to be sent hither , to see that they be such as have discretion , and be something broken in the world , and seen in the trade of merchandise , and one ( if they can get some such ) as can speak the Portingall tongue , may do them as good service , as those that shall be here two years before him : for then we may buy a slave that can speak this language and the Portingal tongue The secret do - also , which shall then interpret unto us in all your secret doings , not making the Russes privy : for they pany are sorry that we ^oe trade into these parts , for we are better beloved then they are : because they are given to be drunkards , they are much hated of these people . It is to be wished that none should serve your worships in these parts that be given to that kind of vice : And that your chief Agent and Factor should be able to rule and govern himself , that no dishonesty should be imputed to him and us . By his evil usage he paid here 24 rubbles , being in this Country 4. tumens for a boy , that he was charged to have conveyed away from a Tesicke one of this country men , who willed him to swear that he knew not where the boy was become , and he should not pay it . If he were honest he might do your worships good service because of his Russian tongue . 
 Your London reds are not to be sent hither , for they will not give above 18. shaughes their arshine . 
 Orient reds of Here be reds of more orient colour , being Venice die . Temce die . The people are given much to wear cloth : the common people specially wear karseis , and the merchant's of more wealth wear broad cloth . You shall do well to send five or sixe broad clothes , some blacks , pukes , or other 52 
 sad colours , that may be afforded at 20. shaughes the arshine , and not above . It is here reported that King Philip hath given the Turkes a great overthrow at Malta , and taken 70. or 80. of his chiere captains . 
 Thus wishing I had more time to write , I pray you to bear with this my scribbled letter , and after you have read it , that M. Nicols may have a sighed thereof . 
 By your servant to command , 
 Arthur Edwards . 
 Commodities to be carried out of England into Persia , with their prizes there . 
 ' 1 1^ " Arseis are sold there for 180. Shaughes : so AX. that a karsey is sold there in Persia for foure pound ten shillings : for every shaugh is sixe shaugh is pence English , and every Bist is two pence halfpenny English , and in Russe money three pence . 
 - 2 Tin is sold in Persia for 14. and 18. shaughes the batman . The batman containing as I have mentioned before . 
 3 Brasil is at 10. and 12. shaughes the batman . 
 4 Read cloth fine , at 25. and 30. shaughes the yard . 
 5 Copper at 20. and 25. shaughes the batman . 
 Commodities to be brought out of Persia for t1 - 3 5 8 - ] England . 
 i TA Awe silk at 60. shaughs you batman . 
 2 AX Pepper at 32. shaughs you batman . 
 3 Ginger at 18. & 20. shaughs you batman . 
 4 Nutmegs at 30. shaughs the batman . 
 5 Brimstone at 4 shaughs the great batman . The 
 5 great batman is 12. li . English . 
 6 Allom at 2. bists and a half the batman and less . 
 7 Rice at half a bist the batman . 
 8 Gals at half a bist the batman . 
 9 Cloves at 40. shaughs the batman . 
 _ 10 Yew for bow staves , at 
 