U - 376 - ] The Ambassage of the right worshipful Master Thomas Randolfe , Esquire , to the Emperor of Russia , in the year 1568 , briefly written by himself . 
 In this voyage went Thomas Bannister , W Geofrey Ducket , for their voyage into Persia . 
 He 22 day of June , in the year of our Lord 1568 , I went aboard the Harry , lying in the road at Harwich with my company , being to the number of fortie persons or thereabouts : of which the one half were gentlemen , desirous to see the world . 
 Within one days sailing , we were out of the sighed of land , and following our course directly North , till we came to the North Cape , we sailed for the space of twelve days with a prosperous wind , without tempest or outrage of sea : having compassed the North Cape we directed our course flat Southeast , having upon our right hand Norway , Wardhouse , Lapland , all out of sighed till we came to Cape Gallant : and so sailing between two bays , the two and thirtieth day after our departure from Harwich , we cast anchor at Saint Nicholas road . In all the time of our voyage , more then the great number of Whale's engendering together , which we might plainly behold , and the Sperma Cetae , which we might see swimming upon the sea , there was no great thing to be wondered at . Sometime we had calms , wherein our Mariners fished , and took good The abbey of store of diverse sorts . At S. Nicholas we landed the S. Nicholas of 23 of July , where there stands and abbey of Monks 20 Monks . ( t£ ) number of twentie ) built all of wood : the apparel of the Monks is superstitious , in black hoods , as ours have be . Their Church is fair , but full of painted images , tapers , and candles . Their own houses are low , and small rooms . They lie apart , they eat together , and are much given to drunkenness , unlearned , write they can , preach they do 102 
 1568. never , ceremonious in their Church , and long in their prayers . 
 At my first arrival I was presented from their Prior with two great rye loaves , fish both salt and fresh of diverse sorts , both sea fish and fresh water , one sheep alive , black , with a white face , to be the more grateful unto me , and so with many solemn words inviting me to see their house , they took their leave . 
 Town or habitation at S. Nicholas there is none The English more then about foure houses near the abbey , and house at 8. another built by the English Company for their own K 0 ‘ use . 
 This part of the country is most part wood , saving here and there pasture & arable ground , many rivers and diverse Islands unhabited , as the most part of the country is , for the coldness in Winter . 
 S. Nicholas stands Northeast : the elevation of the The river of pole 64 degrees . The river that runneth there into the ^wina . sea is called Dwina , very large , but shallow . This river takes his beginning about 700 miles within the country , & upon this river stands Colmogro , and many pretty villages , well situated for pasture , arable land , wood , and water . The river pleasant between high hills of either side inwardly inhabited , and in a manner a wilderness of high fir trees , and other wood . 
 At Colmogro being 100 versts , which we account for Colmogro . three quarters of a mile every versed , we tarried three weeks , not being suffered to depart before the Emperor had word of our coming , who sent to meet us a gentleman of his house , to convey us , and to see us furnished of victuals , and all things needful , upon his own charge . 
 The allowance of meat and drink was for every day two rubbles , beside the charge of boats by water , and foure score post horses by land , with above 100 carts to carry my wines , and other carriage . 
 Colmogro is a great town built all of wood , not walled , but scattered house from house . The people are 
 103 
 And English house with lands at Colmogro . 
 [ I - 377-J 
 The description of the inland of Moscovie . 
 rude in manners , and in apparel homely , saving upon their festival ! , and marriage days . 
 The people of this town finding commodity by the English men's traffic with them are much at their commandment , given much to drunkenness , and all other kind of abominable vices . 
 In this town the English men have lands of their own , given them by the Emperor , and fair houses , with offices for their commodity , very many . 
 Of other towns until I come to Vologda , I write not , because they are much like to this , and the inhabitants not differing from them . 
 I was five whole weeks upon the river of Dwina till I came to Vologda , being drawn with men against the stream , for other passage there is none . 
 Vologda stands upon the river of Vologda , which comes into Dwina . The town is great and long , built all of wood , as all their towns are . 
 In this town the Emperor hath built a castle environed with a wall of stone , and brick , the walls fair and high , round about . Here ( as in all other their towns ) are many Churches , some built of brick , the rest of wood , many Monks and Nuns in it : a town also of great traffic , and many rich merchant's there dwelling . 
 From hence we passed by land towards Mosco in post , being 500 versts great , which are equal with our miles . In their towns we baited or lay , being post towns . 
 The country is very fair , plain & pleasant , well inhabited , corn , pasture , meadows enough , rivers , and woods , fair and goodly . 
 At Yeraslave we passed the river of Volga , more then a mile over . This river takes his beginning at Beal Ozera , & descendeth into Mare Caspium , portable thorough of very great vessels with flat bottoms , which far pass any that our country uses . 
 To sail by this river into Mare Caspium the English company caused a bark to be built of 27 tunns , which 104 
 there was never seen before : This bark built , and ready rigged to the sea with her whole furniture cost not the company above one hundreth marks there . 
 To Mosco we came about the end of September , His arrival received by no man , not so much as our own country - at Mosco-men suffered to meet us , which bred suspicion in me of some other course intended , then we had hitherto found . 
 We were brought to a house built of purpose by the sPecial Emperor for Ambassadors , fair and large , after the ^u^atMosco ' fashion of that country . bassadours . 
 Two gentlemen were appointed to attend upon me , the one to see us furnished of victuals , and that we lacked nothing of the Emperor's allowance : the other to see that we should not go out of the house , nor suffer any man to come unto us , in which they left nothing undone that belonged to their charge . But specially he that looked to our persons so straightly handled us , that we had no small cause to doubt that some evil had be intended unto us . No supplication , suit , or request could take place for our liberty , nor yet to come to his presence . 
 Having passed over 17 weeks in this sort , the Emperor sends word that we should be ready against Tuesday the 20 of Februarie , at eight a clock in the morning . 
 The hour being come that I should go to the Court , Two the two gentlemen Pristaves ( as they call them ) came Pristaves . unto me appareled more princely then before I had ever seen them . They press us to depart , and mounted upon their own horses , and the Ambassador upon such a one as he had borrowed , his men marching on foot , to their great grief . 
 The Ambassador ( being my self ) was conveyed into and office where one of the chancellors doth use to fit , being there accompanied with the two foresaid gentlemen : I tarried two long hours before I was sent for to the Emperor . In the end message being brought that the Emperor was set , I was conveyed by my gentlemen up a pair of stairs thorough a large room , where sat by 105 
 His admission to the Emperor's presence . 
 The Queens present . 
 The Emperor's speech to the Ambassador . 
 my estimation 300 persons , all in rich attire , taken out of the Emperor's wardrobe for that day , upon three ranks of benches , set round about the place , rather to present a majesty , then that they were either of quality or honour . 
 At the first entry into the chamber I with my cap gave them the reverence , such as I judged their stately sitting , grave countenances , and sumptuous apparel required , and seeing that it was not answered again of any of them I covered my head , and so passing to a chamber where the Emperor was , there received me at the door from my two gentlemen or governors , two of the Emperor's counsellors , and showed me to the Emperor , and brought me to the middle of the chamber , where I was willed to stand still , and to say that which I had to say . I by my Interpretor opened my message as I received it from the Queen my Mistress , from whom I came , at whose name the Emperor stood up , and demanded diverse questions of her health and state : whereunto answer being made , he gave me his hand in token of my welcome , and caused me to fit down , and further asked me diverse questions . 
 This done , I delivered her Majesties present , which was a notable great Cup of silver curiously wrought , with verses graved in it , expressing the histories workmanly set out in the same . 
 All being said and done ( as appeared ) to his contentment , he licenced me and my whole company to depart , who were all in his presence , and were saluted by him with a nod of his head , and said unto me : I dine not this day openly for great affairs I have , but I will send thee my dinner , and give leave to thee and thine to go at liberty , and augment our allowance to thee , in token of our love and favour to our sister the Queen of England . 
 I with reverence took my leave , being conveyed by two other of greater calling then those that brought me to the Emperor's sighed , who delivered me to the two 
 106 
 first gentlemen , who conducted me to the office where I first was , where came unto me one called the Long duke , with whom I conferred a while , and so returned to my lodging . 
 Within one hour after in comes to my lodging a duke richly appareled , accompanied with fiftie persons , each of them carrying a silver dish with meat , and covered with silver . The duke first delivered twenty loaves of bred of the Emperor's own eating , having tasted the same , and delivered every dish into my hands , and tasted of every kind of drink that he brought . 
 This being done , the duke and his company sat down with me , and took part of the Emperor's meat , and filled themselves well of all sorts , and went not away from me unrewarded . 
 Within few nights after the Emperor had will to speak secretly with me , and sent for me in the night by the Long duke : The place was far off , and the night cold , and I having changed my apparel into such as the Russes do wear , found great incommodity thereby . 
 Having talked with him above three hours , towards the morning I was dismissed , and so came home to my lodging , where I remained above six weeks after , before I herd again from the Emperor , who went the next day to Slovoda , the house of his solace . After the end of which sixe weeks , which was about the beginning of April , the Emperor returned from Slovoda aforesaid , and sent for me again to make repair unto him . And being come , I dealt effectually with him in the behalf of our English merchant's , and found him so graciously inclined towards them , that I obtained at his hands my whole demands for large privileges in general , together with all the rest my particular requests . And then he commended to my conduct into England , a noble man of his , called Andrew Savin , as his Ambassador , for the better confirmation of his privileges granted , and other negotiations with her Majesty . And thus being dispatched with full contentment , the said Ambassador 
 A second conference with the Emperor . 
 Andrew Savin Ambassador to the Queen . 
 107 
 and my self departed , and embarked at S. Nicholas about the end of July , and arrived safely at London in the month of September following . 
 