Their arrival at Bilbil the 14 - of August 1568. 
 Prince Erasbec . 
 The fourth voyage into Persia , made by M. Arthur Edwards Agent , John Spark , Laurence Chapman , Christopher Faucet , and Richard Pingle , in the year 1568. declared in this letter written from Casbin in Persia by the foresaid Laurence Chapman to a worshipful merchant of the company of Russia in London . Anno Domini 1569. Aprill 28. 
 Orshipfull sir , my duty always remembered , and your prosperous health , and good success in all your affairs wished , to the glory of God , and your own hearts desire , etc. May it please you to understand that your Agent M. Arthur Edwards and we departed from Yera - 
 slave in July 1568. and the 14. of August arrived at our port called Bilbil , with your ship the Grace of God , and the goods in her in good safety , God be thanked for it , finding there neither the people so ready to aid us for the bringing of her in , & unlading of the goods , nor yet so obedient to the Shaughs privilege , as the worshipful company have be informed . Our goods brought upon land , we were compelled to open & sei as they would set the price , or otherwise it would have be worse for us . Being so satisfied to their contentment , we were speedily aided with camels by the prince Erasbec Sultan his appointment , to carry our goods to Shamaki , to which place we attained the first of September , finding it so thoroughly furnished with all manner of commodities by occasion of our late coming , and by such as came before us , that no man would ask to buy any one piece of karsie of us , and lying then the space of one whole month before your Agent Arthur Edwards would disperse us abroad with the goods , such as came out of Russia afterwards , had 136 
 brought their goods to that and other places , and spoiled those sales we might have made , being sent abroad in time convenient , being no little hindrance to the worshipful , as also great grief unto us to see . To conclude , through our daily calling upon him , he bent himself for Casbin , taking with him the greatest sum of the goods , and two of the worshipfuls servants , to wit , John Spark and my self , to help and procure the better sale for the same : and leaving at Shamaki Christopher Faucet and Richard Pingle with three hundred and fiftie pieces of karsies in their hands , supposed to be sold there or in Arrash before he should be able to make his return from Casbin , pingle . which , so far forth as I can understand , lie for the greatest part unsold . And being upon our way , at a certain town called Ardouil , we chanced to barter nine pieces of karsies with those merchant's for fourescore and foure batemans of cinnamon , selling the karsies at one hundred and fiftie shawghs the piece . 
 And being at that present not far from Teveris , called the principal place in this country for uttering of cloth or karsies , by much intreaty I persuaded your Agent to send thither to prove what might be done , and receiving from him foure and fiftie pieces of karsies , as also his commission for the sale of the same , I proceeded on that voyage my self , and one Tolmach in company with me , finding in that place great store of broad cloth and karsies brought thither , some part by the Turkes who be resident there , some by the Armenians , who fetch them at Aleppo , and some by the townsmen , who travel unto Venice and there buy them , so that no man offered me one penny more then a hundred and fourtie shawghs for a karsie : and having speciali commission and charge from your Agent not to stay there above the space of seven days after my arrival there , but to repair to Casbin with all speed , and furthermore , having regard to keep up the price of the worshipfuls commodities , according to 
 137 
 War against the Portingals at Ormuz . 
 The gpvemour of Grozin his Merchant . 
 their desire , I found means to barter them away for spices , such as were there to be had , neither in goodness nor yet in price to my content : nevertheless , considering the cold sales which were there , as well for your karsies , as also the hight news , that Ormuz way was shut up by occasion that the Indians do war against them , which is true in deed : and again the desire that the worshipful hath to have such commodities bought , I thought it necessary to buy them , the princes and weight whereof appears at large by my account sent to the worshipful , and is , as I think , the whole sum of spices bought at this time . 
 It chanced me in that place to meet with the governors merchant of Grozin , who was not a little desirous to bargen with me for a hundred pieces of karsies for his master called Levontie , and offering me so good bans for the payment of the money or silk to the merchant's contentment upon the delivery of them , as in any place within all this country is to be had : and offering me beside his own letter in the behalf of his master , that no custom should be demanded for the same , and the obtaining also at his master's hand as large a privilege for the worshipful to travel into all parts of his dominion , as the Shaugh had given them , and hearing good report made of him by the Armenians also , and that he was a Christian , I was much more the willing to bargen with him , and sold him a hundred pieces for a hundred and threescore shawghs a piece , to be paid to the merchant in Grozin either in money or silk to his contentment , within three days after the delivery of the karsies there , having a band of him made by the Metropolitanes own hand , for the performance of the same , which is as sure as any here is to be devised : and upon the same I sent my Tolmach from me back to Shamaki , with such goods as I bought at Teveris , and to the end he might cause the worshipfuls servants there to see this bargen accomplished . At whose arrival there , as I do 138 
 1568. perceive , the Captain would not accomplish his bargen to take them , but says , he hath no need of them : such is the constancy of all men in this country , with whomsoever you shall bargen . If the ware be bought , and they do mislike it afterwards , they will bring it again , and compel you to deliver the money for it The generail again , regarding the Shawghs letters , which manifesteth inconstancy tn the contrary , as a straw in the wxnde : by means and aiers of whereof , the worshipful may know whither all be true these parts . that hath be written of this country people or not . 
 I am informed by all the brokers in Teveris , that the way once open to Ormuz , from whence comes no such store of spices as the worshipful doth look for , that here will be put a way in Teveris , some for money , and other some for barter , to the number of three hundred or foure hundred pieces of karsies , being in colors and goodness to the examples here sent you , the rest of the karsies to make them up a thousand , and broad clothes to the sum of a hundred , be as many as will be put away yearly in this country , so far as yet I can perceive . 
 To break the trade betwixt the Venetians and the whole company of the Armenians it is not possible , unless the worshipful will find some means to receive of them yearly to the number of 100. catters or mules lading , and deliver them for the same one third part money , the rest cloth and karsies fitted in colors meet for this country : the examples , as abovesaid , are sent unto you . 
 At Amadia sixe days journey from Teveris , grow abundance of galls , which are brought up yearly by the Venetians , and be sold there for two bistes the Teveris bateman , which as your Agent here says , makes sixe pound English weight , but I doubt it will not so be proved . Nevertheless it is supposed much good will be done by buying of them : which might at this present have partly be proved , if so be that some could do but half that which hath be written . 
 139 
 The trade between the Venetians and the Armenians not easily to be broken . 
 A.D. 
 1568. 
 Babylon 15. days journey from Casbin . 
 Touching drug , I find many as well at Teveris , as also in Casbin , but the goodness nothing like to such as be brought into England out of other places : & the price is so high that small gain will be had in buying of them : albeit , if I had be furnished with money , as I might have be , if some would , I would have bought some , to the end the goodness of them might have be seen in England . At my coming to Casbin I found no manner of sales of any commodity made , but all lying there whole , and news given out ( as your Agent says ) that you Shaugh would buy all such commodities as he had , and give him silk and spices for the same : but by report the Shaugh never took cloth into his treasury all the days of his life , and will not now begin : his whole trade is in raw silk , which he selleth always for money to the Armenians and Turkes , and such other as use to buy it : thus hoping of that which is not like to be had , he hath driven off the time , not sending to any other places : by means whereof the worshipfuls goods lie unsold to this day to their great hindrance , which I for my part am not a little sorry to see . 
 Babylon is from hence fifteene days journey , whereas by true report be great store of Dates , and sold for a bisse the batman , the commodity fit for England , and the place so near unto us might easily have be known , if he , whose deeds and sayings differ much , had be willing to the same . Cassan also is but seven days journey from hence , & a place by report where most store of spices be at all times to be had , over and above any place in this country : it could not be granted by him to be seen and proved at this time : if this be loss to the worshipful , refer it to the want of one which can do that which he speaks in words . 
 To travel in this country is not only miserable and uncomfortable for lack of towns and villages to harbour in when night comes , and to refresh men with wholesome victuals in time of need , but also such scarcity 140 
 EDWARDS , SPARKE AND CHAPMAN a. worser 1568. 
 of water , that sometime in three days journey together , is not to be found any drop fit for man or beast to drink , beside the great danger we stand in for robbing by these infidels , who do account it remission of sins to wash their hands in the blood of one of us . Better it is therefore in mine opinion to continue a beggar in England during life , then to remain a rich Merchant seven years in this Country , as some shall well find at their coming hither . 
 By commandment of the Agent also I went to Gilan , His voyage to as well to see what harbour was there for your ship , as Gilan-also to understand what commodity is there best sold , and for what quantity . I found the way from hence so dangerous and troublesome , that with my pen I am not able to note it unto you : no man travelleth from hence thither , but such poor people as need constrains to buy Rice for their relief to live upon , and they lay not above twentie batmans upon a catter , and it lies no lower then the skirts of the saddle , and he escapeth very hardly that comes there with the same . 
 The town of Laighon , which was the chiefest place in all that land , have I seen , and Langro and Rosar also , which be now overrun by the Shaugh and his power , and be so spoiled , & the people so robbed , that not one of them is able to buy one karsie . The best commodity there to be bought , is raw silk , and is sold in the Summer time for 38. shaughs the Laighon batman , which is little above 40. li . weight , and for ready money : also there is to be had what store of Alom you will , and sold there for one bisse the Teveris batman . 
 In these parts be many Turkey merchant's resident , The malice of which give and outward show , as though they were glad of our coming hither , but secretly they be our mortali enemies , searching by all means to hinder our sales , because we should the sooner give over our trade thither , which in process of time I hope will grow to better perfection . They wish us to go to Hallape with the 
 141 
 rest of our commodities unsold , where they say we shall have good entertainment in spite of the great number of Venetians which be there resident , and the custom but two in the hundred , and our karsies to be sold presently , had we never so many , for twelve ducats , which makes of this money 165. shaughs : but by such as know the place , market and custom , it is reported to us credibly to the contrary , and that such karsies as ours be , are not sold for above 8. ducats there : the custom thirtie in the hundred and more , that no place in the world is so well furnished with good cloth and karsies , and of so brave colour as that place is , supposing it to be craftily purposed of them , to bring us into trouble , which God defend us from . 
 The price of spices be these , at this present enhanced by reason you way is shut to Ormus , which when God shall send open , I purpose ( God willing ) to see , and at my return to advertise the worshipful what benefit is there to be had in all points , so near as I can learn : Pepper 25. shaughs the Teveris batman : Cloves 50. shaughs , Long pepper 25. shaughs , Maces large 50. shaughs , Ginger 24. shaughs , ready money all , or else look not upon them . And the best sort of raw silk is sold for 60. shaughs the Teveris batman . Thus for want of further matter to enlarge , I end for this time , beseeching God to preserve you in continual ! health . 
 By your obedient servant , Lawrence Chapman . 
 