Notes concerning this fourth voyage into Persia , begun in the month of July 1568. gathered by M. Richard Wills from the mouth of Master Arthur Edwards , which was Agent in the same . 
 Hen he came first to the Sophies presence , at his court in Casbin , bringing his interpreter with him , and standing far ofF , the Sophy ( sitting in a seat royal with a great number of his noble men about him ) bade him come near , and that thrice , until he came so near him that 
 he might have touched him with his hand . Then the first demand that he asked him was , from what country he came : he answered , that he came from England . Then asked he of his noble men , who knew any such country ? But when Edwards saw that none of them had any intelligence of that name , he nam it Inghil-terra , as the Italians call England . Then one of the noble men said Londro , meaning thereby London , Londro . which name is better known in far countries out of Lon ( lon - 
 Christendom , then is the name of England . When Edwards herd him name Londro , he said that that was the name of the chief city of England , as was Teveris of the chief city of Persia . He asked him many things more , as of the realm of England , marvelling that it should be and Island of so great riches and power , as Edwards declared unto him : of the riches & abundance of our merchandise he further understood 
 by our traffic in Moscovia and other countries . He demanded also many things of the Queens majesty , and of the customs and laws of the realm : saying oftentimes in his own language , Bara colla , ( that is to say ) Well said . He asked also many things of king Philip , & of his wars against the Turke at Malta . Then he demanded of him what was the chief cause 
 of his resort into his realm . And being certified that it was for the trade of merchandise , he asked what kind of merchandise he could bring thither . Such ( said he ) as the Venetian merchant's do , which dwelling in our country in the city of Londro send to Venice , & from thence into Turkey by Halepo & Tripoli in Syria , from whence , as by the second and third hands , with great charges of many customs and other things thereunto pertaining , they are at the length brought into your country and cities of Persia . What merchandise are those ? said the Sophy . Edwards answered , that they were great abundance of fine karsies , of broad clothes of all sorts & colours , as scarlets , violets , and other of the finest cloth of all the world . The Venetians Also that the Venetians brought out of England not traffic in only such clothes ready made , but furthermore great 
 n^an * plenty of fine wool to mingle with their wools , of which 
 they could not otherwise make fine cloth : affirming that there went out of England yearly that ways , above two hundred thousand karsies , and as many broad clothes , beside fine wool & other merchandise , beside also the great abundance of like clothes , the which were carried into Spaine , Barbarie , & diverse other countries . The Sophy then asked him by what means such merchandise might be brought into Persia . Right well sir ( said he ) by the way of Moscovia , with more safety and in much shorter time ' then the Venetians can bring them : first from England to Venice , and from thence into Persia by the way of Turkey . And therefore if it shall please your majesty to grant us free passage into all your dominions , with such privileges as may appertain to the safeguard of our lives , goods and merchandise , we will furnish your countries with all such merchandise and other commodities , in shorter time , and better cheap then you may have the same at the Turks hands . This talk and much more was between the Sophy and Edwards for the space of two hours : all which things liked him so well , that shortly after he granted to the said Arthur Edwards other privileges for the trade of merchandise into Persia , 
 144 
 all written in Azure and gold letters , and delivered unto the lord keeper of the Sophy his great seal . The lord keeper was nam Coach Califay , who said that when the Shaugh ( that is the king or prince ) did fit to seal any letters , that last privilege should be sealed & delivered to Laurence Chapman . In this privilege is one principali article for servants or merchant's : That if the Agent do perceive that upon their naughty doings , they would become Busormen , that then the Agent wheresoever he shall find any such servant or servants , to take them and put them in prison , and no person to keep them or maintain them . This article was granted in respect of a custom among the Persians , being Mahumetans , whose manner is friendly to receive and well entertain , both with gifts and living , all such Christians , as forsaking their religion , will become of the religion of the Persians . Insomuch that before this privilege was granted , there was great occasion of naughty servants to deceive and rob their master's , that under the colour of professing that religion , they might live among them in such safety , that you might have no law against them , either to punish them or to recover your goods at their hands , or elsewhere . For before the Sophy ( whom they say to be a marvelous wise and gracious prince ) seemed to favour our nation , and to grant them such privileges , the people abused them very much , and so hated them , that they would not touch them , but reviled them , calling them Cafars and Gawars , which is , infidels or misbelievers . But after they saw how greatly the prince favoured them , they had them afterwards in great reverence , and would kiss their hands and use them very friendly . For before they took it for no wrong to rob them , defraud them , bear false witness against them , and such merchandizes as they had bought or sold , make them take it again , and change it as often as them listed . And if any stranger by chance had killed one of them , they would have the life of two for one slain , and for the debts of any stranger would take the goods of any other of the 
 in T4S K 
 same nation , with many other such like abuses , in manner unknown to the prince , before the complaints of our men made unto him for reformation of such abuses : which were the cause that no merchant strangers of contrary religion durst come into his dominions with their commodities , which might be greatly to the profit of him and his subject's . 
 The Articles of the second privilege delivered to Laurence Chapman , which are to be annexed unto the former privilege . 
 10 Item , that the merchant's have free liberty , as in their first privilege , to go unto Gilan , and all other places of his dominions , now or hereafter when occasion shall be given . 
 11 Item , if by misfortune any of their ships should break , or fallen upon any part of his dominions on the sea coast , his subject's to help with all speed to save the goods and to be delivered to any of the said merchant's that lives : or otherwise to be kept in safety until any of them come to demand them . 
 12 Item , if any of the said merchant's depart this life in any city or town , or on the high way , his governors there to see their goods safely kept , and to be delivered to any other of them that shall demand them . 
 13 Item , the said merchant's to take such camel-men as they themselves will , being country people , and that no Kissell Bash do let or hinder them . And the said owners of the camels to be bound to answer them such goods as they shall receive at their hands , and the camel-men to stand to the losses of their camels or horses . 
 14 Item more , that the said Carriers do demand no more of them , then their agreement was to pay them . 
 15 Item more , if they be at a price with any Carriers , & have given earnest , the camel-men to see they keep their promise . 
 16 Item , if any of the said merchant's be in fear to travel , to give them one or more to go with them and see 
 146 
 them in safety with their goods , to the place they will go unto . 
 17 Item , in all places , to say , in all cities , towns or villages on the high way , his subject's to give them honest room , and victuals for their money . 
 18 Item , the said merchant's may in any place , where they shall think best , built or buy any house or houses to their own uses . And no person to molest or trouble them , and to stand in any Caravan where they will , or shall think good . 
 THe commodities which the merchant's may have by this trade into Persia are thought to be great , and may in time perhaps be greater then the Portugals trade into you East Indies , forasmuch as by the way of Persia into England , the return may be made every year once : whereas the Portugals make the return from Calecut but once in two years , by a long and dangerous voyage all by sea : for where as the city and Island of Ormus , lying in the gulf of Persia , is the most famous Mars town of all East India , whither all you merchandises of India are brought , the same may in shorter time and more safely be brought by land and rivers through Persia , even unto the Caspian sea , and from thence by the countries of Russia or Moscovia by rivers , even unto the city of Yeraslave , and from thence by land 180. miles to Vologda , and from thence again all by water even unto England . 
 The merchandises which be had out of Persia for the return of wares are silk of all sorts of colours , both raw and wrought . Also all manner of spices and drugs , pearls & precious stones , likewise carpets of diverse sorts , with diverse other rich merchandises . It was told me of them that came last from Persia , that there is more silk brought into some one city of Persia , then is of cloth brought into the city of London . Also that one village of Armenia nam Gilgat doth carry yearly five hundred , and sometime a thousand mules laden with 
 147 
 silk to Halepo in Soria of Turkey , being 4. days journey from Tripoli , where the Venetians have their continual ! abiding , and send from thence silks which they return for English karsies and other clothes into all parts of Christendome . 
 [ I - 394-1 The manner how the Christians become Busormen , and forsake their religion . 
 I Have noted here before that if any Christian will become a Busorman , that is , one that hath forsaken his faith , and be a Mahometan of their religion , they give him many gifts , and sometime also a living . The manner is , that when the devil is entered into his heart to forsake his faith , he resorteth to the Sultan or governor of the town , to whom he makes protestation of his devilish purpose . The governor appoints him a horse , and one to ride before him on another horse , bearing a sword in his hand , and the Busorman bearing and arrow in his hand , and rides in the city , cursing his father and mother : and if ever after he return to his own religion , he is guilty of death , as is signified by the sword born before him . A young man , a servant of one of our merchant's , because he would not abide the correction of his master for his faults , was minded to forsake his faith . But ( as God would ) he fell suddenly sick and died , before he gave himself to the devil . If he had become a Busorman , he had greatly troubled the merchant's : for if he would then have said that half their goods had be his , they would have given credit unto him . For the avoiding of which inconvenience , it was granted in the privileges , that no Busorman , etc. as there appears . 
 In Persia in diverse places oxen and kine bear the tents and household stuff of the poor men of the country , which have neither camels nor horses . 
 148 
 Of the tree which bears Bombasin cotton , or Gossampine . 
 IN Persia is great abundance of Bombasin cotton , & very fine : this grows on a certain little tree or brier , not passed the height of a men waste or little more : the tree hath a slender stalk like unto a brier , or to a carnation gillifloure , with very many branches , bearing on every branch a fruit or rather a cod , growing in round form , containing in it the cotton : and when this bud or cod comes to the bigness of a walnut , it openeth and shows forth the cotton , which grows still in bigness until it be like a fleece of wool as big as a men fist , and begins to be lose , and then they gather it as it were the ripe fruit . The seeds of these trees are as big as peason , and are black , and somewhat flat , and not round ; they sow them in plowed ground , where they grow in the fields in great abundance in many countries in Persia , and diverse other regions . 
 The writing of the Persians . 
 ARthur Edwards showed me a letter of the Sophy , written in their letters backward , subsigned with the hands both of the Sophy & his Secretary . The Sophies subscription was only one word ( his name I suppose was Shaugh ) written in golden letters upon read paper . The whole letter was also written on the same piece of read paper , being long & narrow , about the length of a foot , and not passed three inches broad . The private signet of the Sophy was a round printed mark about the bigness of a royal , only printed upon the same paper without any wax or other seal , the letter seem so mishapen and disordered , that a man would think it were somewhat scribbled in manner at adventures . Yet they say that almost every letter with his prick or circunflexe signifies a whole word . Insomuch that in a piece of paper as big as a men hand their writing doth contain as much as doth ours almost in a sheet of paper . 
 