Necessary notes to be observed , and followed in discovery , as hereafter follows . 
 your bark with all furniture and necessaries be in readiness for you to depart to the sea : be that you take your bark at S. Nicholas , or any part of Dwina Reca ) you shall from thence , even as timely in the spring as the ice will permit you , sail , & make all expedition that may be , unto the mouth of the river Pechora ( as your commission does lead you ) and as you pass by the coast all alongst ( notwithstanding the plate that shows you the description of the said coast , from Dwina unto Vaigats ) yet you shall seek by all the means that you can , to amend the same plate , using as many observations , as you possibly can do : and these notes following are to be observed by you principally . 
 1 First , that you do observe the latitude as often , and in as many places as you may possibly do it , noting diligently the place where you do so observe the same . 
 2 Also that you do diligently set with your compass , how the land does lie from point to point , all alongst 
 122 
 as you go , and to use your judgements how far there may be between each of them . 
 3 Item , that you do always use to draw the proportion and biting of the land , aswell the lying out of the points , and headlands , unto the which you shall give some apt names ( at your discretion ) as also the form of the Baize , and to make some mark in drawing the form , and border of the same , where the high cliffs are , and where low land is , whither sandy hills , or whatsoever : omit not to note any thing that may be sensible and apparent to you , which may serve to any purpose . 
 4 In passing along by any coast , that you keep your led going often times , and found at the least once every glass , and oftener if you think good as occasion does serve , and note diligently the depth with the manner of the ground , and at every time , how far the same sounding may be from the next shore to it : and how the next point or headland does bear from you . And in the sea after you set off from your port , you shall orderly at the end of every foure glasses found , and if you find ground , note the depth and what ground , but if you can find no ground , you shall also note in what depth you could find no ground . 
 5 Also that you do diligently observe the flowing , & ebbing in every place , and how the tides do set , which way the flood does come , and how much water it does high in every place , and what force the same tide hath to drive a ship in and hour , as near as you can judge it . 
 6 Also that you do seek to observe with the instrument which I deliver you herewith , according as I taught you at Rose Island , the true platforms , and distances , in as many places as conveniently you may , for it serves very aptly your purpose . 
 7 Also that you take with you paper and ink , and keep a continual jour nail or remembrance day by day , of all such things as shall fallen out worth the knowledge , not forgetting or omitting to write it , and note it , that it may be showed and read at your return . 
 123 
 8 These order if you shall diligently observe , it will be easy for you to make a plate and perfect description of your discovery , and so shall your notes be sufficient to answer that which is looked for at your hands . But withal you may not forget to note as many things as you can learn and understand by the report of any people whatsoever they be , so that it appertain any way to our desires . And thus the Lord God prosper your voyage . Amen . 
 