Certain directions given by M. Richard Hackluit of the Middle Temple , to M. 
 Morgan Hubblethorne , Dier , sent into Persia , 1579 - 
 i TTOr that England hath the best wool & cloth of the X1 world , and for that the clothes of the realm have no good vent , if good dying be not added : therefore it is much to be wished , that the dying of foreign countries were seen , to the end that the art of dying may be brought into the Realm in greatest excellency : for thereof will follow honour to the Realm , and great and ample vent of our clothes : and of the vent of clothes , will follow the setting of our poor on work , in all degrees of labour in clothing and dying : for which cause most principally you are sent over at the charge of the city : and therefore for the satisfying the lords , and of the expectation of the merchant's and of your company , it behooves you to have care to return home with more knowledge then you carried out . 
 2 The great dearth of clothes is a great let in the ample vent of clothes , and the price of a cloth , for a fifth , sixth and seventh part riseth by the colour and dying : and therefore to devise to die as good colours with the one half of the present price were to the great commodity of the Realm , by saving of great treasure in time to come . And therefore you must have great care to have knowledge of the materials of all the countries' that you shall pass thorough , that may be used in dying , be they herbs , weeds , barks , gums , earth's , or what else soever . 
 3 In Persia you shall find carpets of course thrummed wool , the best of the world , and excellently coloured : those cities & towns you must repair to , and you must use means to learn all the order of the dying of those thrums , which are so died as neither rain , wine , nor yet vinegar can stain : and if you may attain to that 
 249 
 cunning , you shall not need to fear dying of cloth : For if the colour hold in yarn and thrum , it will hold much better in cloth . 
 4 For that in Persia they have great colouring of silks , it behooves you to learn that also , for that cloth dying & silk dying have a certain affinity , and your merchant's mind to bring much raw silk into the Realm , and therefore it is more requisite you learn the same . 
 5 In Persia there are that stain linen cloth : it is not amiss you learn it if you can : it hath be and old trade in England , whereof some excellent clothes yet remain : but the art is now lost , and not to be found in the Realm . 
 6 They have a cunning in Persia to make in buskin's of Spanish leather flowers of many kinds , in most lively colours , and these the Courtiers do wear there : to learn which art were no harm . 
 7 If any Dier of China , or of the East parts of the world , be to be found in Persia , acquaint yourself with him , and learn what you may of him . 
 8 You shall find Anile there , if you can procure the herb that it is made of , either by seed or by plant , to carry into England , you may do well to endeavour to enrich your country with the same : but withal learn you the making of the Anile , and if you can get the herb , you may send the same dry into England , for possibly it grows here already . 
 9 Return home with you all the materials and substances that they die withal in Russia , and also in Persia , that your company may see all . 
 io In some little pot in your lodging , I wish you to make daily trials in your art , as you shall from time to time learn ought among them . 
 ii Set down in writing whatsoever you shall learn from day to day , lest you should forget , or lest God should call you to his mercy : and by each return I wish you to send in writing whatsoever you have learned , or at the least keep the same safe in your coffer , that 25° 
 COMMISSION TO PET AND JACKMAN aj > . 
 1580. come death or life your country may enjoy the thing that you go for , and not loose the charge , and travel bestowed in this case . 
 12 Learn you there to fix and make sure the colour to be given by log wood : so shall we not need to buy woad so deer , to the enriching of our enemies . 
 13 Inquire of the price of leckar , and all other things belonging to dying . 
 14 In any wise set down in writing a true note from whence every of them do come , and where , and in what country each of them does grow , I mean where the natural place of each of them is , as how near to such a city , or to such a sea , or to such a portable river in Russia , Persia , or elsewhere . 
 15 If before you return you could procure a singular good workman in the art of Turkish carpet making , you should bring the art into this Realm , and also thereby increase work to your company . 
 