A letter of James Alday to the Worshipful M. Michael Lock , Agent in London for the Moscovie company , touching a trade to be established in Lappia , written 157 5. 
 He marvelleth the company do not confer with him open Lappia . 
 Have in remembrance ( worshipful Sir ) the talk we had when I was with you , as touching the trade in Lappia : And certainly I have something marveiled that in all this time the right wor . your society have not given order that some little conference ( by you , or with some other ) 
 might have been had with me touching those parts , considering they know ( as I think ) that I remained there one whole year & more , by which means reason would that I should have learned something . But the cause why they have not desired to confer with me ( as I judge ) rests only in one of these 4 cases , that is to say , either they think themselves so thoroughly certified of that trade , as more need not be spoken thereof , or that they have no lust more to deal that ways , or that they hold me so untrusty to them that they dare not open their minds , for fear or doubt , I should bear more affection to others then to them , & so discover their secrets : or else they think me of so simple understanding , that I am not worthy to be spoken with in these matters . To which 4 cases I answer as follows : First , if they think themselves so thoroughly certified as more need not to be spoken : certainly I something marvel by whom it should be : for in you winter past there lay but 5 English persons there , viz. Christopher Colt , Roger Leche , Adam Tunstal cooper , one lad , and I : for Henry Cocknedge was the whole winter at Mosco . And of these persons , as touching Colt , I think him ( if I may without offence speak my conscience ) the most simple person that was there , ( as touching the understanding of a merchant ) although indeed he took upon him very much to his own harm 197 
 > 5 74 - 
 5 English men wintered in Lappia . 
 Christopher Colt a simple merchant . 
 Henry Cocknedge honest , but ignorant . 
 Roger Leech expert of Lappia . 
 8c others I doubt , for he used himself not like a merchant , neither showed diligence like a worthy servant or factor , but lay still in a den all you whole winter , having wares lying upon his hand , which he would not employ to any use : although sundry ways there were that he might have put his wares in ready money with gain , & no great adventure , which money would have been more acceptable to the poor Laps 8c fishermen at the spring , then any kind of wares : but his found head did as he that had the talon in the Gospel , 8c yet he had counsel to the contrary which he disdained , so that men perceiving his captious head , left not only to counsel him , but also some , in as much as they might , kept him from knowledge of the trade that might be in that country , the winter time , which is better peradventure then most men think of . Wherefore if Colt have written or said any thing touching those countries , it is doubtful whither it touches the effect or not , considering he lay still all the winter without trial of any matter . And for Henry Cocknedge assuredly speaking so much as I do perfectly know , I must needs say , that he is a very honest young man , 8c right careful of his business , and in that respect worthy to be praised . But yet he being absent in the winter other then by hearsay he could not learn , so that his instructions may be something doubtful . And like as of the lad nothing can be learned , so am I sure that Tunstal the Cooper hath not yet be spoken with , so that of those parts certain knowledge cannot as yet be learned , except by Roger Leche , of whom I confess knowledge may be had , for indeed there is no English man living that hath like knowledge in those countries as he hath , nor that is able to do so much with the people as he may : he in the winter travailed one ways 8c other never 300 miles : he of a little made something , and learned not only the manners , conditions 8c customs of the people , but also he learned of all kind of commodities in those regions how they may be bought at the most advantage , that gain may 198 
 be made of them : So that I confess , if he hath given intelligence to the right Wor. company , then have they no need to speak with me or any other for to learn of those countries ( except it be to hear mine opinion ) which in truth I will always open unto them . But the effect of you beneficial secrets of that country is to be inquired of him , & in mine opinion worthy to be learned , except , as in the second case , they list no more to deal that ways . To which I answer , that if they deal not that ways , & that with speed they seek not to prevent others y‘ mean to deal there , although not English men , let them then not think long to have any profitable trade in Russia : for the com-greater part of that benefit will be wiped from them , or $ year to and end , as 1 will show good reason , it 1 be tra^e of demanded the question . Therefore if they will maintain Lappia , others the Russia trade with advantage , then ought they to toil prevent look to this in time , and so may they keep the Russia trade as it is , and likewise make a trade in Lappia more profitable then that , and therefore this is to be considered , rather then to prohibit Englishmen from The trade of the trade of Vedagoba . For if they look not to this , Vedagba . and that in time , they may be likened ( if it might be without offence spoken ) to two dogs that strive for the bone while the third run away with it : and yet mean I not otherwise , but in such order , as not Englishmen only , but also Hollanders , Brabanders , & others may be justly and utterly put from the trade in Lappia , and the company to keep the whole trades to themselves without interruption of any , to their great benefit , which I wish to them from the bottom of my heart , as ever I wished wealth to mine own person : And thereby hold me excused in the third case I write of . 
 And for the fourth as touching my judgement , as I He can say confess it is not very deep , so I thank God I am s° ™ what not utterly without understanding ( although 1 be poor ) much _ & therefore peradventure held out of reputation , yet God does distribute his gifts as it pleases him . I 
 199 
 have seen wise men poor in my time , & foolish men rich , and some men have more knowledge then they can utter by speech , which fault was once objected against me by a great learned man of this realm : but surely how weak soever my utterance is , my meaning is faithful and true , and I wish in my heart to your laudable company all the gain that may be , or else I pray the Lord God to confound me as a false dissembler . It grieveth me to see how of late they have been brought to great charges , beating the bush , as the old term is , & other men taking the birds : this last year having in Lappia 2 ships , as I am partly informed , they both brought not much above 300 barrels of train oil , yet am I sure there was bought beside them of the Russes , 1183 Corels , & Laps , 1183 barrels , beside 27 barrels tf oil bought q SQjj tO Jacob the Hollander , at two barrels for Golt sold zy one Wortherne dozen . And yet there is a greater barrels to a inconvenience springing , which if it take a little deeper Hollander . root it will be ( I fear ) too hard to be pulled up , which for love & good will ( God is my witness ) I write of , wishing as to my deer friends that they should look to it in time , if they mean to keep the trade of Russia or Lappia . And thus love hath compelled me to write this advertisement , which I wish to be accepted in as good part , as I with good will have written it . 
 