The opinion of Master William Burrough sent to a friend , requiring his judgement for the fittest time of the departure of our ships towards S. Nicholas in Russia . 
 WHereas you request me to persuade the company not to send their ships from hence before the fine of May , I do not think the same so good a course for them to observe : for you know that the sooner we 306 
 send them hence , the sooner we may look for their return . If we send them in the beginning of May , The Russian then may they be at Saint Nicholas by the fine of the same month : and by that time the greatest part or beaming of your lading of necessity must be come down , especially May . the flax : but if it should fallen out so lateward a breaking up of the river of Duyna , that by the end of May the goods cannot be brought to Saint Nicholas , yet this is always to be accounted for certain , that before our ships can come thither , the goods may be brought down to that place : and if through ice the ships be kept back any time , the loss and charge of that time touches not the company at all , but the owners of the ships , and yet will the Owners put that in adventure , rather then tarry longer time before their going hence . 
 Now seeing by sending our ships hence in the beginning of May , their arrival at S. Nicholas may be at the end of the same month , and remaining thirtie days there , they may be laden and come thence by the last of June , and return home hither by the 10 of August with commodities to serve the market then , it cannot be denied but we should reap thereby great commodi tie . 
 But it may be objected , that if all our ships be sent then to return as aforesaid , you shall not be able to send us in so much cordage , Wax and Oils , as otherwise you should do if they remained a month longer , neither could you by that time perfect your accounts to be sent in them as you would do . 
 For answer thereunto this is my meaning : though I wish the greatest part of our shipping to go as aforesaid , yet would I have one good ship or two at the most well furnished in all points that should depart always from hence , between the beginning and the 10 day of June : and the same to be conditioned withal to remain at S. Nicholas from the first arrival there until the midst of August , or to be dispatched thence sooner , 3°7 
 at the will and liking of our factors for the same : by this order these commodities following may ensue 
 1 You may have our commodities there timely to send up the river before it wax shallow , to be dispersed in the country at your pleasure . 
 2 The greatest part of our goods may be returned hither timely to serve the first markets . 
 3 Our late ships remaining so long here may serve to good purpose , for returning answer of such letters as may be sent over land , and received here before their departure . 
 4 Their remaining so late with you shall satisfy your desire for perfecting your accounts , and may bring such cordage , Wax , Oil , & other commodities , as you can provide before that time : and chiefly may serve us in 
 stead to bring home our goods that may be sent us 
 from Persia . 
 Now seeing it may be so many ways commodious to the company to observe this order , without any charge unto them , I wish that you put to your helping hand to further the same . 
 