A Letter sent from her Highness to the said great Duke of Russia , by sir Hierome Bows aforesaid , her Majesties Ambassador . 
 Serenissimo Principi ac Domino , Joanni Basilio , Dei gratia Regi & magno Duci totius Russiae , Volo-domerae , etc. Regi Cazani , etc. Domino Plescoae , etc. Domino & magno Duci Novogrodiae , etc. & Gubernatori in tota Provincia Siberiae , etc. Fratri & amico nostro charissimo . 
 Lizabetha , Dei gratia Angliae , Franciae , & Hiberniae Regina , fidei defensatrix , etc. Serenissimo Principi ac Domino , Joanni Basilio , eadem Dei gratia Regi & magno Duci totius Russiae , Volo-domerae , Moscoviae , & Novogrodiae , Regi Cazani & Astracani , Domino Plescoae , & 
 magno Duci Smolenscoae , Tueri , Ugori , Permiae , Viatskae , Bolharae , & aliarum ditionum , Domino & magno Duci Novogrodiae in inferiori region , Chernigae , Rezanae , Polotscoae , Rostovae , Jaroslavae , Bealozeri , Liflandiae , Oudori , & Condensae , & Gubernatori in tota provincia Siberiae , & partium Septentrionalium , & aliarum , fratri & amico suo charissimo , Salutem . 
 Serenissime princeps , frater & amice charissime , ex iis quae nobiscum egit S. V. illustris legatus , intelleximus , quam grate vobis faceremus satis , si legatum aliquem cum mandatis instructum , ad S. V. ablegaremus . In quo certain quidem instituto aded nobis ex animo placuit , quod est honest postulatum , ut non nisi praestita re , possemus nobis quoquo modo satisfacere . Atque cum id haberemus apud nos decretum , nobis non incommodi incurrit in mentem & oculos Hieronimus Bowes miles , ex nobilibus nostris Domesticis , plurimum nobis dilectus , quem inpraesentiarum ad S. V. ablegamus , cujus prudentiae & fidei , totum hoc quicquid est , quod ad Serenitatum mutuo nostrarum dignitatem ornandam pertinere posse 
 312 
 1583-arbitramur , commisimus . In quo munere perfungendo , quin omnem curam & diligentiam sit collaturus , neutiquam dubitamus : i S. autem V. rogamus , velit ei eam fidem habere in iis persequendis quae habet a nobis in mandatis , quam nobis habendam putaret , si essemus praesentes . Praeteret , cum nobis multum charus sit Robertus Jacobus medicus , quem superiori II anno , ad 1582. S. V. misimus , rogamus ut eum eo loco S. V. habeat , quo virum probatissimum , & singulari quam plurimarum virtutum laud ornatum habendum esse , boni principes censent . Quem i nobis neutiquam ablegavissemus , nisi amicitiae nostrae , & study gratificandi S. V. plurimum tribuissemus . In qua dum voluntate manemus erga S. V. non nisi optime de bonis vestris meritis in praefatum Jacobum nobis pollicemur . Et Deum Opt. Max. precamur , ut S. V. salvam conservet , & incolumem . Datae e Regia nostra Grenovici 19 die mensis Junii , Anno Domini 1583 , regni verb nostri vicessimo quinto . 
 S. vestrae bona soror . 
 The same in English . 
 ELizabeth by the grace of God , Queen of England , France , and Ireland , defender of the faith , etc. to the most excellent Prince and Lord , John Basiliwich , by the same grace of God , King and great Duke of all Russia , Volodomer , Moscovie , and Novogrod , King of Cazan and Astracan , Lord of Plesco , and great Duke of Smolensco , of Tuer , Ugor , and Permie , Viatsca , Bolhar , and others , Lord and great Duke of Novogrod in the low country , of Cherniga , Rezan , Polotsko , Rostove , Jaroslave , Bealozera , Lifland , Oudor , Obdor , and Condensa , and Governor of all the land of Siberia , and of the North parts and others , her dearest brother and friend , Salutations . 
 Most excellent Prince , most deer brother and friend , by those things which the worthy ambassador of your excellency declared unto us , we have understood how kindly it would be taken , if we should send to your 313 
 excellency and ambassador from us , with commandment and instructions . In which matter your honourable request hath so much pleased us , that we could not any manner of way satisfy our selves , except we performed the same . And having purposed with our self so to do , we thought of , and remembered Jerome Bowes Knight , a gentleman of quality of our household , a man very much beloved of us , whom at this present we send unto your Majesty , and to whose wisdom and faithfulness we have committed all , whatsoever we take to appertain to the advancement of both our honours indifferently . In the discharge of which service , we doubt not but that all care and diligence shall be used on his part , so that we entreat your Majesty to give him credence in the prosecuting of those things which he hath from us in commandment , no less then to our self , if we were present . And whereas Doctor Jacob. Robert Jacob doctor of physic is a man very deer unto us , whom the last year we sent unto your excellency , we desire that he may have that favour and estimation with you , which good princes think a most honest and virtuous man worthy of : for had we not carried great respect to our mutual friendship , and endeavour to gratify your Majesty , we should in no case have parted with him . And seeing we continue still the same good will towards your excellency , we do even promise to our self your honourable kindnesses towards him : and we pray the almighty God to preserve your Majesty in good safety and health . Given at our palace of Greene-wich the 19 day of June , in the year of our Lord 1583 , and of our reign the five and twentieth . 
 Your Majesties good sister . 
 