Certain brief advises given by Master Dee , to Arthur Pet , and Charles Jackman , to be observed in their Northeastern discovery , Ann oh 1580. 
 IF we reckon from Wardhouse to Colgoieve Island 400. miles for almost 20. degrees difference only of longitude very near East and West , and about the latitude of 70. degrees and two thirde parts : From Colgoieve to Vaigats 200. miles for 10. degrees difference only in longitude , at 70. degrees of latitude also : From Vaigats to the promontory Tabin 60. degrees difference of longitude ( the whole course , or shortest distance being East and West ) in the latitude likewise of 70. degrees , makes 1200. miles : then is summa totalis from Wardhouse to Tabin 600. leagues , or 1800. English miles . Therefore allowing in a discovery voyage for one day with another but 50. English miles , it is evident that from Wardhouse to Tabin , the course may be sailed easily in sixe and thirtie days : but by Gods help it may be finished in much shorter time , both by help 262 
 of wind prosperous , and light continual for the time requisite thereunto . 
 When you are passed Tabin , or come to the longitude of 142. degrees , as your chart shows , or two , three , foure , or five degrees further Easterly , it is probable you shall find the land on your right hand run much Southerly and Eastward , in which course you are like either to fallen into the mouth of the famous river Oechardes , or some other , which yet I conjecture to pass by the renowned City of Cambalu , and the mouth to be in latitude about 50. or 52. degrees , and within 300. or 400. miles of Cambalu it self , being in the latitude of 45. degrees Southerly of the said rivers mouth , or else that you shall trend about the very Northern and most Easterly point of all Asia , passing by the province Ania , and then to the latitude of 46. degrees , keeping still the land in view on your right hand ( as near as you may with safety ) you may enter into Quinsay haven , being the chief city in the Northern China , as I term it for distinctions sake , from the other better known . 
 And in or about either or both of these two warm places , you may to great good purpose be occupied the whole winter , after your arrival in those quarters , as sometime by sea , sometime in notable fresh rivers , sometime in discreet view and noting down the situation of the Cities within land , etc. and ever assaying to come by some charts or maps of the country , made and printed in Cathay or China , and by some of their books likewise for language , etc. You may also have opportunity to sail over to Japan Island , where you shall find Christian men , Jesuits of many countries' of Christendome some , and perhaps some Englishmen , at whose hands you may have great instruction and advice for you affairs in hand . 
 [ Notes 263 
 A.D. 
 1580. 
 M. Dee gave them a Chart of his own making , which here he refers them unto . 
 