The description of the country of Russia , with the breadth , length , and names of the Shires . 
 He country of Russia was sometimes called Sarmatia . It changed the name ( as some do suppose ) for that it was parted into diverse small , and yet absolute governments , not depending , nor being subject the one to the other . For Russe in that tongue doth signify as much as to part , 
 or divide . The Russe reporteth that foure brothers , Trubor , Rurico , Sinees , and Varivus divided among them the North parts of the country . Likewise that the South parts were possessed by 4. other , Kio , Scieko , Choranus , and their sister Libeda : each calling his territory after his own name . Of this partition it was called Russia , about the year from Christ 860. As for the conjecture which I find in some Cosmographers , that the Russe nation borrowed the name of the people called Roxellani , & were the very same nation with them , it is without all good probability , both in respect of the 357 
 Strabo in his etymologic of the word ( which is very far fetched ) and especially for the seat and dwelling of that people , which was betwixt the two rivers of Tanais and Boristhenes , ( as Strabo reporteth ) quite another way from the country of Russia . 
 When it bore the name of Sarmatia , it was divided into two chief parts : the White and the Black . The white Sarmatia was all that part that lies towards the North , & on the side of Liefland : as the provinces now called Dwina , Vagha , Ustiug , Vologda , Cargapolia , Novo-grodia , etc. whereof Novogrod velica was the Metropolite or chief city . Black Sarmatia was all that country that lies Southward towards the Euxin or Black sea : as the dukedom of Volodemer , of Mosco , Rezan , etc. Some have thought that the name of Sarmatia was first taken 
 Gen. 10. from one Sarmates , whom Moses & Josephus call 
 1 Asarmathes son to Joktan , & nephew to Heber , of 
 ' the posterity of Sem. But this seems to be nothing 
 but a conjecture taken out of the likeness of the name Asarmathes . For the dwelling of all Joktans posterity is described by Moses to have be betwixt Mescha or Masius ( and hill of the Ammonites ) & Sephace , never to U - +75 - ] the river Euphrates : which makes it very unlikely that Asarmathes should plant any colonies so far ofF in you ^Rus^ia^ North & northwest countries . It is bounded northward ’ by the Laps & the North Ocean . On the Southside by the Tartars called Crimmes . Eastward they have the Nagaian Tartar , that possesses all the country on the East side of Volga towards the Caspian sea . On the West and Southwest border lies Lituania , Livonia and Polonia . 
 The Shires oj Russia . 
 The whole Country being now reduced under the government of one , containeth these chief Provinces or Shires . Volodemer , ( which bears the first place in the Emperors style , because their house came of the Dukes of that Country ) Mosco , Nisnovogrod , Plesko , Smolensko , Novogrod velica ( or Novgorod of the low Country ) Rostove , Yaruslave , Bealozera , Rezan , Duyna , Carga-358 
 polia , Meschora , Vagha , Ustuga , Ghaletsa . These are the natural shires pertaining to Russia , but far greater and larger then the shires of England , though not so well peopled . The other Countries' or provinces which The Provinces the Russe Emperors have got perforce added of late y^nquest to their other dominion , are these which follow , Twerra , Youghoria , Permia , Vadska , Boulghoria , Chernigo , Oudoria , Obdoria , Condora , with a great part of Siberia : where the people though they be not natural Russes , yet obey the Emperor of Russia , and are ruled by the Laws of his Country , paying customs and taxes , as his own people do . Beside these he hath under him the kingdoms of Cazan and Astracan , got by conquest not long since . As for all his possession in Lituania ( to the number of 30. great Towns and more , ) with Narve and Dorp in Livonia , they are quite gone , being surprised of late years by the Kings of Poland and Sweden . These Shires and Provinces are reduced all into foure Jurisdictions , which they call Chetfyrds ( that is ) Tetrarchies , or Fourthparts . 
 The whole Country is of great length and breadth . The breadth From the North to the South ( if you measure from Cola Country to Astracan which bendeth somewhat Eastward ) it reaches in length about 4260. versed , or miles . Notwithstanding the Emperor of Russia hath more territory Northward , far beyond Cola unto the River of Tromschua , that runneth a hundred versed , wellnigh Pechinga . beyond Pechinga , near to Wardhouse , but not entire nor clearly limited , by reason of the kings of Sweden and Denmarke , that have diverse Towns there , aswell as the Russe , plotted together the one with the other : every one of them claiming the whole of those North parts as his own right . The breadth ( if you go from that part of his territory that lies farthest Westward on the Narve side , to the parts of Siberia Eastward , where the Emperor hath his garrisons ) is 4400. versed or thereabouts . A versed ( by their reckoning ) is a 1000. pases , yet less by one quarter then and English mile . If the 
 359 
 whole dominion of the Russe Emperor were all habitable , and peopled in all places , as it is in some , he would either hardly hold it all within one regiment , or be over mighty for all his neighbour Princes . 
 Of the Soil and Climate . 
 THe soil of the Country for the most part is of a sleight sandy mould , yet very much different one place from another , for the yield of such things as grow out of the earth . The Country Northwards towards the parts of S. Nicholas and Cola , and Northeast towards Siberia , is all very barren , and full of desert woods by reason of the Climate , and extremity of the cold in Winter time . So likewise along the River Volgha betwixt the Countries' of Cazan , and Astracan : where ( notwithstanding the soil is very fruitful ! ) it is all unhabited , saving that upon the river Volgha on the Westside , the Emperor hath some few Castles with garrisons in them . This happeneth by means of the Crimme Tartar , that will neither himself plant Towns to dwell there , ( living a wild and vagrant life ) nor suffer the Russe ( that is far off with the strength of his Country ) to people those parts . From Vologda ( which lies almost 1700. versed from the port of S. Nicholas ) down towards Mosco , and so towards the South part that bordereth upon the Crimme , ( which containeth the like space of 1700. versed or there about ) is a very fruitful and pleasant Country , yielding pasture , and corn , with woods and waters in very great plenty . The like is betwixt Rezan ( that lies Southeast from Mosco ) to Novogrod and Vobsko , that reach farthest towards the Northwest . So betwixt Mosco , and Smolensko ( that lies Southwest towards Lituania ) is a very fruitful and pleasant soil . 
 The whole Country differeth very much from it self , by reason of the year : so that a man would marveile to see the great alteration and difference betwixt the Winter , and the Summer Russia . The whole 360 
 Country in the Winter lies under snow , which falls continually , and is sometime of a yard or two thick , but greater towards the North . The Rivers and other waters are all frozen up a yard or more thick , how swift or broad so ever they be . And this continueth commonly five months , viz. from the beginning of November till towards the end of March , what time the snow begins to melt . So that it would breed a °f frost in a man to look abroad at that time , and see Russta-the Winter face of that Country . The sharpness of the air you may judge of by this : for that water dropped down or cast up into the air congealeth into ice before it come to the ground . In the extremity of Winter , if you hold a pewter dish or pot in your hand , or any other mettle ( except in some chamber where their warm stoves be ) your fingers will frieze fast unto it , and draw off the skin at the parting . When you pass out of a warm room into a cold , you shall sensibly feel your breath to wax stark , and even stifling with the cold , as you draw it in and out . 
 Diverse not only that travel ! abroad , but in the very markets , and streets of their Towns , are mortally pinched and killed withal : so that you shall see many drop down in the streets ; many travellers brought into the Towns sitting dead and stifle in their Sleds . Divers loose their noses , the tips of their ears , and the bals of their cheeks , their toes , feet , etc. Many times ( when the Winter is very hard and extreme ) the bears and wolves issue by troops out of the woods driven by hunger , and enter the villages , tearing and ravening all they can find : so that the inhabitants are feign to fly for safeguard of their lives . And yet in the Summer time you shall see such a new hiew and face of a Country , the woods ( for the most part which are all of fir and birch ) so fresh and so sweet , the pastures and meadows so green and well grown , ( and that upon the sudden ) such variety of flowers , such noise of birds ( specially of Nightingales , that seem to be more loud and of a more 361 
 variable note then in other Countries' ) that a man shall not lightly travel in a more pleasant Country . 
 And this fresh and speedy growth of the Spring there seems to proceed from the benefit of the snow : which all the Winter time being spread over the whole Country as a white robe , and keeping it warm from the rigour of the frost , in the Spring time ( when the Sun waxes warm , and dissolveth it into water ) doth so thoroughly drench and soak the ground , that is somewhat of a sleight and sandy mould , and then shines so hotly upon it again , that it draws the herbs and plants forth in great plenty and variety , in a very short time . As the Winter exceeds in cold , so the Summer inclineth to over much heat , specially in the months of June , July and August , being much warmer then the Summer air in England . 
 The Country throughout is very well watered with springs , rivers , and Ozera's , or lake's . Wherein the providence of God is to be noted , for that much of the Country being so far inland , as that some part lies a thousand miles and more every way from any Sea , yet it is served with fair Rivers , and that in very great number , that emptying themselves one into another , , run all into the Sea. Their lake's are many and large , , some of 60. 80. 100. and 200. miles long , with breadth proportionate . 
 The chief Rivers are these , First , Volgha , that hath his head or spring at the root of and Aldertree , about 200. versed above Yaruslave , and grows so big by the increase of other Rivers by that time it comes thither , that it is broad and English mile and more , and so runneth into the Caspian sea , about 2800. versed or miles of length . 
 The next is Boristhenes ( now called Neper ) that divides the Country from Lituania , and falls into the Euxin sea . 
 The third Tanais or DONE , ( the ancient bounder betwixt Europe and Asia ) that takes his head out of Rezan 362 
 Ozera , and so running through the Country of the Chrim Tartar , falls into the great Sea , lake , or mere , ( called Maeotis ) by the City of Azov . By this River ( as the Russe reporteth ) you may pass from their City Mosco to Constantinople , and so into all those parts of the world by water , drawing your boat ( as their manner is ) over a little Isthmus or narrow slip of land , a few versts overthwart . Which was proved not long since by and Ambassador sent to Constantinople , who passed the River of Moscua , and so into another called Ocka , whence he drew his boat over into Tanais , and thence passed the whole way by water . 
 The fourth is called Duyna , many hundred miles long , that falls Northward into the bay of S. Nicholas , and hath great Alabaster rocks on the banks towards the sea side . 
 The fifth Duna , that emptieth into the Baltic sea by the town Riga . 
 The sixt Onega , that falls into the Bay at Solovetsko 90. versed from the port of S. Nicholas . This River , below the town Cargapolia , meeteth with the River Volock , that falls into the Finland Sea by the town Yama . So that from the port of S. Nicholas into the Finland sea , and so into the Found , you may pass all by water , as hath be tried by the Russe . 
 The seventh Suchana , that flows into Duyna , and so into the North sea . 
 The eight Ocka , that fetches his head from the borders of the Chrim , and streameth into Volgha . 
 The ninth Moscua , that runneth thorough the City Mosco , and gives it the name . 
 There is Wichida also a very large and long river that riseth out of Permia , and falls into Volgha . All these are rivers of very large streams , the least to be compared to the Thames in bigness , and in length far more , beside diverse others . The Pole at Mosco is 55. degrees 10. minutes . At the port of S. Nicholas towards the North 63. degrees and 50. minutes . 
 363 
 The native commodities of the Country . 
 The fruits and TpOr kinds of fruits , they have Apples , pears , ussia^ plums , cherries , read and black , ( but the black ' wild ) a deene like a musk millian , but more sweet and pleasant , cucumbers and goords ( which they call Arbouse ) rasps , strawberries , and hurtilberies , with many other berries in great quantity in every wood and hedge . Their kinds of grain are wheat , rye , barley , oats , peas , buckway , psnytha , that in taste is somewhat like to rice . Of all these grains the Country yields very sufficient with and overplus quantity , so that wheat is sold sometime for two alteens or ten pence starling the Chetfird , which makes almost three English bushels . 
 Their rye is sowed before the Winter , all their other grain in the Spring time , and for the most part in May . The Permians and some other that dwell far North , and in desert places , are served from the parts that lie more Southward , and are forced to make bred sometime of a kind of root ( called Vaghnoy ) and of the middle rind of the fir tree . If there be any dearth ( as they accounted this last year Anno 1588. wheat and rye being at 13. alteens , or 5. shillings five pence starling the Chetfird ) the fault is rather in the practice of their Nobility that use to engross it , then in the Country it self . 
 The chief The native commodities of the Country ( wherewith commodities of serve both their own turns , and send much abroad the country . to great enriching of the Emperor , and his people ) i Furs . are many & substantiali . First , furs of all sorts . 
 Wherein the providence of God is to be noted , that provideth a natural remedy for them , to help the natural inconvenience of their Country by the cold of the Climate . Their chief furs are these , Black fox , Sables , Lusernes , don fox , Martrones , Gurnestalles or Armins , Lasets or Miniver , Bever , Wulverins , the skin These Rats of a great water Rat that smelleth naturally like musk , areinCanada . Calaber or grey squirrel , read squirrel , read & white fox . 
 364 
 Beside the great quantity spent within you Country ( the people being clad all in furs the whole winter ) there are transported out of the Country some years by the merchant's of Turkey , Persia , Bougharia , Georgia , Armenia , and some other of Christendom , to the valve of foure or five hundred thousand rubbles , as I have herd of the merchant's . The best Sable fur grows in the country of Pechora , Momgosorskoy and Obdorskoy , the Momgwnkoy worse sort in Siberia , Perm , & other places . The PerhaP\ black fox and read come out of Siberia , white and dun from Pechora , whence also come the white wolf , and white Bear skin . The best Wulverin also thence and from Perm . The best Martrons are from Siberia , Cadam , Morum , Perm , and Cazan . Lyserns , Minever , and Armins , the best are out of Gallets , and Ouglits , many from Novogrod and Perm . The Beaver of the best sort breeds in Murmonskey by Cola. Other common furs and most of these kinds grow in many , and some in all parts of the Country . 
 The second commodity is of Wax , whereof hath be 2. Wax . shipped into foreign countries' ( as I have herd it reported by those that best know it ) the sum of 50000. pood yearly , every pood containeth 40. pound , but now about 10000. pood a year . 
 The third is their Honey , whereof beside and exceed - 3. Hony. ing great quantity spent in their ordinary drinks ( which is Mead of all sorts ) and their other uses , some good quantity is carried out of the country . The chief increase of honey is in Mordua and Cadam near to the Cheremissen Tartar : much out of Severskoy , Rezan , Morum , Cazan , Dorogobose , and Vasma . 
 Fourthly , of Tallow they afford a great weight for 4. Tallow . transportation : not only for that their country hath very much good ground apt for pasturage of cattle , but also by reason of their many Lents and other fasts : and partly because their greater men use much wax for their lights , the poorer and meaner sort birch dried in their stoves , and cut into long shivers , which they call 
 365 
 Luchineos . Of tallow there hath be shipped out of the Realm a few years since about 100000. pood yearly , now not passed 30000. or thereabouts . The best yield of tallow is in the parts and territories of Smolensko , Yaruslave , Ouglits , Novogrod , and Vologda , Otfer , and Gorodetskey . 
 5. Hide . And other principali commodity is their Losh and Cow hide . Their Losh or Buff hide is very fair and large . Their bull and cow hide ( for oxen they make none , neither yet weather ) is of a small size . There hath be transported by merchant's strangers some years 100000. hides . Now it is decreased to 30000. or thereabouts . Beside great store of goats skins , whereof great numbers are shipped out of the country . The largest kind of Losh or Buff breeds about Rostove , Wichida , Novogrod , Morum , and Perm . The lesser sort within the kingdom of Cazan . 
 6. Trane oil . And other very great and principali commodity is their Trane oil , drawn out of the Seal fish . Where it will The manner of not be impertinent to show the manner of their hunting Seal fish . the Seal , which they make this oil or : which is in this sort . Towards the end of Summer ( before the frost begin ) they go down with their boats into the Bay of S. Nicholas , to a cape called Cusconesse or Foxnose , where they leave their boats till the next spring tide . When the Sun waxes warm towards the spring , and yet the ice not melted within the Bay , they return thither again . Then drawing their boats over the sea ice , they use them for houses to rest and lodge in . There are commonly about 17. or 18. fleet of them , of great large boats , which divide themselves into diverse companies , five or sixe boats in a consort . 
 They that first find the haunt , fire a beacon , which they carry with them for the nonce . Which being espied by the other companies , by such among them as are appointed of purpose , they come altogether and compass the Seals round about in a ring , that lie sunning themselves together upon the ice , commonly foure or five 366 
 1588. thousand in a shoal , and so they invade them every man with his club in his hand . If they hit them on the nose , they are soon killed . If on the sides or back they bear out the blow , and many times so catch and hold down the club with their teeth by main force , that the party is forced to call for help to his fellows . 
 The manner of the Seals is when they see themselves beset , to gather all close together in a throng or plump , to sway down the ice , and to break it ( if they can ) which so bendeth the ice that many times it takes the sea water upon it , and makes the hunter's to wade a foot or more deep . After the slaughter when they have killed what they can , they fallen to sharing every boat his part in equal ! portions : and so they flay them , taking from the body the skin , and the lard or fat with all that cleaveth to the skin . This they take with them , leaving the bodies behind , and so go to shore . Where they dig pits in the ground of a fathom and and half deep , or thereabouts , and so taking the fat or lard off from the skin , they throw it into the pit , and cast in among it hot burning stones to melt it withal . The uppermost and purest is sold , and used to oil wool for cloth , the grosser ( that is of a read colour ) they fell to make soap . 
 Likewise of Ickary or Cavery , a great quantity is made 7. ickary . upon the river of Volgha out of the fish called Bellougina , the Sturgeon , the Severiga and the Sterledey . Whereof the most part is shipped by French and Netherlandish merchant's for Italy and Spaine , some by English merchant's . 
 The next is of Flax and Hemp , whereof there hath 8. Hemp be shipped ( as I have herd merchant's say ) at the port an Flax . of Narve a great part of 100. ships small and great yearly . Now , not passed five . The reason of this abating and decrease of this & other commodities , that were wont to be transported in a greater quantity , is the shutting up of the port of you Narve towards the Finland sea , which now is in the hands and possession of the Sweden . 
 367 
 Likewise the stopping of the passage overland by the way of Smolensko , & Plotsko , by reason of their wars with the Polonian , which causeth the people to be less provident in maintaining and gathering these and like commodities , for that they lack sales . For the growth of flax the province of Vobsko , and the country about is the chief and only place . For Hemp Smolensko , Dorogobose and Vasma . 
 9. Salt . The country beside makes great store of salt . Their best salt is made at Stararovse in very great quantity , where they have great store of salt wells , about 2 50. versed from the sea . At Astracan salt is made naturally by the sea water , that casts it up into great hills , and so it is dug down , and carried away by the merchant's and other that will fetch it from thence . They pay to the Emperor for acknowledgement or custom 3-d . Russe upon every hundred weight . Beside these two , they Nonocks . make salt in many other places of the Realm , as in Perm , Wichida , Totma , Kenitsma , Solovetsky , Ocona , Bombasey , and Nonocks , all out of salt pits , save at Solovetsky , which lies near to the sea . 
 10. Tam. Likewise of Tar they make a great quantity out of their fir trees in the country of Duyna and Smolensko , whereof much is sent abroad . Beside these ( which are all good and substantiali commodities ) they have diverse other of smaller account , that are natural and proper to 
 11. Riba - that country : as the fish tooth ( which they call Riba-zul > a - zuba ) which is used both among themselves , and the Persians and Bougharians that fetch it from thence for beads , knives , and sword hafts of Noblemen and gentlemen , and for diverse other uses . Some use the powder of it against poison , as the Unicorns horn . The fish that weareth it is called a Morse , and is caught about Pechora . These fish teeth some of them are almost 2. foot of length , and weigh 11. or 12. pound apiece . 
 12. Slide . In the province of Corelia , and about the river Duyna towards the North sea , there grows a soft rock which they call Slude . This they cut into pieces , and so tear 368 
 it into thin flakes , which naturally it is apt for , and so use it for glass-lanthorns and such like . It gives both inward and outward a clearer light then glass , and for this respect is better then either glass or horn : for that it neither breaks like glass , nor yet will burn like the lanthorn . Saltpeter they make in many places , as at Ouglits , Yaruslave & Ustiug , and some small store of 
 1588. 
 13. Saltpeter and brimstone . 
 brimstone upon the river Volgha , but want skill to refine it . Their iron is somewhat brittle , but a great weight of 14. Iron . 
 it is made in Corelia , Cargapolia , & Ustiug Thelesna . Other mine they have none growing within you realm . 
 Their beasts of strange kinds are the Losh , the Ollen , nge the wild horse , the bear , the wolvering , or wood dog , ’ 
 the Lyserne , the Beaver , the Sable , the Martron , the black that breed in and dun fox , the white Bear towards the sea coast of Russia . Pechora , the Gurnstale , the Laset or Minever . They have a kind of Squirrel ! that hath growing on the pinion of the shoulder bone a long tuft of hair , much like unto feathers with a far broader tail then have any other squirrels , which they move and shake as they leap from tree to tree , much like unto a wing . They skise a large space , & seem for to fly withal , and therefore they call them Letach Vechshe , that is , the flying squirrels . 
 Their hares and squirrels in Summer are of the same colour with ours , in Winter the hare changes her coat into milk white , the squirrel into grey , whereof comes the Calaber . 
 They have fallow deer , the roe buck , & goats very great store . Their horses are but small , but very swift & hard , they travel them unshod both winter and Summer , without all regard of pace . Their sheep are but small & bear course & harsh wool . Of foul they have diverse of the principal kinds : First , great store of hawks , the eagle , the gerfalcon , the slightfaulcon , the goshawk , the tassel , the sparhawk , etc. But the principal hawk y* breeds in the country , is counted you gerfalcon . Of other fowls their principal kinds are the swan tame & wild , ( whereof they have great store ) the 
 III 
 369 
 2 A 
 stork , the crane , the tedder of the colour of a pheasant , but far bigger & lives in the fir woods . Of pheasant and partridge they have very great plenty . And owl there is of a very great bigness , more ugly to behold then you owls of this country , with a broad face , & ears much like unto a man . 
 For fresh water fish , beside the common sorts ( as carp , pikes , perch , tench , roach , etc. ) they have diverse kinds very good and delicate : as the Bellouga or Bellougina of 4. or 5. elnes long , the Ositrina or Sturgeon , the Severiga and Sterledy somewhat in fashion and taste like to the Sturgeon , but not so thick nor long . These 4. kinds of fish breed in the Volgha , and are catched in great plenty , and served thence into the whole Realm for a great food . Of the Roes of these foure kinds they make very great store of Icary or Caveary as was said before . 
 They have beside these that breed in the Volgha a fish called the Riba bela , or white salmon , which they account more delicate then they do the read salmon , whereof also they have exceeding great plenty in the Rivers Northward , as in Duyna , the river of Cola , etc. In the Ozera or lake near a town called Perislave , not far from the Mosco , they have a small fish which they call the fresh herring , of the fashion , and somewhat of the taste of a sea-herring . Their chief towns for fish are , Yaruslave , Bealozera , Novogrod , Astracan , and Cazan : which all yield a large custom to the Emperor every year for their trades of fishing , which they practise in Summer , but send it frozen in the Winter time into all parts of the Realm . 
 The chief Cities of Russia . 
 THe chief cities of Russia are Mosco , Novogrod , Rostove , Volodomer , Plesko , Smolensko , Jaruslave , Perislave , Nisnovogrod , Vologda , Ustiug , Colmogro , Cazan , Astracan , Cargapolia , Columna . The city of Mosco . Mosco is supposed to be of great antiquity , though 
 370 
 the first founder be unknown to the Russe . It seems to have taken the name from the river that runneth on the one side of the town . Berosus the Chaldean in his 5. book telleth that Nimrod ( whom other profane stories call Saturne ) sent Assyrius , Medus , Moscus , 8c Magog into Asia to plant colonies there , and that Moscus planted both in Asia and Europe . Which may make some probability , that the city , or rather the river whereon it is built , took the denomination from this Moscus : the rather because of the climate or situation , which is in the very farthest part 8c list of Europe , bordering upon Asia . The City was much enlarged by one Ivan or John , son to Daniel , that first changed his title of duke into King : though that honour continued not to his posterity : the rather because he was invested into it by the Popes Legate , who at that time was Innocentius the 4. about the year 1246. which was very much misliked by the Russe people , being then a part of the Eastern or Greek Church . Since that time the name of this city hath grown more famous , 8c better known to the world : insomuch that not only the province , but the whole Country of Russia is termed by some by the name of Moscovia the Metropolite city . The form of this City is in manner round with 3. strong walls , circling the one within the other , 8c streets lying between , whereof the inmost wall , and the buildings closed within it ( lying safest as the heart within the body , fenced and watered with the river Moscua , that runneth close by it ) is all accounted the Emperor's castle . The number of houses ( as I have herd ) through the whole City ( being reckoned by the Emperor a little before it was fired by the Crim ) was 41500. in all . Since the Tartar besieged and fired the town ( which was in the year 1571. ) there lies waste of it a great breadth of ground , which before was well set and planted with buildings , specially that part on the South side of Moscua , built not long before by Basilius the Emperor for his garrison 
 371 
 of soldiers , to whom he gave privilege to drink Mead , and beer at the dry or prohibited times , when other Russes may drink nothing but water , and for that cause called this new city by the name of Naloi , that is skink or pour in . So that now the city of Mosco is not much bigger then the city of London . The next in greatness , & in a manner as large , is the Novograd . ci tie Novograd : where was committed ( as the Russe says ) the memorable war so much spoke of in stories of the Scythians servants , that took arms against their master's : which they report in this sort : viz. That the Boiarens or gentlemen of Novograd & the territory about ( which only are soldiers after the discipline of those countries ) had war with the Tartars . Which being well performed & ended by them , they returned homeward . Where they understood by the way that their Cholopey or bondslaves whom they left at home , had in their absence possessed their towns , lands , houses , wives and all . At which news being somewhat amazed , and yet disdaining the villainy of their servants , they made the more speed home : and so not far from Novograd met them in warlike manner marching against them . Whereupon advising what was best to be done , they agreed all to set upon them with no other show of weapon but with their horse whips ( which as their manner is every man rides withal ) to put them in remembrance of their servile condition , thereby to terrify them , & abate their courage . And so marching on & lashing all together with their whips in their hands they gave the onset . Which seemed so terrible in the ears of their villains , and stroke such a sense into them of the smart of the whip which they had felt before , that they fled altogether like sheep before the drivers . In memory of this victory the Novogradians ever since have stamped their coin ( which they call a dingoe Novogrodskoy currant through all Russia ) with the figure of a horseman shaking a whip aloft in his hand . These 2. cities exceed you rest in greatness . For strength 
 372 
 OF THE CHIEF CITIES OF RUSSIA a.d. 
 1588. 
 their chief towns are Vobsko , Smolensko , Cazan & Astracan , as lying upon the borders . But for situation Jaruslave far exceeds the rest . For beside the come - Jaruslave . modities that the soil yields of pasture and corn , it lies upon the famous river of Volgha , & looks over it from a high bank very fair & stately to behold : whereof the town takes the name . For Jaraslave in that tongue signifies as much as a fair or famous bank . In this town ( as may be guessed by thee & axo Gr^~ name ) dwelled the Russe king Viadimer surnamed Jaruslave , that married the daughter of Harald king of England , by mediation of Sveno the Dane , as is noted in the Danish story about the year 1067. 
 The other towns have nothing y‘ is greatly memorable , save many ruins within their walls . The streets of their cities and towns in stead of paving are planked with fir trees , plained & laid even close the one to the other . Their houses are of wood without any lime or manner stone , built very close and warm with fir trees plained and piled one upon another . They are fastened together ’ with dents or notches at every corner , & so clasped fast together . Betwixt the trees or timber they thrust in moss ( whereof they gather plenty in their woods ) to keep out the air . Every house hath a pair of stairs that led up into the chambers out of the yard or street after the Scottish manner . This building seems far better for their country , then that of stone or brick ; as being colder & more dampish then their wooden houses , specially of fir , that is a dry & warm wood . Whereof the providence of God hath given them such store , as that you may built a fair house for 20. or 30. rubbles or little more , where wood is most scant . The greatest inconvenience of their wooden building is the aptness for firing , which happeneth very oft & in very fearful sort , by reason of the dryness and fatness of the fir , that being once fired , burns like a torch , & is hardly quenched till all be burned up . 
 [ Of 
 373 
 Of the manner of Crowning or Inauguration of the Russe Emperors . 
 THe solemnities used at you Russe Emperor's coronation , are on this manner . In the great church of Precheste ( or our Lady ) within the Emperor's castle is erected a stage whereon stands a serine that bears upon it the Imperial cap & robe of very rich stuff . When the day of the Inauguration is come , there resort thither , first the Patriarch w‘ the Metropolitanes , archbishop's , bishops , abbots and priors , all richly clad in their pontificalibus . Then enter the Deacons with the quire of singers . Who so soon as the Emperor sets foot into you church , begin to sing : Many years may live noble Theodore Ivanowich , etc. : Whereunto the patriarch and Metropolite with the rest of the clergy answer with a certain hymn , in form of a prayer , singing it altogether with a great noise . The hymn being ended , the patriarch with the Emperor mount up the stage , where stands a seat ready for the Emperor . Whereupon the patriarch wills him to fit down , & then placing himself by him upon another seat provided for y‘ purpose , boweth down his head towards you ground , and says this prayer : O Lord God king of kings , Lord of lords , which by thy prophet Samuel didst chosen thy servant David , & anoint him for King over thy people Israel , hear now our prayer , & look from thy sanctuary upon this thy servant Theodore , whom thou hast chosen and exalted for king over these thy holy nations , anoint him with the oil of gladness , protect by thy power , put upon his head a crown of gold & precious stones , give him length of days , place him in the seat of Justice , strengthen his arm , make subject unto him all the barbarous nations . Let thy fear be in his whole heart , turn him from and evil faith , and all error , and show him the salvation of thy holy and universal Church , that he may judge thy people with Justice , & protect the children of the poor , 374 
 and finally attain everlasting life . This prayer he speaks with a low voice , and then pronounceth aloud : All praise and power to God the Father , the Son , and the holy Ghost . The prayer being ended , he commands certain Abbots to reach the imperiali robe & cap : which is done very decently , and with great solemnity , the Patriarch withal pronouncing aloud : Peace be unto all . And so he begins another prayer to this effect : Bow your selves together with us , and pray to him that reigneth over all . Preserve him ( o Lord ) under thy holy protection , keep him that he may do good and holy things , let Justice shine forth in his days , that we may live quietly without strife and malice . This is pronounced somewhat softly by the Patriarch , whereto he adds again aloud : Thou art the king of the whole world , and the saviour of our souls , to thee the Father , Son and Holy ghost be all praise for ever and ever . Amen . Then putting on the robe and the cap , he blesses the Emperor with the sign of the cross , saying withal : In the name of the Father , the Son and the Holy ghost . The like is done by the Metropolites , Archbishop's , and Bishops : who all in their order come to the chair , and one after another bless the Emperor with their two forefingers . Then is said by the Patriarch another prayer , that begins : O most holy virgin , mother of God etc. After which a Deacon pronounceth with a loud voice : Many years to noble Theodore , good , honourable , beloved of God , great Duke of Volodemer , of Mosco , Emperor , and Monarch of all Russia , etc. Whereto the other Priests and Deacons that stand somewhat far of by the altar or table , answer singing : Many years , many years to the noble Theodore . The same note is taken up by the Priests and Deacons , that are placed at the right and left side of the Church , and then altogether , they chant and thunder out , singing : Many years to the noble Theodore , good , honourable , beloved of God , great Duke of Volodomer , Mosco , Emperor of 
 375 
 all Russia , etc. These solemnities being ended , first comes the Patriarch with the Metropolites , Archbishop's , and Bishops , then the Nobility , and the whole company in their order , to do homage to the Emperor , bending down their heads , and knocking them at his feet to the very ground . 
 The style wherewith he is invested at his Coronation , runneth after this manner . 
 THeodore Ivanowich , by the grace of God great Lord and Emperor of all Russia , great Duke of Volodemer , Mosco , and Novogrod , King of Cazan , King of Astracan , Lord of Plesco , and great duke of Smolensco , of Twerria , Joughoria , Permia , Vadska , Bulghoria , and others , Lord and great Duke of Novogrod of the Low country , of Chernigo , Rezan , Polotskoy , Rostove , Yaru-slaveley , Bealozera , Liefland , Oudoria , Obdoria , and Condensa , Commander of all Siberia , and of the North parts , and Lord of many other Countries , etc. 
 This style containeth in it all the Emperors Provinces , and sets forth his greatness . And therefore they have a great delight and pride in it , forcing not only their own people but also strangers ( that have any matter to deliver to the Emperor by speech or writing ) to repeat the whole form from the beginning to the end . Which breeds much cavil , and sometime quarrel betwixt them and the Tartar , and Poland Ambassadors : who refuse to call him Czar , that is Emperor , and to repeat the other parts of his long style . My self when I had audience of the Emperor , thought good to salute him only with thus much vz . Emperor of all Russia , great Duke of Volodomer , Mosco and Novogrod , King of Cazan , King of Astracan . The rest I omitted of purpose , because I knew they gloried , to have their style appear to be of a larger volume then the Queens of England . But this was taken in so ill part , that the Chancellor ( who then attended the Emperor , with the rest of the nobility ) with a loud 
 376 
 chafing voice , called still upon me to say out the rest . Whereto I answered , that the Emperor's style was very long , and could not so well be remembered by strangers , that I had repeated so much of it , as might show that I gave honour to the rest etc. But all would not serve till I commanded my interpreter to say it all out . 
 Their forces for the wars , with the chief officers and their salaries . 
 THe Soldiers of Russia are called Sinaboyarskey , or the sons of Gentlemen : because they are all of that degree , by virtue of their military profession . For every soldier in Russia is a gentleman , and none are gentlemen , but only the soldiers , that take it by dissent from their ancestors : so that the son of a gentleman ( which is born a soldier ) is ever a gentleman , and a soldier withal , & professes nothing else but military ^ „ 7^^ matters . When they are of years able to bear arms , they come to the office of Roserade or great Constable , and there present themselves : who entereth their names , and allots them certain lands to maintain their charges , for the most part the same that their father's enjoyed . For the lands assigned to maintain the army , are ever certain , annexed to this office without improving , or detracting one foot . But that if the Emperor have sufficient in wages , the rooms being full so far as the land doth extend already , they are many times deferred , and have nothing allowed them , except some one portion of the land be divided into two . The whole number of his soldiers in continual pay , is this . First he hath his Dworaney , that is , Pensioners , or Guard of his person , to the number of 15000 horsemen , with their captains and other officers , that are always in a Degrees readiness . horsemen . 
 Of these 15000 horsemen , there are three sorts or 1 • Praetoriani degrees , which differ as well in estimation as in wages , or suc^ as one degree from another . The first sort of them is called " E^ennfer-Dworaney Bulshey , or the company of head Pensioners , son 15000. 
 377 
 Two other troops to the number of 65000. 
 that have some and hundred , some fourescore rubbles a year , and none under 70. The second sort are called Seredney Dworaney , or the middle rank of Pensioners . These have sixty or fifty rubbles by the year , none under fortie . The third and lowest sort , are the Dyta Boiarskey , that is , the low Pensioners . Their salary is thirty rubbles a year for him that hath most , some have but 25 , some 20 , none under 12. Whereof the half part is paid them at the Mosco , the other half in the field by the general , when they have any wars , & are employed in service . When they receive their whole pay , it amounteth to 55000 rubbles by the year . 
 And this is their wages , beside lands allotted to every one of them , both to the greater and the less , according to their degrees . Whereof he that hath least , hath to yield him twentie rubbles or marks by the year . Beside these 15000 horsemen , that are of better choice ( as being the Emperor's own guard when himself goes to the wars , not unlike the Roman soldiers called Prsetoriani ) are a hundred and ten men of speciali account for their Nobility , and trust , which are chosen by the Emperor , and have their names registered , that find among them for the Emperor's wars , to the number of 65000. horsemen , with all necessaries meet for the wars after the Russe manner . 
 To this end they have yearly allowance made by the Emperor for themselves , and their companies , to the sum of 40000 rubbles . And these 65000 are to repair to the field every year on the borders towards the Crim Tartar ( except they be appointed for some other service ) whither there be wars with the Tartars , or not . This might seem peradventure somewhat dangerous for some state , to have so great forces under the command of Noblemen to assemble every year to one certain place . But the matter is so used , as that no danger can grow to the Emperor , or his state by this means . First , because these noblemen are many , to wit , and no . in all , & changed by the Emperor so oft as he thinketh 378 
 good . Secondly , because they have their livings of the Emperor , being otherwise but of very small revenue , and receive this yearly pay of 40000 rubbles , when it is presently to be paid forth again to the soldiers that are under them . Thirdly , because for the most part they are about the Emperor's person being of his Counsel , either speciali , or at large . Fourthly , they are rather as paymasters , then Captains to their companies , themselves not going forth ordinarily to the wars , save when some of them are appointed by speciali order from the Emperor himself . So the whole number of horsemen that are ever in a readiness , and in continual pay , are 80000 , a few more or less . 
 If he have need of a greater number ( which seidome falls out ) then he enterteineth of those Sinaboiarskey , that are out of pay , so many as he needs : and if yet he want of his number , he gives charge to his Noblemen , that hold lands of him to bring into the field every man a proportionable number of his servants ( called Kolophey , such as till his lands ) with their furniture , according to the just number that he intends to make . Which the service being done , presently lay in their weapons , and return to their servile occupations again . 
 Of footmen that are in continual pay , he hath to the number of 12000 all gunners , called Strelsey : Whereof 5000 are to attend about the city of Mosco , or any other place where the Emperor shall abide , and 2000 ( which are called Stremaney Strelsey , or gunners at the stirrup ) about his own person at the very Court or house where himself lodgeth . The rest are placed in his garrison towns , till there be occasion to have them in the field , and receive for their salary or stipend every man seven rubbles a year , beside twelve measures a piece of Rye , and Oats . Of mercenary Soldiers , that are strangers ( whom they call Nimschoy ) they have at this time 4300 of Polonians : of Chirchasses ( that are under the Polonians ) about 4000 , whereof 3500 are abroad in his garrisons : of Doutches & Scots about 150 : 
 379 
 A.D. 
 1588. 
 Horsemen in continual pay 80000. 
 Footmen in continual pay 12000. 
 Strangers mercenaries in pay 4300. 
 1. The Voiavod or General . 
 2. Lieutenant general . 
 3. Marshals of the field foure . 
 Foure marshals . • deputies eight . 
 of Greeks , Turks , Danes and Swedens , all in one band , and 100 or thereabouts . But these they use only upon the Tartar side , and against the Siberians : as they do the Tartar soldiers ( whom they hire sometime , but only for the present ) on the other side against the Polonian and Sweden : thinking it best policy to use their service upon the contrary border . 
 The chief Captains or leaders of these forces , according to their names and degrees , are these which follow . First , the Voyavoda Bulshaia , that is , the Great Captain , or Lieutenant general under the Emperor . This commonly is one of the foure houses of the chief Nobility of the land . Their great Voiavod or general at this present in their wars , is commonly one of these foure : Knez Feodor Ivanowich Methisloskey , Knez Ivan Michalowich Glinskoy , Cherechaskoy , and Trowbetskoy , all of great nobility . Next unto the Voiavod or general there is some other placed as Lieutenant general , being a man of great valour and experience in the wars , who ordereth all things that the other countenanceth . At this time their principal man , & most used in their wars , is one Knez Demetrie Ivanowich Forestine , and ancient and expert captain , and one that hath done great service ( as they say ) against the Tartar and Polonian . Next under the Voiavod and his Lieutenant general are foure other that have the marshalling of the whole army divided among them , and may be called the marshals of the field . 
 Every man hath his quarter , or fourth part under him . Whereof the first is called the Prava Polskoy , or right wing . The second is the Levoy Polskoy , or left wing . The third is Rusnoy Polskoy , or the broken band , because out of this there are chosen to send abroad upon any sudden exploit , or to make a rescue or supply , as occasion does require . The fourth Storoshovoy Polskoy , or the warding band . Every one of these foure Marshals have two other under them ( eight in all ) that twice every week at the least must muster and train their several wings or bans , and hold and give 380 
 1588. justice for all faults , and disorders committed in the camp . 
 And these eight are commonly chosen out of the 11 oh . ( which I spoke of before ) that receive & deliver the pay to the soldiers . Under these eight are diverse other Five Coronels Captains , as the Gulavoy , Captains of thousands five under Caf " hundreds and 100. The Petyde Setskoy or Captains of ans ' fifties , and the Decetskies or Captains of tennes . 
 Beside the Voiavoda or general of the army ( spoken of before ) they have two other that bear the name of Voiavoda , whereof one is the master of the great Ordi - Sixe Master's nance ( called Naradna voiavoda ) who hath diverse under officers , necessary for that service . The other is called ' the Voiavoda gulavoy , or the walking Captain , that hath The waiting allowed him 1000 good horsemen of principali choice , CaPtatne-to range & spy abroad , & hath the charge of the running Castle , which we are to speak of in the Chapter following . All these Captains , & men of charge must once every day resort to the Bulsha voiavoda , or General of the army , to know his pleasure , & to inform him , if there be any requisite matter pertaining to their office . 
 Of their mustering , and levying of forces , manner of armour , and provision of victuali for the wars . 
 WHen wars are towards ( which they fail not of lightly every year with the Tartar , & many times with the Polonian & Sweden ) the foure Lords of the Chetfirds send forth their summons in the Emperor's name , to all the Dukes and Dyacks of the Provinces , to be proclaimed in the head towns of every Shire : that all the Sinaboiarskey , or sons of gentlemen make their repair to such a border where the service is to be done , at such a place , & by such a day , and there present themselves to such , & such Captains . When they come to the place assigned them in the summons or proclamation , their names are taken by certain officers that have commission for that purpose from the Roserade , or high 381 
 Their order of mustering . 
 Constable , as Clerks of the bans . If any make default & fade at the day , he is mulcted , & punished very severely . As for the General & other chief Captains , they are sent thither from the Emperor's own hand , with such Commission & charge as he thinketh behooveful for the present service . When the soldiers are assembled , they are reduced into their bans , & companies , under their several Captains of tennes , fifties , hundreds , thousands , etc. and these bans into 4 Polskeis , or Legions ( but of far greater numbers then the Roman Legions were ) under their foure great Leaders , which also have the authority of Marshals of the field ( as was said before . ) 
 The horse - Concerning their armour they are but slightly appointed . men fuml - The common horseman hath nothing else but his bow in ture ' his case under his right arm , & his quiver & sword hanging on the left side : except some few that bear a case of dagges , or a Javelin , or short staff along their horse side . The under captains will have commonly some piece of armour beside , as a shirt of male , or such like . The General with the other chief captains & men of Nobility will have their horse very richly furnished , their saddles of cloth of gold , their bridles fair bossed & tasseled with gold , & silk fringe , bestudded with pearl & precious stones , themselves in very fair armour , which they call Bullatnoy , made of fair shining steel , yet covered commonly with cloth of gold , and edged round with armin fur , his steel helmet on his head of a very great price , his sword bow and arrows at his side , his spear in his hand , with another fair helmet , and Shesta pera , or horseman's sceptre carried before him . Their swords , bows , and arrows are of the Turkish fashion . They practise like the Tartar to shoot forward and backwards , as they fly and retire . 
 The footmans The Strelsey or footman hath nothing but his piece furniture . jn } ianjj hjs striking hatchet at his back , & his sword by his side . The stock of his piece is not made caliver-wise , but with a plain & strait stock ( somewhat like 382 
 a fouling piece ) the barrel is rudely & unartificially made , very heavy yet shoots but a very small bullet . As for their provision of victual , the Emperor alloweth none , Provision of either for Captain or soldier , neither provideth any for them except peradventure some corn for their money . Every man is to bring sufficient for himself , to serve his turn for foure months , & if need require to give order for more to be brought unto him to the Camp from his tenant that tilleth his land , or some other place . 
 One great help they have , that for lodging and diet every Russe is prepared to be a soldier beforehand . Though the chief Captains & other of account carry tents with them after the fashion of ours , with some better provision of victual then the rest . They bring with them commonly into the Camp for victuali a kind of dried bred , ( which they call Suchary ) with some store of meal , which they temper with water , and so make it into a ball , or small lump of dow , called Tollockno . And this they eat raw in stead of bred . Their meat is bacon , or some other flesh or fish dried , after the Dutch manner . If the Russe soldier were as hardy to execute and enterprise , as he is hard to bear out toil and travel , or were otherwise as apt and well trained for the wars , as he is indifferent for his lodging and diet , he would far exceed the soldiers of our parts . 
 Of their marching , charging , and other Martial discipline . 
 THe Russe trusteth rather to his number , then to the valour of his soldiers , or good ordering of his forces . Their marching or leading is without all order , save that the foure Polskey or Legions , ( whereinto their army is divided ) keep themselves several under their ensigns , & so thrust all on together in a hurrey , as they are directed by their general . Their Ensign is Horsemen's the image of S. George . The Bulsha Dworaney or Cummes . chief horsemen , have every man a small drum of brass 
 383 
 The walking Castle . 
 at his saddle bow , which he striketh when he gives the charge , or onset . 
 They have drums beside of a huge bigness , which they carry with them upon a board laid on foure horses , that are sparred together with chains , every drum having eight strikers , or drummers , beside trumpets and shawmes , which they found after a wild manner , much different from ours . When they give any charge , or make any invasion , they make a great hallow or shout altogether , as loud as they can , which with the found of their trumpets , shawmes , and drums , makes a confused and horrible noise . So they set on first discharging their arrows , then dealing with their swords , which they use in a bravery to shake , and brandish over their heads , before they come to strokes . 
 Their footmen ( because otherwise they want order in leading ) are commonly placed in some ambush or place of advantage , where they may most annoy the enemy , with least hurt to themselves . If it be a set battle , or if any great invasion be made upon the Russe borders by the Tartar , they are set within you running or moving Castle ( called Beza , or Gulaygorod ) which is carried about with them by the Voiavoda gulavoy ( or the walking General ) whom I spoke of before . This walking or moving Castle is so framed , that it may be set up in length ( as occasion doth require ) the space of one , two , three , foure , five , sixe , or seven miles : for so long it will reach . It is nothing else but a double wall of wood to defend them on both sides behind and before , with a space of three yards or thereabouts , betwixt the two sides : so that they may stand within it , and have room enough to charge and discharge their pieces , and to use their other weapons . It is closed at both ends , and made with loop holes on either side , to lay out the nose of their piece , or to push forth any other weapon . It is carried with the army wheresoever it goes , being taken into pieces , and so laid on carts sparred together , and drawn by horse that are not 
 384 
 seen , by reason that they are covered with their carriage as with a shelf or penthouse . When if'is brought to the place where it is to be used ( which is devised and chosen out before by the walking Voiavod ) it is planted so much as the present use requires , sometime a mile long , sometime two , sometime three or more : Which is soon done without the help of any Carpenter , or instrument : because the timber is so framed to clasp together one piece within another : as is easily understood by those that know the manner of the Russe building . 
 In this Castle stands their shot well fenced for advantage , specially against the Tartar , that brings no ordinance , nor other weapon into the field with him , save his sword , and bow , and arrows . They have also within it diverse field pieces , which they use as occasion does require . Of pieces for the field they carry no great store , when they war against the Tartar : but when they deal with the Polonian ( of whose forces they make more account ) they go better furnished with all kind of munition , and other necessary provisions . It is thought that no Prince of Christendome hath better store of munition , then the Russe Emperor . And it may partly appear by the Artillery house at Mosco , where are of all sorts of great Ordinance , all brass pieces , very fair , to and exceeding great number . 
 The Russe soldier is thought to be better at his defence within some castle or town , then he is abroad at a set pitched field . Which is ever noted in the practice of his wars , and namely at the siege of Vobsco , about eight years since : where he repulsed the Polonian king Stepan Batore , with his whole army of iooooo men , and forced him in the end to give over his siege , with the loss of many of his best Captains and soldiers . But in a set field the Russe is noted to have ever the worse of the Polonian and Sweden . 
 If any behave himself more valiantly then the rest , in 385 2 B 
 1580. 
 Reward for valour . 
 or do any special piece of service , the Emperor sends him a piece of gold , stamped with the Image of Saint George on horseback . Which they hang on their sleeves , & set in their caps . And this is accounted the greatest honour they can receive , for any service they do . 
 Of their Colonies , and maintaining of their conquests , or purchases by force . 
 THe Russe Emperor's of late years have very much enlarged their dominions , & territories . Their first conquest after the Dukedom of Mosco , ( for before that time they were but Dukes of Volodomer , as before was said ) was the city , & Dukedom of Novogrod on you West , and Northwest side : which was no small enlargement of their dominion , & strengthening to them for the winning of the rest . This was done by Ivan great grandfather to Theodor now Emperor , about the year 1480. The same began likewise to encroach upon the countries of Lituania and Livonia , but the conquest only intended , & attempted by him , upon some part of those countries , was pursued & performed by his son Basileus , who first won the city & dukedom of Plesko , afterwards the city & dukedom of Smolensco , & many other fair towns , with a large territory belonging unto them , about the year 1514. These victories against the Lettoes or Lituanians , in the time of Alexander their duke , he achieved rather by advantage of civil dissensions , & treasons among themselves , then by any great policy , or force of his own . But all this was lost again by his son Ivan Vasiliwich , about 8 or 9 years past , upon composition with the Polonian king Stephan Batore : whereunto he was forced by the advantages which the Pole had then of him , by reason of the foil he had given him before , and the disquietness of his own state at home . Only the Russe Emperor , at this time hath left him on that side his country , the cities of Smolensco , Vobsco , 386 
 1588. Chernigo , & Bealagorod in Lituania . In Livonia , not Lituania . a town nor one foot of ground . 
 When Basilius first conquered those countries , he suffered then the natives to keep their possessions , and to inhabit all their towns , only paying him a tribute , under the government of his Russe Captains . But by their conspiracies & attempts not long after , he was taught to deal more surely with them . And so coming upon them the second time , he killed and carried away with him , three parts of foure , which he gave or sold to the Tartars that served him in those wars , and in stead of them placed there his Russes , so many as might overmatch the rest , with certain garrisons of strength beside . Wherein notwithstanding this oversight was committed , for that ( taking away with him the upland , or country people that should have tilled the ground , & might easily have be kept in order without any danger , by other good policies ) he was driven afterwards many years together , to vitaile the country ( specially the great towns ) out of his own country of Russia , the soil lying there in the mean while wast , and untilled . 
 The like fell out at the port of Narve in Liefland , Narve . where his son Ivan Vasiliwich devised to built a town , and a castle on the other side the river , ( called Ivangorod ) to keep the town and country in subjection . The castle he caused to be so built and fortified , that it was thought to be invincible . And when it was furnished , for reward to the Architect ( that was a Polonian ) he put out both his eyes , to make him unable to built the like again . But having left the natives all within their own country , without abating their number or strength , the town and castle not long after was betrayed , and surrendered again to the king of Sweden . 
 On the Southeast side , they have god the kingdoms of Cazan , and Astracan . These were won from the Tartar , by the late Emperor Ivan Vasiliwich , the one 
 387 
 Conquest of a 1000 miles . Permia and Pechora . 
 Means of holding chief towns . 
 Means of holding the countries of Pechora , Permia , and Siberia . 
 about thirtie five , the other about thirtie and three years ago . Northward out of the country of Siberia , he hath laid unto his realm a great breadth and length of ground , from Wichida to the river of Obba , about a 1000 miles space : so that he is bold to write himself now , The great Commander of Siberia . The countries likewise of Permia and Pechora are a diverse people and language from the Russe , overcome not long since , and that rather by threatening , and shaking of the sword , then by any actuali force : as being a weak and naked people , without means to resist . 
 That which the Russe hath in his present possession , he keepeth on this sort . In his foure chief border towns of Vobsko , Smolensko , Astracan , and Cazan , he hath certain of his counsel not of greatest nobility , but of greatest trust , which have more authority within their precincts , ( for the countenancing and strengthening of their government there ) then the other Dukes that are set to govern in other places , as was noted before , in the manner of ordering their Provinces . These he changes sometime every year , sometime every second or third year , but exceeds not that time , except upon very speciali trust , and good liking of the party , and his service : lest by enlarging of their time , they might grow into some familiarity with the enemy ( as some have done ) being so far out of sighed . 
 The towns beside are very strongly fenced with trenches , castles , & store of munition , and have garrisons within them , to the number of two or three thousand a piece . They are stored with victual if any siege should come upon them , for the space of two or three years before hand . The foure castles of Smolensko , Vobsko , Cazan and Astracan , he hath made very strong to bear out any siege : so that it is thought that those towns are impregnable . 
 As for the countries of Pechora and Permia , and that part of Siberia , which he hath now under him , they are kept by as easy means , as they were first god . vz . 
 388 0 
 1588. rather by showing , then by using of arms . First , he hath stored the country with as many Russes as there are natives , & hath there some few soldiers in garrison , enough to keep them under . Secondly , his officers & Magistrates there are of his own Russe people , and he changes them very often , vz . every year twice or thrice : notwithstanding there be no great fear of any innovation . Thirdly , he divideth them into many small governments , like a staff broke in many small pieces : so y* they have no strength being severed , which was but Iide neither when they were all in one . Fourthly , he provideth that the people of the country have neither armour , nor money , being taxed & peeled so often as he thinketh good : without any means to shake off that yoke , or to relieve themselves . 
 In Siberia ( where he goes on in pursuing his con - Siberia . quest ) he hath diverse castles & garrisons to the number of 6000 soldiers of Russes & Polonians , & sends many new supplies thither , to plant and to inhabit , as he wins ground . At this time beside he hath got the kings brother of Siberia , allured by certain of his The kings captains , to leave his own country by offers of great entertainment , and pleasanter life with the Russe Emperor , ' then he had in Siberia . He was brought in this last 1588. year , and is now with the Emperor at Mosco well entertained . 
 Of the Tartars , and other borderers to the country of Russia , with whom they have most to do in war , and peace . 
 THeir neighbours with whom they have greatest dealings & intercourse , both in peace & war , are first the Tartar . Secondly the Polonian whom the Russe The Polonians calls Laches , noting the first author or founder of the nation , who was called Laches or Leches , whereunto is e usse ' added Po , which signified ! People , and so is made Polaches , that is , the People or posterity of Laches : 
 389 
 The filing of Mosco by the Chrim Tartar , in the year 1571. 
 which the Latins after their manner of writing call Polonos . The third are the Swedens . The Polonians & Swedens are better known to these parts of Europe then are the Tartars , that are farther off from us ( as being of Asia ) and divided into many tribes , different in name , and government one from another . The greatest and mightiest of them is the Chrim Tartar , ( whom some call the Great Can ) that lies South , & Southeastward from Russia , and does most annoy the country by often invasions , commonly once every year , sometime entering very far within the inland parts . In the year 1571 he came as far as the city of Mosco , with and army of 200000 men , without any battle , or resistance at all , for that the Russe Emperor ( then Ivan Vasiliwich ) leading forth his army to encounter with him , marched a wrong way . The city he took not , but fired the suburbs , which by reason of the buildings ( which are all of wood without any stone , brick , or lime , save certain out rooms ) kindled so quickly , and went on with such rage , as that it consumed the greatest part of the city almost within the space of foure hours , being of 30 miles or more of compass . Then might you have seen a lamentable spectacle : beside the huge & mighty flame of the city all on light fire , the people burning in their houses and streets , but most of all of such as laboured to pass out of the gates farthest from the enemy , where meeting together in a mighty throng , & so pressing every man to prevent another , wedged themselves so fast within the gate , and streets near unto it , as that three ranks walked one upon the others head , the uppermost treading down those that were lower : so that there perished at that time ( as was said ) by the fire & the press , the number of 800000 people or more . 
 The principali cause of this continual quarrel betwixt the Russe & the Chrim is for the right of certain border parts claimed by the Tartar , but possessed by the Russe . The Tartar allegeth that beside Astracan and Cazan 
 390 
 ( that are the ancient possession of the East Tartar ) the whole country from his bounds North and Westward so far as the city of Mosko , and Mosko it self pertaineth to his right . Which seems to have be true Homage done by the report of the Russes them selves , that tell of a certain homage that was done by the Russe Emperor Tartar . every year to the great Chrim or Can , the Russe Emperor standing on foot and feeding the Chrims horse , ( himself sitting on his back ) with oats out of his own cap , in stead of a bowl or manger , and that within the castle of Mosko . And this homage ( they say ) was done till the time of Basileus grandfather to this man . Who surprising the Chrim Emperor by a stratagem done by one of his nobility ( called Ivan Demetro-wich Belschey ) was content with this ransom , viz. with the changing of this homage into a tribute of furs : which afterwards also was denied to be paid by this Emperor's father . 
 Hereupon they continue you quarrel , the Russe defending his country , & that which he hath wone , you Chrim Tartar invading him once or twice every year , sometime about Whitsontide , but oftener in harvest . What time if the great Can or Chrim come in his own person , he brings with him a great army of 100000. or 200000. men . Otherwise they make short & sudden roads into the country with lesser numbers , running about the list of the border as wild geese fly , invading and retiring where they see advantage . 
 Their common practice ( being very populous ) is to The manner of make diverse armies , and so drawing the Russe to one Tartars 
 or two places of the frontiers , to invade at some other and place , that is left without defence . 1 heir manner of fight , or ordering of their forces is much after the Russe manner ( spoken of before ) save that they are all horsemen , and carry nothing else but a bow , a sheaf of arrows , and a falcon sword after the Turkish fashion . They are very expert horsemen , and use to shoot as readily backward , as forward . Some will have a horsmans staff like to a 
 391 
 boar spear , beside their other weapons . The common soldier hath no other armour then his ordinary apparel , viz. a black sheeps skin with the wool side outward in the day time , and inward in the night time , with a cap of the same . But their Morseys or noblemen imitate the Turk both in apparel and armour . When they are to pass over a river with their army , they tie three or foure horses together , and taking long poles or pieces of wood , bind them fast to the tails of their horse : so sitting on the poles they drive their horse over . At handy strokes ( when they join battle ) they are accounted far better men then the Russe people , fierce by nature , but more hardy and bloody by continual practice of war : as men knowing no arts of peace , nor any civil practice . 
 Yet their subtlety is more then may seem to agree with their barbarous condition . By reason they are practised to invade continually , and to rob their neighbours that border about them , they are very pregnant , and ready witted to devise stratagems upon the sudden for their better advantage . As in their war against Beala the fourth , king of Hungarie , whom they invaded with 500000. men , and obtained against him a great victory . Where , among other , having slain his Chancellor called Nicholas Schinick , they found about him the kings privy seal . Whereupon they devised presently to counterfeit letters in the kings name , to the cities and towns next about the place , where the field was fought : with charge that in no case they should convey themselves , and their goods out of their dwellings , where they might abide safely without all fear of danger , and not leave the country desolate to the possession of so vile and barbarous and enemy , as was the Tartar nation , terming themselves in all reproachful manner . For notwithstanding he had lost his carriages , with some few stragglers that had marched disorderly , yet he doubted not but to recover that loss , with the access of a notable victory , if the savage Tartar durst 
 392 
 abide him in the field . To this purpose having written their letters in the Polish character , by certain young men whom they took in the field , and signed them with the Kings seal , they dispatched them forth to all the quarters of Hungaria , that lay near about the place . Whereupon the Ungarians that were now flying away with their goods , wives , and children , upon the rumour of the kings overthrow , taking comfort of these counterfeit letters , stayed at home . And so were made a prey , being surprised on the sudden by this huge number of these Tartars , that had compassed them about before they were aware . 
 When they besiege a town or fort , they offer much parley , and send many flattering messages to persuade a surrendry : promising all things that the inhabitants will require : but being once possessed of the place , they use all manner of hostility , and cruelty . This they do upon a rule they have , vz . that justice is to be practised but towards their own . They encounter not lightly , but they have some ambush , whereunto ( having once showed themselves , and made some short conflict ) they retire as repulsed for fear , and so draw the enemy into it if they can . But the Russe being well acquainted with their practice is more wary of them . When they come a roving with some small number , they set on horseback counterfeit shapes of men , that their number may seem greater . 
 When they make any onset , their manner is to make a great shout , crying all out together Olla Billa , Olla Billa , God help us , God help us . They contemn death so much , as that they choose rather to die , then to yield to their enemy , and are seen when they are slave to bite the very weapon , when they are passed striking or helping of themselves . Wherein appears how different the Tartar is in his desperate courage from the Russe and Turke . For the Russe soldier , if he begin once to retire , putteth all his safety in his speedy flight . And if once he be taken by his enemy , he neither defendeth 393 
 [ I . 488. J 
 himself , nor intreateth for his life , as reckoning straight to die . The Turk commonly , when he is past hope of escaping , falls to intreaty , and casts away his weapon , offereth both his hands , and holds them , as it were to be tied : hoping to save his life , by offering himself bondslave . 
 The chief booty the Tartars seek for in all their wars is to get store of captives , specially young boys , and girls , whom they fell to the Turkes , or other their neighbours . To this purpose they take with them great baskets made like bakers panniers to carry them tenderly , and if any of them happen to tire , or to be sick by the way , they dash him against the ground , or some tree , and so leave him dead . The Soldiers are not troubled with keeping the captives and the other booty , for hindering the execution of their wars , but they have certain bands that intend nothing else , appointed of purpose to receive and keep the captives and the other pray . 
 The Russe borderers ( being used to their invasions lightly every year in the Summer ) keep few other cattle on the border parts , save swine only which the Tartar will not touch , nor drive away with him : for that he is of the Turkish religion , and will eat no swines flesh . Of Christ our Saviour they confess as much as doth the Turke in his Alkaron , viz. that he came of the Angel Gabriel and the Virgin Marry , that he was a great Prophet , and shall be the Judge of the world at the last day . In other matter likewise , they are much ordered after the manner and direction of the Turke : having felt the Turkish forces when he won from them Azov and Caffa , with some other towns about the Euxine or black Sea , that were before tributaries to the Crim Tartar . So that now the Emperor of the Crims for the most part is chosen one of the Nobility whom the Turke doth commend : whereby it is brought now to pass , that the Crim Tartar gives to the Turke the tenth part of the spoil which he gets in his wars against the Christians . 
 394 
 Herein they differ from the Turkish religion , for that they have certain idol puppets made of silk , or like stuff , of the fashion of a man , which they fasten to the door of their walking houses , to be as Janusses or keepers of their house . And these idols are made not by all , but by certain religious women which they have among them for that and like uses . They have beside the image of their King or great Can , of and huge bigness , which they erect at every stage when the army marches : and this every one must bend and bow unto as he passes by it , be he Tartar or stranger . They are much given to witchcraft , and ominous conjectures upon every accident which they hear or see . 
 In making of manages they have no regard of alliance or consanguinity . Only with his mother , sister , and daughter a man may not marry , and though he take the woman into his house , and accompany with her , yet he accounteth her not for , his wife till he have a child by her . Then he begins to take a dowry of her friends of horse , sheep , kine , etc. If she be barren after a certain time , he turns her home again . 
 Under the Emperor they have certain Dukes , The Tartar whom they call Morseis or Divoymorseis , that rule nobilUie . over a certain number of 10000. 20000. or 40000. a piece , which they call Hoards . When the Emperor hath any use of them to serve in his wars , they are bound to come , and to bring with them their Soldiers to a certain number , every man with his two horse at the least , the one to ride on , the other to kill , when it comes to his turn to have his horse eaten . For 7^ Tartar their chief vitaile is horse flesh , which they eat without diet . bred , or any other thing with it . So that if a Tartar be taken by a Russe , he shall be sure lightly to find a horse-legge , or some other part of him at his saddle bow . 
 This last year when I was at the Mosco , came in i ; 88-one Kiriach Morsey , nephew to the Emperor of the Crims that now is ( whose father was Emperor before ) 
 395 
 accompanied with 300. Tartars , and his two wives , whereof one was his brother's widow . Where being entertained in very good sort after the Russe manner , he had sent unto his lodging for his welcome , to be made ready for his supper and his companies , two very large and fat horses , ready flayed in a sled . They prefer it before other flesh , because the meat is stronger ( as they say ) then Beef , Mutton , and such like . And yet ( which is marveile ) though they serve all as horsemen in the wars , and eat all of horse flesh , there are brought yearly to the Mosco to be exchanged for other commodities 30. or 40. thousand Tartar horse , which they call Cones . They keep also great heards of kine , & flocks of black sheep , rather for the skins and milk ( which they carry with them in great bottles ) then for the use of the flesh , though sometime they eat of it . Some use they have of rise , figs , and other fruits . They drink milk or warm blood , and for the most part carded them both together . They use sometime as they travel by the way , to let their horse blood in a vain , and to drink it warm , as it comes from his body . 
 Towns they plant none , nor other standing buildings , but have walking houses , which the latins call Veii , built upon wheels like a shepherds cottage . These they draw with them whithersoever they go , driving their cattle with them . And when they come to their stage , or standing place , they plant their cart houses very orderly in a rank : and so make the form of streets , and of a large town . And this is the manner of the Emperor himself , who hath no other seat of Empire but and Agora , or town of wood , that moves with him whithersoever he goes . As for the fixed and standing building used in other countries , they say they are unwholesome and unpleasant . 
 They begin to move their houses and cattle in the Spring time from the South part of their Country towards the North parts . And so driving on till they 396 
 have grazed all up to the farthest part Northward , they return back again towards their South country ( where they continue all the Winter ) by io . or 12. miles a stage : in the mean while the grass being sprung up again , to serve for their cattle as they return From the border of the Shalcan towards the Caspian sea , to the Russe frontiers , they have a goodly Country , specially on the South and Southeast parts , but lost for lack of tillage . 
 Of money they have no use at all , and therefore prefer brass and steel before other metals , specially bullate , which they use for swords , knives , and other necessaries . As for gold and silver they neglect it of very purpose , ( as they do all tillage of their ground ) to be more free for their wandering kind of life , and to keep their Country less subject to invasions . Which gives them great advantage against all their neighbours , ever invading and never being invaded . Such as have taken upon them to invade their Country ( as of oldetime Cyrus and Darius Hystaspis , on the East and Southeast side ) have done it with very ill success : as we find in the stories written of those times . For their manner is when any will invade them , to allure and draw them on by flying and reculing ( as if they were afraid ) till they have drawn them some good way within their country . Then when they begin to want victuali and other necessaries ( as needs they must where nothing is to be had ) to stop up the passages , and enclose them with multitudes . By which stratagem ( as we read in Laonicus Chalcacondylas in his Turkish story ) they had wellnigh surprised the great and huge army of Tamerlan , but that he retired with all speed he could towards the river Tanais or DONE , not without great loss of his men , and carriages . 
 In the story of Pachymerius the Greek ( which he wrote of the Emperor's of Constantinople from the beginning of the reign of Michael Palaeologus to the time of Andronicus the elder ) I remember he telleth to the same purpose of one Nogas a Tartarian captain 397 
 Pachy merits . 
 under Cazan the Emperor of the East Tartars ( of whom the city and kingdom of Cazan may seem to have taken the denomination ) who refused a present of Pearl and other jewels sent unto him from Michael Palaeologus : asking withal , for what use they served , and whither they were good to keep away sickness , death , or other misfortunes of this life , or no . So that it seems they have ever , or long time be of that mind to valve things no further , then by the use and necessity for which they serve . 
 For person and complexion they have broad and flat visages , of a tanned colour into yellow and black , fierce and cruel looks , thin haired upon the upper lip , and pit of the chin , light and nimble bodied , with short legs , as if they were made naturally for horsemen : whereto they practise themselves from their childhood , seidome going afoot about any business . Their speech is very sudden and loud , speaking as it were out of a deep hollow throat . When they sing you would think a kowe lowed , or some great bandog howled . Their greatest exercise is shooting , wherein they train up their children from their very infancy , not suffering them to eat till they have shot near the mark within a certain scantling . They are the very same that sometime were called Scythae Nomads , or the Scythian shepherds , by the Greeks and Latines . Some think that the Turks took their beginning from the nation of the Crim Tartars . Of which opinion is Laonicus Call - Laonicus Calcocondylas the Greek Historiographer , in cocmdylas . £rst book of Turkish story . Wherein he i follows diverse very probable conjectures . The first taken from the very name it self , for that the word Turk signifies a Shepherd or one that follows a vagrant and wild kind of life . By which name these Scythian Tartars have ever been noted , being called by the Greeks aKvQai vo / naSes or the Scythian shepherds . 
 2 His second reason because the Turkes ( in his time ) that dwelled in Asia the less , to wit , in Lydia , Caria , 398 
 Phrygia and Cappadocia , spoke the very same language that these Tartars did , that dwelled betwixt the river Tanais or DONE , and the country of Sarmatia , which ( as is well known ) are these Tartars called Crims . At this time also the whole nation of the Turkes differ not much in their common speech from the Tartar language . Thirdly because the Turke and the Crim Tartar agree so well together , as well in religion , as in matter of traffic never invading , or inurying one another : save that the Turke ( since Laonicus his time ) hath encroached upon some Towns upon the Euxin Sea , that before pertained to the Crim Tartar . Fourthly , because Ortogules son to Oguzalpes , and father to Otoman the first of name of the Turkish nation made his first roads out of those parts of Asia , upon the next borderers , till he came towards the countries' about the hill Taurus , where he overcame the Greeks that inhabited there : and so enlarged the name and territory of the Turkish nation , till he came to Eubaea and Attica , and other parts of Greece . This is the opinion of Laonicus , who lived among the Turkes in the time of Amurat the sixt Turkish Emperor , about the year 1400. when the memory of their originali was more fresh : and therefore the likelier he was to hit the truth . 
 There are diverse other Tartars that border upon Russia , as the Nagayes , the Cheremissens , the Mordwites , the Chircasses , and the Shalcans , which all differ in name more then in regiment , or other condition , from the Crim Tartar , except the Chircasses that border Southwest , towards Lituania , and are far more civil than the rest of the Tartars , of a comely person , and of a stately behaviour , as applying themselves to the fashion of the Polonian . Some of them have subjected themselves to the Kings of Poland , and profess Christianitie . The Nagay lies Eastward , and is reckoned for the best man of war among all the Tartars , but very savage , and cruel above all the rest . The Cheremessen Tartar , that lies betwixt the Russe and the Nagay , are of two 399 
 3 
 4 
 1400. 
 The Nagay Tartar the cruelest . 
 The Chircasce the cimllest Tartar . 
 The Cheremissen Tartar of two sorts : the Lugavoy and the Nagornay . 
 sorts , the Lugavoy ( that is of the valley ) and the Nagornay , or of the hilly country . These have much troubled the Emperors of Russia . And therefore they are content now to buy peace of them , under pretence of giving a yearly pension of Russe commodities to their Morseys , or Divoymorseis , that are chief of their tribes . For which also they are bound to serve them in their wars , under certain conditions . They are said to be just and true in their dealings : and for that cause they hate the Russe people , whom they account to be double , and false in all their dealing . And therefore the common sort are very unwilling to keep agreement with them , but that they are kept in by their Morseis , or Dukes for their pensions sake . 
 The Mordwlt The most rude & barbarous is counted tne iviorawit ost^arbar Tartar , that hath many self-fashions and strange kinds luso / theZest . of behaviour , differing from the rest . For his religion , though he acknowledge one God , yet his manner is to worship for God , that living thing ill he first meeteth in the morning , & to swear by it all that whole day , whither it be horse , dog , cat , or whatsoever else it be . When his friend dieth , he kills his best horse , and having flayed off the skin he carrieth it on high upon a long pole before the corpses to ' the place of burial . This he doth ( as the Russe sayeth ) that his friend may have a good horse to carry him to heaven : but it is likelier to declare his love towards his dead friend , in that he will have to die with him the best thing that he hath . 
 Next to the kingdom of Astracan , that is the farthest part Southeastward of the Russe dominion , lies the Shalcan , and the country of Media : whither the Russe merchants trade for raw silks , syndon , saphion , skins , and other commodities . The chief Towns of Media where the Russe tradeth , are Derbent ( built by Alexander the great , as the inhabitants say ) and Zamachi where The reviving the staple is kept for raw silks . Their manner is in of silkworms . the Spring time to 
 revive the silkworms ( that lie dead all the Winter ) by laying them in the warm 
 400 
 Liberty to trade down the Caspian 
 OF THE TARTARS a.d. 
 1588. sun , and ( to hasten their quickening that they may sooner go to work ) to put them into bags , and so to hang them under their children's arms . As for the worm called Chrinisin ( as we call it Chrymson ) Chrinisin a that makes coloured silk , it is bred not in Media , but kind of silkin Assyria . This trade to Derbent and Samachi for raw silks , and other commodities of that Country , as also into Persia , and Bougharia down the river of Volga , and through the Caspian sea , is permitted aswell to the English as to the Russe merchant's , by the Emperors last grant at my being there . Which he accounteth 
 for a very speciali favour , and might prove indeed very beneficial ! to our English merchant's , if the trade were well and orderly used . 
 The whole nation of the Tartars are utterly void of all learning , and without written Law : yet certain rules they have which they hold by tradition , common to all the Hoards for the practice of their life . Which are of this sort . First , To obey their Emperor and other 1 Magistrates , whatsoever they command about the public service . 2 Except for the public behoof , every 2 man to be free and out of controlment . 3 No private 3 man to possess any lands , but the whole country to be as common . 4 To neglect all daintiness and 4 variety of meats , and to content themselves with that which comes next to hand , for more hardness , and readiness in the executing of their affairs . 5 To wear 5 any base attire , and to patch their clothes whither there be any need or not : that when there is need , it be no shame to wear a patched coat . 6 To take 6 or steal from any stranger whatsoever they can get , as being enemies to all men , save to such as will subject themselves to them . 7 Towards their own hoorde and nation to be true in word and deed . 8 To suffer no stranger to come within the Realm . If any do , the same to be bondslave to him that first takes him , except such merchant's and other as have the Tartar Bull , or passport about them . 
 in 401 2 c 
 7 
 8 
 No stranger without passport admitted . 
 The Samoits religion . 
 Slata Baba or the golden Hag. 
 A fable . 
 The Sea. 
 Of the Permians , Samoites , and Laps . 
 THe Permians and Samoites that lie from Russia , North and Northeast , are thought likewise to have taken their beginning from the Tartar kind . And it may partly be guessed by the fashion of their countenance , as having all broad and flat faces as the Tartars have , except the Chircasses . The Permians are accounted for a very ancient people . They are now subject to the Russe . They live by hunting , and . trading with their furs , as also doth the Samoit , that dwells more towards the North Sea. The Samoit hath his name ( as the Russe says ) of eating himself : as if in times past , they lived as you Cannibals , eating one another . Which they make more probable , because at this time they eat all kind of raw flesh , whatsoever it be , even the very carrion that lies in the ditch . But as the Samoits themselves will say , they were called Samoie , that is , of themselves , as though they were Indigenae , or people bred upon that very soil , that never changed their seat from one place to another , as most nations have done . They are subject at this time to the Emperor of Russia . 
 I talked with certain of them , and find that they acknowledge one God : but represent him by such things as they have most use and good by . And therefore they worship the Sun , the Ollen , the Losh , and such like . As for the story of Slata Baba , or the Golden hag , ( which I have read in some maps , and descriptions of these countries , to be and idol after the form of and old woman ) that being demanded by the Priest , gives them certain Oracles , concerning the success , and event of things , I found it to be a very fable . Only in the Province of Obdoria upon the sea side , near to the mouth of the great river Obba , there is a rock , which naturally ( being somewhat helped by imagination ) may seem to bear the shape of a ragged woman , with a child in her arms ( as the rock by the 
 402 
 North Cape the shape of a Friar ) where the Obdorian Samoites use much to resort , by reason of the commodity of the place for fishing : and there sometime ( as their manner is ) conceive , and practise their sorceries , and ominous conjecturings about the good or bad speed of their journeys , fishings , huntings , and such like . 
 They are clad in Seal skins , with the hairy side outward down as low as the knees , with their breeches and netherstockes of the same , both men and women . They are all black haired , naturally beardless . And therefore , the men are hardly discerned from the women by their looks : save that the women wear a lock of hair down along both their ears . They live in a manner a wild and savage life , roving still from one place of the country to another , without any property of house or land more to one then to another . Their leader or directer in every company , is their Papam or Priest . 
 On the North side of Russia next to Corelia , lies The Laps . the country of Lappia , which reaches in length from the farthest point Northward , ( towards the Northcape ) to the farthest part Southeast ( which the Russe calls Sweetness or Holy nose , the English men Capegrace ) about 345. versed or miles . From Sweetness to Candelox by the way of Versega ( which measureth the breadth of that country ) is 90. miles or thereabouts . The whole country in a manner is either lake's , or mountains , which towards the Sea side are called Tondro , because they are all of harden and craggy rock , but the inland parts are well furnished with woods that grow on the hills sides , the lake's lying between . Their diet is very bore and simple . Bred they have none , but feed only upon fish and foul . They are subject to the Emperor • of Russia , and the two kings of Sweden and Denmarke : which all exact tribute and custom of them ( as was said before ) but the Emperor of Russia bears the greatest hand over them , and exacteth of them far more then the rest . The opinion is that they were 
 403 
 The Samoits habit and behaviour . The people of Meta Incognita such . 
 first termed Laps of their brief and short speech . The Russe divides the whole nation of the Laps into two sorts . The one they call Nowremanskoy Lapary , that is , the Norvegian Laps because they be of the Danish religion . For the Danes and Norvegians they account for one people . The other that have no religion at all but live as bruit and heathenish people , without God in the world , they call Dikoy Lapary , or the wild Laps . 
 The whole nation is utterly unlearned , having not so much as the use of any Alphabet , or letter among them . For practice of witchcraft and sorcery they pass all nations in the world . Though for enchanting of ships that sail along their coast , ( as I have herd it reported ) and their giving of winds good to their friends , and contrary to other , whom they mean to hurt by tying of certain knots upon a rope ( somewhat like to the tale of Aeolus his windbag ) is a very fable , devised ( as may seem ) by themselves , to terrify sailors for coming near their coast . Their weapons are the long bow , and handgunne , wherein they excel , aswell for quickness to charge and discharge , as for nearness at the mark by reason of their continual practice ( whereto they are forced ) of shooting at wild fowl . Their manner is in Summer time to come down in great companies to the sea side , to Wardhuyse , Cola , Kegor , and the bay of Vedagoba , and there to fish for Codde , Salmon , & But-fish , which they sei to the Russes , Danes , & Norvegians , and now of late to the English men that trade thither with cloth , which they exchange with the Laps & Corelians for their fish , oil , and furs , whereof also they have some store . They hold their mars at Cola on S. Peters day : what time the captain of Wardhuyse ( that is resiant there for the king of Denmark ) must be present , or at least send his deputy to set princes upon their stockfish , train oil , furs , and other commodities : as also the Russe Emperor's customer , or tribute taker , to receive his custom , which 
 404 
 OF THE NORTH AND EAST REGIONS a.d. 
 1588. 
 is ever paid before any thing can be bought or sold . When their fishing is done , their manner is to draw their carbasses or boats on shore , and there to leave them with the keel turned upwards , till the next spring tide . Their travail to and from is upon sleds SWx drawn drawn by the Olen Dear : which they use to turn mth Deere-a grazing all the Summer time in and Island called Kildyn , ( of a very good soil compared with other parts of that Country ) and towards the Winter time , when the snow begins to fallen they fetch them home again for the use of their sled . 
 