A letter to the right worshipful M. John Dee Esquire , containing the sum and effect of M. Edward Garland his message , delivered to Master Dee himself , ( Letterwise ) for a more perfect memoriali thereof . Anno 1586. 
 Right worshipful , it may please you to understand , that I was sent unto you from the most mighty Prince Feodor Ivanowich , Lord , Emperor and great duke of Russia , etc. As also from the most excellent prince Boris Feodorowich , Lord Protector of Russia : to give your 
 worship to understand the great good will and hearty desire they bear unto you ; for that of long time they have had great good report of your learning & wisdom , as also of your good counsel unto Princes : whereupon his Majesties most earnest desire and request is unto you ; that you would take the pains to come unto his City of Mosco , to visit his Majesties Court : for that he is desirous of your company , and also of your good counsel in diverse matters that his Majesty shall think needful . And for the great goodwill that his Majesty bears unto you , he will give you yearly towards your maintenance 2000. pound starling ; and the Lord Protector will give you a thousand rubbles , as also your provision for your table you shall have free out of his Majesties kitchen : And further whatsoever you shall think needful or convenient for you , in any part or parts of his dominion , it shall be at your worships commandment . And this is the sum and effect of my message and commandment given me by his Majesty and the Lord Protector . 
 In witness whereof I have written this with my own hand , the 17. of December 1586. 
 By me Edward Garland . 
 In Trebona Castle otherwise called Wittingaw in 447 
 BoSmia : to which place this M. Edward Garland came to M. Dee with two Moscovites to serve him , etc. He had sixe more , which by M. Dees counsel were sent back . 
 Witness M. Edward Kelley , and M. Francis Garland , brother to the foresaid Edward , and diverse others . 
 IT seems that this princely offer of the Emperor Pheodor Ivanowich , and of the L. Boris Pheodorowich Protector to his Majesty , was made unto the learned and famous Mathematitian M. John Dee , partly to use his counsel & direction about certain discoveries to the Northeast ; and partly for some other weighty occasions : but because their conquest to Siberia was not as then fully settled , & for diverse other secret reasons , it was for y‘ time with all thankfulness refused . 
 