The Lord Boris Pheodorowich his letter to the Right Honourable William Burghley Lord high Treasurer of England , etc. 
 Y the grace of God the great Lord Emperor , and great Duke Theodore Ivano-wich , great Lord , King , and great Duke of all Russia , of Volodemer , Mosco , and Novogorod , king of Cazan , and Astracan , Lord of Vobsko , and great Duke of Smolensco , Tver , Ughori , Permi , Viatsko , 
 Bolgorie , and other places , Lord and great Duke of Novogrod in the Low Country , of Chernigo , Rezan , The Emperor's Polotsky , Rostove , Yeroslave , Bealozera , and Liefland , style increased . 
 419 
 of Oudorski , Obdorski , Condinski , and commander of all Sibierland , and the North coasts , great Lord over the Country of Iverski , Grisinski , Emperor of Kabar-dinski , and of the Country Charchaski , and the Country of Gorsky , and Lord of many other regions . 
 From Boris Pheodorowich his Majesties brother in law , master of his horses , governor of the territories of Cazan and Astracan , to William Lord Burghley , Lord high Treasurer to the most virtuous Lady Elizabeth , Queen of England , France , and Ireland , and other dominions : I received your Lordship's letters , wherein you write that you have received very joyfully my letters sent unto you , and advisedly read them , and imparted the same unto her Majesty : and that your Merchant's find themselves aggrieved , that when they approach these parts , and are arrived here , they are not permitted to enter into a free and liberali course of barter , traffic , and exchange of their commodities , as heretofore they have done , but are compelled before they can enter into any traffic to accept the Emperors wax , and other goods , at high rates far above their valve , to their great loss : and that they are by reason of this restraint long held upon these coasts to the danger of wintering by the way . Hereafter there shall no cause of offence given to the Merchants of the Queens Majesty Queen Elizabeth : they shall not be forced to any thing , neither are there or shall be any demands made of custom or debts . Such things as have been heretofore demanded , all such things have been already upon their petition and supplication commanded to be discharged . I have solicited his Majesty for them , that they be not troubled hereafter for those matters , and that a favourable hand be carried over them . And according to your request I will be a mean to the Emperor for them in all their occasions , and will my self show them my favourable countenance . And I pray you ( William Burghley ) to signify to her Majesties Merchant's that I promise to have a care of 
 420 
 LETTER FROM BORIS PHEODOROWICH a.d. 
 159° . 
 them , and for the Queens Majesty of Englands sake , I will take her Merchant's into my protection , and will defend them as the Emperors selected people under the Emperor's commission : and by mine appointment all his Majesties officers and authorized people shall be careful over them . The Emperor's gracious favour towards them was never such as it is now . And where you write that at the port the Emperor's Officers fell their wax by commission at a set rate given them , far above the valve , and that they enforce your Merchants to accept it , they deny that they take any such course , but say they barter their wax for other wares , and also put their wax to sale for ready money to your Merchant's , according to the worth thereof , and as the price goes in the custom house here . It hath been heretofore deer , and now is sold as good cheap as in any other place , and as they can best agree : they enforce no man to buy it , but rather keep it : therefore your Merchants have no just cause to make any such report . I have expressly given order , that there shall be no such course used to enforce them , but to buy according to their own wills , and to tarry at the port or to depart at their pleasure . And as touching the customs already past , and debts demanded at your Merchant's hands , whereof you write : Our Lord great Emperor and great Duke Theodore Ivanowich of all Russia of famous memory hath showed his Majesties especial favour and love , for the great love of his well-beloved sister Queen of England , and by my petition and mediation , whereas there was commandment given to take Marshes whole debt of your Merchant's and factors , it is moderated to the half , and for the other half , commandment given it should not be taken , and the Merchant's bills to be delivered them . And to the end hereafter that her Majesties Merchants move no contention betwixt our Lord the Emperor and great Duke of Russia , and his well-beloved sister Queen Elizabeth , his Majesty desires order to be given , that 
 English Merchants in great favour with the Emperor . 
 Half the debt of Antony Marsh remitted . 
 421 
 your Merchants do deal justly in their traffic , and plainly without fraud or guile . And I will be a favourer of them above all others , under his Majesties authority : Ann. Dam. themselves shall see it . Written in our great Lord the I59O > Emperors city of Mosco in the month of July , 7°99 - 
 1590. 
 