A learned Epistle written 1581. unto the famous Cosmographer M. Gerardus Mercator concerning the river Pechora , Naramsay , Cara reca , the mighty river of Ob , the place of Yaks Olgush in Siberia , the great river Ardoh , the lake of Kittay called of the borderers Paraha , the Country of Carrah Colmak , giving good light to the discovery of the Northeast passage to Cathay , China and the Maluca's . 
 IT Inclyto & celebri Gerardo Mercatori , domino & amico singulari in manus proprias Duisburgi in Clivia . 
 Um meminissem , amice optime , quantam , cum una ageremus , delectatione affi-cerere in legendis Geographicis scriptis Homeri , Strabonis , Aristotelis , Plinii , Dionis & reliquorum , laetatus sum eo quod incidissem in hunc nuncium , qui tibi has literas tradit , quem tibi come - 
 mendatum esse valde cupio , quique dudum Arusburgi hic ad Ossellam fluvium appulit . Hominis experientia , ut mihi quidem videtur , multum te adjuverit in re una , eaque summis a te votis expetita , & magnopere elaborata , de qua tam vary inter se dissentiunt Cos-mographi recentiores ; patefactione nimirum ingentis illius Promontorii Tabin , celebrisque illius & opulentae regionis sub Cathayorum rege per Oceanum ad Orientem brumalem . Alferius is est nation Belga , qui captivus aliquot annos vixit in Moscovitarum ditione , apud viros illic celeberrimos Yacovium & Unekium ; a quibus Antuerpiam missus est accersitum homines rei nauticae peritos , qui satis amplo proposito praemio ad illos viros se recipiant ; qui Suevo artifice duas ad eam patefac-45® 
 LETTER TO GERARDUS MERCATOR a.d. 1581. 
 tionem naves aedificarunt in Duina fluvio . Ut ille remembering Dua naves proponit , quamquam sine arte , apposite tamen , & ut in satis intelligas , quod quaeso diligenter perpendas , aditus 
 ad Cathayam per Orientem proculdubio brevissimus est tionem Orien-& ; admodum expeditus . Adiit ipse fluvium Obam tum talem . 
 terra per Samoedorum & Sibericorum regionem , tum mari per littus Pechorae fluminis ad Orientem . Hac experientia confirmatus certo apud se statuit navim mercibus onustam , cujus carinam non nimium profunde demissam esse vult , in Sinum S. Nicolai conducere in region Moscovitarum , instructam illam quidem rebus omnibus ad eam patefactionem necessariis , atque illic redintegrato commeatu , Moscoviticae nationis notissimos justa mercede asciscere : qui & Samoedicam linguam pulchre teneant , & fluvium Ob exploratum habeant , ut qui quotannis ea loca ventitant . Unde Maio exeunte constituit pergere ad Orientem per continentem Ugoriae ad Orientales parts Pechorae , Insulamque cui nomen 
 est Dolgoia . Hic latitudines observare , terram des - Dolgoialnsula . cribere , bolidem demittere , locorumque ac punctorum distantias annotare , ubi & quoties licebit . Et quoniam Pechorae Sinus vel euntibus vel redeuntibus commodissimus est tum subsidii tum diversorii locus propter glaciem & tempestates , diem impendere decrevit cognoscendis vadis , facillimoque navium aditu inveniendo : quo loco antehac aquarum altitudinem duntaxat ad quinque pedes invenit , sed profundiores canales esse non dubitat : deinde per eos fines pergere ad tria quatuorve milliaria nautica , relicta Insula quam Vaigats Insula Vai-vocant , media fere via inter Ugoriam & Novam Zem - sats ' blame : tum Sinum quendam praeterire inter Vaigats S* ” ™ inter atque Obam , qui per Meridiem vergens pertingit ad sats W 
 TT’^ . r n ° .. s . » Obam vergens 
 terram Ugoriae , in quem confluunt exigui duo amnes per meridlem . II Marmesia atque Carah , ad quos amnes gens alia | | Vel Naram-Samoedorum accolit immanis & eflerata . Multa in eo say Cara tractu loca vadosa , multas cataractas invenit ; sed tamen reca ' per quas possit Navigari . Ubi ad fluvium Obam perventum fuerit , qui quidem fluvius ( ut referunt Samoedi ) 
 451 
 Littus Oba incolitur ab Ostiis trium dierumitinere . 
 Yaks Oldish locus super Obam fluvium duodecim dierum itinere a mari . 
 Ardoh flumen influens in lacum Kit-thaym . • de quo in itinere ad Boghariam scribit Antonius Jenkin - 
 sonas . 
 septuaginta habet ostia , quas propter ingentem latitudinem multas magnasque concludentem Insulas , quas varii incolunt populi , vix quisquam animadvertat , ne temporis nimium impendat , constituit ad summum tria quatuorve tentare ora , ea prasserim quae ex consilio Incolarum , quos in itinere aliquot habiturus est , commodissima videbuntur , triaque quatuorve ejus regionis navigiola tentandis Ostiis adhibere , quam fieri potest ad littus proxime , ( quod quidem sub itinere trium dierum incolitur ) ut quo loco tutissime navigari possit , intelligat . 
 Quod si navim per fluvium Obam adverso amne possit impellere , prima si poterit cataracta , eaque , ut verisimile est , commodissima , ad eumque locum appellere , quem aliquando ipse cum suis aliquot per Sibericorum regionem terra adiit , qui duodecim juxta dierum itinere distat a Mari , qua influit in mare flumen Ob , qui locus est in continent , prope fluvium Ob cui nomen est Yaks Olgush , nomine mutuato ab illo magno Profluente flumini Ob illabente , tum certain speraret maximas se difficultates superasse . Referunt enim illic populares , qui trium duntaxat dierum navigation ab eo loco abfuerunt ( quod illic rarum est , eo quod multi ad unum duntaxat diem cymbas pelliceas a littore propellentes oborta tempestate perierunt , cimi neque a sole neque a syderibus rectionem scirent petere ) per transversum fluminis Ob , unde spaciosum esse illius latitudinem constat , grandes se carinas praeciosis onustas mercibus magno fluvio delatas vidisse per Nigros , puta TEthiopes . Eum fluvium Ardoh illi vocant , qui influit in lacum Kittayum , quem Paraha illi nominant , cui contermina est gens illa latissimi fusa , quam Carrah Colmak appellant , non alia certain quam Cathaya . Illic , si necessitas postulabit , opportunum erit hybernare , se suosque reficere , resque omnes necessarias conquirere . Quod si acciderit , non dubitat interim plurimum se adjutum iri , plura illic quaerentem atque ediscentem . Veruntamen sperat aestate eadem ad Cathayorum fines se perventurum , nisi ingenti glaciei mole ad os fluvii 
 452 
 Obse impediatur , quae major interdum , interdum minor est . Tum per Pechoram redire statuit , atque illic hybernare : vel si id non poterit , in flumen Duinae , quo mature satis pertinget , atque ita primo vere proximo in itinere progredi . Unum est quod suo loco oblitus sum . Qui locum illum Yaks Olgush incolunt , a majoribus suis olim praedicatum asserunt , se in lacu Kitthayo dulcissimam campanarum harmoniam audivisse , atque ampla aedificia conspexisse : Et cum gentis Carrah Carrah Col-Colmak mentionem faciunt ( Cathaya illa est ) ab imo e ! tO Cath ' pectore suspiria repetunt , manibusque projectis suspiciunt in coelum , velut insignem illius splendorem innuentes atque admirantes . Utinam Alferius hic Cosmographiam melius saperet , multum ad illius usum adjungeret , qui sane plurimus est . Multa praetereo , vir amicissime , ipsumque hominem te audire cupio , qui mihi spospondit se in itinere Duisburgi te visurum . Avet enim tecum confer sermons , & procul dubio hominem multum adjuveris . Satis instructus videtur pecunia & gratia , in quibus aliisque officiis amicitiae feci illi , si vellet , mei copiam . Deus Optimus maximus hominis votis atque alacritati faveat , initia secundet , successus fortunet , exitum fcelicissimum concedat . Vale amice ac Domine singularis . 
 Arusburgi ad Ossellam fluvium 20. Februarii 1581. 
 Tuus quantus quantus sum Joannes Balakus . 
 To the famous and renowned Gerardus Mere - [ I - 511J cator , his Reverend and singular friend at Duisburgh in Cliveland , these be delivered . 
 CAlling to remembrance ( most deer Friend ) what exceeding delight you took at our being together , in reading the Geographical writings of Homer , Strabo , Aristotle , Plinie , Dion , and the rest , I rejoiced not a little that I happened upon such a messenger as the bearer of these presents , ( whom I do especially recom - 
 453 
 Two ships built upon the river of Dwina for the Northeast discovery . 
 mend unto you ) who arrived lately here at Arusburg upon the river of Osella . This men experience ( as I am of opinion ) will greatly avail you to the knowledge of a certain matter which hath be by you so vehemently desired , and so curiously laboured for , and concerning thee which the late Cosmographers do hold such variety of opinions : namely , of the discovery of the huge promo ntorie of Tabin , and of the famous and rich countries' subject unto the Emperor of Cathay , and that by the Northeast Ocean sea . The man is called * Alferius being by birth a Netherlander , who for certain years lived captive in the dominions of Russia under two famous men Yacovius and Unekius , by whom he was sent to Antwerp to procure skilful Pilots and Mariners , ( by propounding liberali rewards ) to go unto the two famous personages aforesaid , which two had set a Sweden Shipwright on work to built two ships for the same discovery upon the river of Dwina . The passage unto Cathay by the Northeast ( as he de-clareth the matter , albeit without art , yet very aptly , as you may well perceive , which I request you diligently to consider ) is without doubt very short and easy . This very man himself hath traveled to the river of Ob , both by land , through the countries' of the Samoeds , and of Sibier , and also by Sea , along the coast of the river Pechora Eastward . Being encouraged by this his experience he is fully resolved with himself to conduct a Bark laden with , merchandise ( the keel whereof he will not have to draw over much water ) to the Bay of Saint Nicholas in Russia , being furnished with all things expedient for such a discovery , and with a new supply of victuals at his arrival there , and also to hire into his company certain Russes best known unto himself , who can perfectly speak the Samoeds language , and are acquainted with the river of Ob , as having frequented those places year by year . 
 Whereupon about the end of May he is determined to sail from the Bay of S. Nicholas Eastward , by the 
 454 
 main of Joughoria , and so to the Easterly parts of Pechora , & to the Island which is called Dolgoia . And Island of here also he is purposed to observe the latitudes , to Dol&ia . survey and describe the country , to found the depth of the Sea , and to note the distances of places , where , and so oft as occasion shall be offered . And forasmuch 
 as the Bay of Pechora is a most convenient place both for harbour and victuali , as well in their going forth as in their return home in regard of Ice and tempest , he is determined to bestow a day in sounding the Flats , and in searching out the best entrance for ships : in which place heretofore he found the water to be but five foot deep , howbeit he doubteth not but that there are deeper channels : and then he intends to proceed on along those coasts for the space of three or foure leagues , leaving the Island called Vaigats almost in the middle Island of way between Ugoria and Nova Zembla : then also to Vaigats . pass by a certain Bay between Vaigats and Ob , trend - Baie being Southerly into the land of Ugoria , whereinto fallen 
 two small rivers called * Marmesia and Carah , upon the trending which rivers do inhabit and other barbarous and savage Southerly : nation of the Samoeds . He found many Flats in that * Or , Naram-tract of land , and many cataracts or overfals of water , Cara yet such as he was able to sail by . When he shall ' come to the river of Ob , which river ( as the Samoeds report ) hath seventie mouths , which by reason of the huge breadth thereof containing many and great Islands , which are inhabited with sundry sorts of people , no man scarcely can well discover , because he will not spend too much time , he purposes to search three or foure at the most of the mouths thereof , those chiefly which shall be thought most commodious by the advice of the inhabitants , of whom he means to have certain with him in his voyage , and means to employ three or foure boats of that Country in search of these mouths , as near as possibly he can to the shore , which within three days journey of the Sea is inhabited , that he may learn where the river is best navigable . If it 
 455. 
 The place up - so fallen out that he may sail up the river Ob against h stream , and mount up to that place which heretofore was ItL e accompanied with certain of his friends , he passed unto days journey by land through the country of Siberia which is about from you twelve days journey from the Sea , where the river Ob mouths there - failed into the Sea , which place is in the Continent near catted Yaks river Ob , and is called Yaks Olgush , borrowing his Olgish . name from that mighty river which falls into the river Ob , then doubtless he would conceive full hope that he had passed the greatest difficulties : for the people dwelling thereabouts report , which were three days sail - ing only from that place beyond the river Ob , whereby the breadth thereof may be gathered ( which is a rare matter there , because that many rowing with their boats of leather one days journey only from the shore , have be cast away in tempest , having no skill to guide themselves neither by Sun nor Star ) that they have seen great vessels laden with rich and precious merchandise brought down that great river by black or M. Jenkinson swart people . They call that river * Ardoh , which falls ^Bo^har^ * unto Kittay , which they call Paraha , where - 
 speaks of the uPon bordereth that mighty and large nation which they river Ardok . call Carrah Colmak , which is none other then the nation of Cathay . There , if need require , he may fitly Winter and refresh himself and his , and seek all things which he shall stand in need of : which if it so fallen out , he doubteth not but in the mean while he shall be much furthered in searching and learning out many things in that place . Howbeit , he hopeth that he shall reach to Cathaya that very Summer , unless he be hindered by great abundance of Ice at the mouth of the river of Ob , which is sometime more , and sometime less . If it so fallen out , he then purposes to return to Pechora , and there to Winter : or if he cannot do so neither , then he means to return to the river of Dwina , whither he will reach in good time enough , and so the next Spring following to proceed on his voyage . One thing in due place I foregate before . 
 45$ 
 The people which dwell at that place called Yaks Olgush , affirm that they have herd their forefathers say , that they have herd most sweet harmony of bells in the lake of Kitthay , and that they have seen therein stately and large buildings : and when they make mention of the people nam Carrah Colmak ( this country is Cathay ) they fetch deep sighs , and holding up their hands , they look up to heaven , signifying as it were , and declaring the notable glory and magnificence of that nation . I would this Oliver were better seen in Cosmography , it would greatly further his experience , which doubtless is very great . Most deer friend , I omit many things , and I wish you should hear the man himself which promised me faithfully that he would visit you in his way at Duisburg , for he desires to confer with you , and doubtless you shall very much further the man . He seems sufficiently furnished with money and friends , wherein and in other offices of courtesy 1 offered him my furtherance if it had pleased him to have used me . The Lord prosper the men desires and forwardness , bless his good beginnings , further his proceedings , and grant unto him most happy issue . Fare you well good sir and my singular friend . From Arusburg upon the river of Ossella , the 20. of February , 1581. 
 Yours wholly at commandment , John Balak . 
 MAster Anthonie Jenkinson in a disputation before her Majesty with sir Humfrey Gilbert for proof of a passage by the Northeast to Cathaya , among other things allegeth this : videlicet , that there came a continual stream or currant through Mare glacial , of such swiftness as a Colmak told him , that if you cast any thing therein , it would presently be carried out of sighed towards the West , etc. 
 