A brief and true report of the Honourable voyage unto Cadiz , 1596. of the overthrow of the kings Fleet , and of the winning , sacking , and burning of the City , with all other accidents of moment , thereunto appertaining . 
 Fter that the two most Noble and Renowned Lords Generals : The L. Robert Earl of Essex , and the L. Charles Howard L. High Admiral of England , were come unto Plymmouth ( which was about the beginning of May last , 1596. ) being there accompanied with diverse 
 other noble Peers , as the Earl of Sussex , the L. Thomas Howard , the L. Harbert , the L. Warden Sir Walter Raleigh : the L. Marshal Sir Francis Vere : the L. Burk , DONE Christopher young Prince of Portingall , young Count Lodovick of Nassaw , and the Admiral of the Hollanders , Sir John Vanderfoord : beside many other most worthy Knights and Gentlemen of great worth attending upon this most honourable Actium : It pleased them , there to make their abided for the time of that month , as well for the new furnishing and revictualing of her Majesties Royal Navy : as also for the expecting of some other ships , which were to come from diverse places of the Realm , and were as yet wanting : making that place as it should seem the Rendezvous for all the whole Fleet , thereto complete the full number of all such companies both for sea and land : as was in their noble and deep wisdoms thought meet and agreed upon . 
 236 
 All the time of this their abided there , there was a most zealous and diligent care had for the holy service of God , daily and reverently to be frequented : and also for other good and civil order of military discipline to be observed , to the exceeding great comfort and rejoicing of all the hearts of the godly and well disposed . 
 And for that it might the better appear , that there was small hope of pardon to be expected of the offenders , if they did at any time neglect their duties , about due observation of matters of importance : Their order , laws , and decrees being once published : about the 8. or 9. of the same month , there were two offenders executed a little without the town , in a very fair pleasant green , called the Ho : the one for beginning of a mutiny in his company , the other for running away from his Colours . 
 And about the same time in the Dutch Regiment , and other for murdering of one of his companions , about a quarrel between themselves , rising as it was supposed , upon their drink , was by order of Martial ! law , presently tied to the party so murdered , and forthwith both of them so cast into the sea . 
 Moreover , about the 28. of the same month , a certain Lieutenant ( whose name I will forbear ) was by found of Drum publicly in all the streets disgraced , or rather after a sort disgraded , and cashiered for bearing any farther Office at that time , for the taking of money by way of corruption , of certain pressed soldiers in the Country , and for placing of others in their rooms , more unfit for service , and of less sufficiency and ability . This severe executing of justice at the very first did breed such a deep terror in the hearts of the whole army , that it seemed to cut off all occasion of the like disorder for ever afterwards to be attempted . 
 And here before their departure from Plymmouth , it pleased their Lordship's to publish in print , and make known to all the world , especially to such as whom it concerned , and that both in the Latin , French , Dutch , 
 237 
 English and Spanish tongue , what were the true , just , and urgent causes , that at this time provoked her Majesty , to undertake the preparing and setting forth of this so great a Navy , annexing thereunto a foil declaration , what was their good will and pleasure should be done and performed of all them that meant not to incur their own private present dangers , or else were willing to avoid her Majesties future indignation and displeasure . 
 Likewise now , at the same instant , their own most provident and godly decrees , which they had devised for the honest carriage of every particular person in their degrees and vocation , were made known to all men , and published in sundry writings , with diverse great punishments , set down and appointed for the wilful offenders and breakers of the same . 
 Thus then , all things being in very good order and well appointed , the most holy name of our Omnipotent God being most religiously and devoutly called upon , and his blessed and sacred Communion being diverse times most reverently and publicly celebrated : These two most noble personages , with all their honourable Associates , and most famous worthy Knights , Gentlemen , Captains , Leaders , and very willing and expert Soldiers , and Mariners , being furnished with 150. good sail of ships or thereabouts : In the name of the most High & everliving God , and with all true and faithful obedience , to her sacred Majesty , to the infinite good and tranquilli tie of our Country , and to the perpetuali glory , and triumphant renown of the eternal memory of their honourable names to all posterity , the first day of June embarked themselves , weighed Anchor , and hoised up sail , and put to sea onward their journey from the Sounds of Plymmouth . 
 The wind , at the first setting forth , seemed very favourable : but yet in the evening growing very scant , and all that night falling more and more against us , and we having sailed no further then to a certain place 238 
 called Dodman head : we were constrained the next day , to make our return to the road of Plymmouth again , and there in the Sounds to lie at anchor for that night . 
 About this time , and in this very place , by good fortune there came to my hands a prayer in English , touching this present Actium , and made by her Majesty , as it was voiced : The prayer seemed to me to be most excellent , aswell for the matter , as also for the manner , and therefore for certain diverse good motives which then presently came to my mind , and whereof hereafter in his more convenient time and place , I will make farther mention , I presumed at that very instant to translate it into Latin . 
 The Prayer is thus . 
 MOst Omnipotent maker and guide of all our world's mass , that only searchest and fadomest the bottom of all our hearts conceits , and in them seest the true originals of all our actions intended : thou that by thy foresight dost truly discern , how no malice of revenge , nor quittance of injury , nor desire of bloodshed , nor greediness of lucre hath bred the resolution of our now set out Army , but a heedful care , & wary watch , that no neglect of foes , nor over-surety of harm might breed either danger to us , or glory to them : these being the grounds wherewith thou dost inspire the mind , we humbly beseech thee with bent knees , prosper the work , and with best forewindes guide the journey , speed the victory , and make the return the advancement of thy glory , the triumph of their fame , and surety to the Realm , with the least loss of the English blood . To these devout petitions Lord give thou thy blessed grant . 
 My homely translation is thus . 
 Sum praepotens Deus , immensae hujus totius nostri mundi molis fabricator & Rector , qui solus perscrutaris intimos cordis nostri sensus , & ad fundum usque nostrarum cogitationum explorando penetras , ac in eis , 239 
 quid ver^ , & ex animo cogitemus , & quae sint actionum nostrarum rationes , ac fundamenta , cognoscis : Tu , qui ea , quae in te est , ab omni aeternitate praescientia , vides , quod nec aliqua ulciscendi malitiosa cupiditas , nec injuriarum referendarum , desiderium , nec sanguinis effundendi sitis , nec alicujus lucri , quaestusve aviditus ad istam classem praeparandam , & emittendam nos commoverit : sed potiiis , quod provida quaedam cura , solersque vigilantia huc nos impulerit : ne vel inimicorum nostrorum neglectus , vel status nostri firmitatis nimium secura cogitatio , aut illis gloriam & honorem , aut nobis damnum & periculum pariat : Cum , inquam , haec sint nostri , quicquid attentatur , negotii fundamenta : cumque tu hunc nobis animum , mentemque injeceris , ut istud aggrederemur : curvatis genibus a te humillimi petimus , ut velis hoc nostrum incoeptum secundissimi fortunare , totum iter prosperrimis flatibus dirigere , celerem & expeditam victoriam nobis concedere , reditumque talem nostris militibus elargiri , qualis & nomini tuo incrementum gloriae , & illis famae , laudisque triumphum , & Regno nostro firmam tranquillitatem possit apportare : idque cum minimo Anglorum sanguinis dispendio . His nostris religiosis petitionibus concede , Domine , sacrosanctam & annuentem voluntatem tuam . 
 After that we had anchored at Plymmouth that night , as I have said , the third of June very early in the morning , having a reasonable fresh gale of wind , we set sail , and kept our course again , and the ninth of the same month coming something near to the North cape , in a manner in the same altitude , or not much differing , which was about xliii . degrees , and something more , yet bearing so , as it was impossible to be descried from the land : There it pleased the Lords to call a select Council , which was always done by hanging out of a flag of the arms of England , and shooting ofF of a great warning piece . Of this select or privy Council , were no more then these : The two Lords general , 
 240 
 the Lord Thomas Howard , the Lord Warden Sir Walter Raleigh , the Lord Martiali Sir Francis Vere , Sir George Carry master of the Ordinance , Sir Coniers Clifford , and Sir Anthony Ashley , Clarke of the said Counsel . And when it pleased the Lords general to call a common Counsel ( as often times they did upon weighty matters best known to their honours ) then they would cause and other kind of flag to be hanged out , which was the Redcrosse of S. George , and was very easy to be discerned from the other that appertained only to the select Counsel , and so often as this flag of Saint George was hanged out , then came all the Master's and Captains of all the ships , whose opinions were to be demanded , in such matters as appertained unto this said select Counsel : It was presently concluded , that our course in sailing should forthwith be altered , and that we should bear more into the West , for some purposes to them best known . 
 At that very instant many letters of instructions were addressed and sent to every particular Master and Captain of the Ships : What the contents of those letters of instructions were it was not as yet known unto any , neither was it held meet to be inquired or known of any of us . But under the titles and superscriptions of every men particular letter these words were endorsed . Open not these letters on pain of your lives , unless we chance to be scattered by tempest , and in that case open them , and execute the contents thereof : but if by mishap you fallen into your enemies hand , then in any case cast them into the sea , sealed as they are . It should seem that these letters did contain in them the principali place and meaning of this intended actium , which was hitherto by their deep foresights kept so secret , as no man to my knowledge either did , or could so much as suspect it , more then themselves , who had the only managing thereof . A conceit in my judgement of greatest moment in the world , to effect any matter of importance . I mean , to entertain those two 
 iv 241 Q 
 virtues , Fidem , & Taciturnitatem : so much commended by the old writers . And if there was ever any great designment , in this our age , and memory , discreetly , faithfully , and closely carried , I assure my self it was this , and though it were but in respect of that point only : yet for such faithful secrecy , it deserveth immortali praise . 
 All this while , our ships , God be thanked , kept in a most excellent good order , being divided into five squadrons : that is to say , The Earl of Essex , the Lord Admiral , the Lord Thomas Howard , the Lord Warden Sir Walter Raleigh , and the Admiral of the Hollanders . All which squadrons , albeit they did every day separate themselves of purpose , by the distance of certain leagues , as well to look out for such ships as were happily under sail , as also for the better procuring of sea-room : yet always commonly either that day , or the next day , toward evening , they came all together , with friendly salutations and gratulations one to and other : which they term by the name of Hailing : a ceremony done solemnly , and in very good order , with found of Trumpets and noise of cheerful voices : and in such sort performed as was no small encouragement one to the other , beside a true report of all such accidents , as had happened in their squadrons . 
 Hitherto , as I said , our journey was most prosperous , and all our ships in very good plighted , more then that the Marry Rose , by some mischance , either sprang or spent her foreyarde , and two days after Sir Robert Cross had in a manner the like mischance . 
 Now being thus between the North cape , and cape S. Vincent , and yet keeping such a course a loof , that by no means , those from the shore might be able to descry us : The tenth of June , a French Bark , and a Fleming coming from the coast of Barbarie were brought in by some of our company : but they were both of them very honourably and well used by the Lords general : and so after a few days tarrying , were 242 
 1596. peaceably sent away , after that they had conferred with them about such matters , as was thought good in their honourable wisdoms . 
 The twelfth of the same month , Sir Richard Levison Knight , assisted with Sir Christopher Blunt , fought with three Hamburgers , and in that fight slew two of them , and hurt eleven , and in the end brought them all three in : and this was the very first handsel and maidenhead ( as it were ) of any matter of importance , or exploit worthy observation that was done in the way outward of this honourable voyage , and was so well performed of those most worthy Gentlemen , as every man highly commended them for their great valour , and discretion , and no less rejoiced at this their fortunate success . 
 The next day after , Sir Richard Weston meeting with a Flemming , who refused to vale his foretop , with the like good courage and resolution , attempted to bring him in . The fight continued very hight between them , for a good space : in the end the Swan , wherein the said Sir Richard was , had her fore-beake strooken off : and having spent before in fight the one side of her tire of Ordinance , while she prepared to cast about , and to bestow on him the other side , in the mean time the Fleming taking this opportunity , did get almost half a league from him : and so for that time made his escape . And yet the next day after , the said Flemming being in a manner god to the very mouth of the River up to Lisbone , was taken , and brought in by M. Dorrell , being Captain of the John and Francis of London . Thus by dividing their squadrons , and spreading the whole sea over a mighty way , there could not so much as the least pink pass but she was espied and brought in . 
 The 13. 14. and 15. days , certain little straggling Caravels were taken by certain of the Fleet , and in one of them a young beggarly Fryer utterly unlearned , with a great packet of letters for Lisbon : the poor wretches were marvellously well used by the Lords 
 243 
 general , and that Caravel , and the like still as they were taken were commanded to give their attendance , and their Honours did understand what they might of these poor men , of the estate of Spaine for that present . 
 About this time and in this place it was , that first in all my life time I did see the flying fish , who when they are hardly pinched and chased by the Bonitoes and other great fish , then to avoid the danger , they presently mount up , and forsake the water , and betake themselves to the benefit of their wings and make their flight , which commonly is not above five or sixe score , or there about , and then they are constrained to fallen down into the water again , and it is the Mariners opinion that they can fly no longer then their wings be wet . The fish it self is about the bigness of a Mack-rell or a great white Hearing , and much of that colour and making , with two large wings shaped of nature very cunningly , and with great delight to behold , in all the world much like to our Gentlewomen's dutch Fans , that are made either of paper , or parchment , or silk , or other stuff , which will with certain plights easily run and fold themselves together . One of these flying fish was presented to my L. Admiral by a fisher man , and newly taken in his L. return from Cadiz , and then I had good leisure and opportunity to view it . 
 The 18. day early in the morning we took and Irish man , and he came directly from Cadiz , having been there but the day before at twelve of the clock at high noon . This man being examined , told truly that there was now great store of shipping at Cadiz , and with them xviii . or xix . galleys in a readiness , and that among those ships there were diverse of the kings best : and namely , that the Philip of Spaine was among them , but what their intent was , he could not tell . This man was commanded also to give his attendance . 
 The 20. of June being Sunday , we came before Cadiz very early in the morning , and in all this time as yet , the whole Navy had not lost either by sickness or by any 244 
 other manner of ways sixe men to my knowledge : as for the Dutch company , I am not able precisely to say what happened there , for that they were no part of our charge to be looked unto , but were a regiment entire of themselves , and by themselves to be provided for , either for their diet , or for the preservation of their healths by physic . 
 Thus then I say , being all in good plighted and strong , the 20. of June we came to Cadiz , and there very early in the morning presented our selves before the Town , riding about a league or something less , from it . The sea at that instant went marvelous high , and the wind was exceeding large . Notwithstanding , a Council being called , our Lords general forthwith attempted with all expedition to land some certain companies of their men at the West side of the Town , by certain long boats , light horsemen , pynnesses , and barges made for the purpose , but could not compass it , and in the attempting thereof , they chanced to sink one of their Barges , with some foure score good soldiers well appointed in her , and yet by good hap and great care , the men were all saved excepting viii . And therefore they were constrained to put off their landing till and other more convenient time . 
 That morning very timely , there lighted a very fair dove upon the main yard of the L. Admirals ship , and there she sat very quietly for the space of 3. or 4. hours , being nothing dismayed all that while , every man gazed and looked much upon her , and spoke their minds and opinions , yet all concluding by no means to disquiet her : I for my part , took it for a very good omen and boding , as in truth ( God be thanked ) there fell out nothing in the end to the contrary . And as at our very first coming to Cadiz this chanced , so likewise on the very last day of our departing from the same town , another Dove presented her self in the self same order into the same ship , and presently grew wonderful tame and familiar to us all , and did so still keep us company , even till our arrival here in England . 
 245 
 We no sooner presented our selves , but presently a goodly sort of tall Spanish ships came out of the mouth of the Bay of Cadiz , the Galleys accompanying them in such good order , and so placed as all of them might well succour each other , and therewithal ! kept themselves very close to their town , the castle , and the forts , for their better guard and defence , abiding there still , and expecting our farther determination . All that day passed , being very rough and boisterous , and little or nothing could be done , more then that about the evening there passed some friendly and kind salutations sent one from the other in warlike manner , by discharging certain great pieces , but to my knowledge no hurt done at all , or else very little . 
 A careful and diligent watch was had all that night through out the whole army , and on monday morning being the 21. day , the wind and weather being become moderate and favourable , between five and sixe of the clock in the morning , our ships in the name of almighty God , and in defence of the honour of England , without any farther delay , with all speed , courage , and alacrity , did set upon the Spanish ships , being then under sail , and making out of the mouth of the Bay of Cadiz , up towards Puente de Suago on Granada side , being in number lix . tall ships , with xix . or xx . Galleys attending upon them , sorted in such good order , and reasonable distance as they might still annoy us , and always relieve themselves interchangeably : having likewise the Castle , Forts , and Town , continually to assist them and theirs , and always ready to play upon us and ours . 
 In most men's opinions it seemed that the enemy had a wondered advantage of us , all circumstances being well weighed , but especially the straightness of the place , and the natural form and situation of the Bay it self , being rightly considered . For albeit the very Bay it self is very large and exceeding beautiful , so that from Cadiz to Port S. Marry , is some vi . or vii . English miles over or there about , yet be there many rocks , shelves , sands 246 
 and shallows in it , so that the very channel & place for sea room , is not above 2. or 3. miles , yea and in some places , not so much , for the ships of any great burden , to make way in , but that they must either be set on ground or else constrained to run fowl one on another . All this notwithstanding , with great and invincible courage , the Lords generail presently set upon them , and sorting out some such convenient ships , as to their honourable wisdoms seemed fittest for that times service , they were driven to take some other course then before had been by them intended . Wherefore upon a grave consultation had by a select Counsel , what great dangers might ensue upon so mighty a disadvantage as appeared in all probability , if it were not by good and found judgement prevented , & therewithal in their singular wisdoms foreseeing that some great stratagem might be practised by the enemy , either by firework , or some other subtle politic devise , for the hazarding of her Majesties ships of honour in so narrow a place , thus with all expedition they concluded that the Viceadmiral , the L. Thomas Howard , that most noble L. Howard ( whose exceeding great magnanimity , courage , & wisdom , joined with such and honourable kind of sweet courtesy , bounty , and liberality , as is not able by me & my weakness to be expressed , hath won him all the faithful loving hearts of as many as ever have had any manner of dealing with him ) This L. Thomas , I say , in you Non Pareille for that time , & the Rear Admiral Sir Walter Raleigh ( a man of marvelous great worth & regard , for many his exceeding singular great virtues , right fortitude & great resoluteness in all matters of importance ) in the Warspight associated with diverse most famous worthy knights , namely , Sir Francis Vere the L. Martiali in the Rainbow , Sir George Carry M. of the Ordinance , in the Marry rose , Sir Robert Southwell in the Lion , gentlemen for all laudable good virtues , and for perfect courage & discretion in all military actions , of as great praise & good desert as any gentlemen of their degree whosoever , 
 247 
 having with them some of you ships of London , and some of the Dutch squadron of reasonable burden , should lead the dance , & give the onset , and that the two most noble Lords generail with some others of their companies , should in their convenient time & order , second the main battle . The fight being begun and grown very hight , the L. general the Earl of Essex , ( whose infinite princely virtues , with triumphant fame , deserve to be immortalized ) being on Port S. Marry side , upon a sudden & unlocked for of others , thrust himself among the foremost into the main battle . The other most honourable L. general ( whose singular virtues in all respects are of such and excellency & perfection , as neither can my praise in any part increase them , nor any men envy any whit blemish or diminish them ) understanding , the most noble Earl to be in fight among them , & perceiving by the M. of his ship , the Ark royal , that for lack of water , it was not possible , that he might put any nearer , without farther delay , called presently for his Pynnesse , and in the same Pynnesse put himself , and his honourable son L. William Howard that now is , aboard the Honour de la mer , & there remained in the fight till the battle was ended . The fight was very terrible , and most hideous to the beholder by the continual discharging of those roaring thundering great pieces , on all sides , and so continued doubtful till about one or two of the clock in the afternoon : about which time the Philip , whom in very truth , they had all most fancy unto , began to yield and give over , her men that remained alive shifting for themselves as they were able , and swimming and running a shore with all the haste that they could possibly , & therewithal ! , at the very same instant themselves fired their ship , and so left her , & presently thereupon a great Argosy , with and other mighty great ship , fired themselves in you like manner . Immediately hereupon , the residue of the ships , ran them - selves on ground , as far from us as they could , and thereby purchased their own safety , or rather breathing 
 248 
 / n^n and fJrytna / ty Henry Cornelius V ] * oom . 
 / / / . » - Lt / hyraph from and angtnal Letter tn the Pofjteffian rf 
 John Thane . 
 space for the time . Of them all two fair ships only were boarded and taken by our men with most part of their furniture in them , the one called S. Matthy , a ship by estimation of some xii . hundred tun , and the other S. Andrew , being a ship of not much lesser burden . The Galleys , seeing this sudden great victorious overthrow , made all the haste they could towards the Bridge called Puente de Sua ? oh , and there shrouded themselves in such sort as our ships could not by any means possible come nigh them for lack of water . 
 The Spanish ships in all were lix . & as is said , all tall ships & very richly furnished and well appointed , whereof some of them were bound for the Indies , and other freighted and furnished for Lisbon , as themselves affirm : and had we not come that very time that we did , ( which for my part , I do not attribute so much unto mere chance , as to some secret deep insight and foreknowledge of the two most worthy Lords general , who no doubt spared for no cost or labour for true intelligence ) we had certainly missed of them all . 
 Of what great wealth and riches these ships were , that I leave to other men's judgement and report , but sure I am , that themselves offered two millions and a half of ducats for the redemption of the goods and riches that were in them : which offer of theirs , albeit it was accepted of the Lords general , and should have been received , yet we were defeated of it , as hereafter shall be more at large declared . 
 What manner of fight this was , & with what courage performed , and with what terror to the beholders continued , where so many thundering tearing pieces were for so long a time discharged , I leave it to the Reader to think & imagine . Yet such was the great mercy & goodness of our living God , that in all this cruel terrible fight , in the end , there were not either slain or hurt by any manner of means ( excepting one mischance that happened , whereof I will by & by make mention ) many above the number of 100. of our men : notwithstanding 
 249 
 diverse of our ships were many times shot thorough and thorough : yea and some of them no less then two and twentie times , as I was informed by credible report of the Captains and Master's themselves . I know not of any other hurt done , saving only that Sir Robert Southwell , who always showed himself a most valiant resolute knight in all this actium , making a little too much haste with his Pinnace to board the Philip , had there his said Pinnace burned with the Philip at the same instant , and yet by good care and diligence his men were saved . 
 One other mischance ( as I said ) there happened , and it was thus : One of the Flemings flyboats , who had , in all the conflict before , carried himself very well and valiantly , about ten of the clock while the fight continued sharpest , chanced by great negligence and misfortune , to be fired and blown up by his own powder , who could not have any fewer in him , then one hundred fighting men by all supposal , and so in the very twinkling of and eye , both ship and men were all cast away , excepting vii . or viii . which by very good fortune , and great care and diligence of some of the other ships were saved . 
 Immediately upon this notable victory without any farther stay in all the world , the Lord general the Earl of Essex put to shore , and landed about 3000. shot , & pikemen : of the which number the one half was presently dispatched to the bridge Puente de Sua ? oh , under the conduct of three most famous worthy knights , Sir Christopher Blunt , Sir Coniers Clifford , & Sir Thomas Gerard : with the other half , being about fifteene hundred , the most noble Earl of Essex himself , being accompanied with diverse other honourable Lords , namely the Earl of Sussex , the Lord Harbert , the Lord Burk , Count Lodovick of Nassaw , the Lord Martiali Sir Francis Vere , with many other worthy Knights , and men of great regard , who all in that days service did most valiantly behave themselves , with all expedition 250 
 possible marched on foot towards the town of Cadiz , which was about three English miles march . That time of the day was very hight and faint and the way was all of dry deep sliding sand in a manner , and beside that , very uneven , and by that means so tiresome and painful as might be . The enemy having reasonable company both of horse and footmen , stood in a readiness some good distance without the town to welcome us , and to encounter the Lord general . But the most famous Earl with his valiant Troops , rather running in deed in good order , then marching , hastened on them with such unspeakable courage and celerity , as within one hours space and less , the horsemen were all discomfited and put to flight , their leader being strooken down at the very first encounter , whereat the footmen being wonderfully dismayed and astonished at the unexpected manner of the Englishmens kind of such fierce and resolute fight , retired themselves with all the speed possible that they could , to recover themselves into the Town again , which being done by them , with far swifter legs then manly courage , our men were inforced to scale the walls : which thing in very deed , although it was not without great danger and difficulty to be performed : Yet such was the invincible resolution , and the wonderful dexterity of the English , that in one half hour or thereabouts , the enemy was repulsed , and the town wall possessed , by the noble Earl himself , being in all this actium , either the very first man or else in a manner joined with the first . 
 The town walls being then possessed , and the English Ensign being there displayed upon them , with all speed possible they proceeded on to march through the town , making still their way with sword and shot so well as they could , being still fought withal at every turn . 
 Immediately upon this most famous entry , the noble Earl , ( according to their resolutions , as I take it , put 
 251 
 down before ) was seconded by the noble L. Admiral in person , who was accompanied , with the noble L. Thomas Howard , the most worthy gentleman his son , now L. Howard , Sir Robert Southwell , Sir Richard Levison , and with diverse other gentlemen , his L. followers of good account : his colours being advanced by that valiant resolute gentleman , ( a man beautified with many excellent rare gifts , of good learning and understanding ) S. Edward Hobby Knight . And thus he likewise marching with all possible speed on foot , notwithstanding his L. many years , the intolerable heat for the time , and the overtiring tedious deep sands , with other many impediments : Yet in good time , joined himself with the Earl and his companies , and gave them the strongest , and best assistance that he could . 
 Thus then the two Lords general with their companies being joined together , and proceeding so far as the market place , there they were hotly encountered , where and at what time , that worthy famous knight Sir John Winkfield , being soar wounded before on the thigh , at the very entry of the town , and yet for all that no whit respecting himself , being carried away with the care he had to encourage and direct his company , was with the shot of a musket in the head most unfortunately slain . 
 And thus before eight of the clock that night were these two most noble Lords General , Master's of the market place , the forts , and the whole Town and all , only the Castle as yet holding out , & from time to time as they could , still annoying them with seven battering pieces . By this time night began to grow on , and a kind of peace or intermission was obtained by them of the Castle : to whom the Lords general had signified : that unless before the next day in the morning they would absolutely render themselves , they should look for no mercy , but should every one be put to the sword : upon which message they took deliberation that night : but in the morning before break of day 252 
 they hanged out their flag of truce , and so without any further composition did yield themselves absolutely to their mercy , and delivered up the Castle . 
 And yet notwithstanding all this , in the night time while they had this respite to pause , and deliberate about the peacemaking , there were diverse great and sudden alarms given : which did breed some great outrages and disorder in the town . At every which alarm , the two Lords general showed themselves marvelous ready & forward , insomuch that at the very first alarm , skant well furnished with any more defence then their shirts , hose , and doublets , & those too altogether in a manner untied , they were abroad in the streets themselves , to see the uttermost of it . But for that it is not as yet very well known ( or at the least not well known unto me ) either wherefore , or by whom these alarms were attempted : I am therefore to entreat , that a bore report , that such a thing was done , may suffice . 
 These things being done , and this surrender being made , present proclamation was published , that the fury now being passed , all men should surcease from all manner of blood and cruel dealing , and that there should not kind of violence or hard usage be offered to any , either man , woman or child , upon pain of death : And so permitting the spoil of so much of the town as was by them thought meet , to the common soldiers for some certain days , they were continually in counsel about other grave directions , best known to their honourable wisdoms . 
 This honourable and merciful Edict I am sure was streightly and religiously observed of the English : But how well it was kept by the Dutch , I will neither affirm , nor yet deny . For I perceive between them and the Spaniards there is and implacable heartburning , and therefore as soon as the Dutch squadron was espied in the fight , immediately thereupon both they of Sivil and S. Lucar and also some of some other places did not only arrest all such Dutch ships , as dealt with them friendly 253 
 by the way of traffic & Merchandise , and so confiscated their goods , but also imprisoned the Merchants and Owners of the same , and , as the report goes , did entreat many of them with extreme cruelty thereupon . 
 In the mean while the very next day being the two and twenty day of June , all the Spanish ships which were left on ground in the Bay of Cadiz , where the great overthrow had been but the day before , were by the Spaniards themselves there set on fire , and so from that time forward they never left burning of them , till every one of them , goods and all , as far as we know were burned and consumed . This their doing was much marveled at of us , and so much the more , for that , as I said before , there had be made some offer for the redemption and saving of the goods , and it was not to them unknown that this their offer was not misliked , but in all probability should have be accepted . The common opinion was , that this was done either by the appointment of the Duke de Medina Sidonia , or else by express commandment from the higher powers . 
 Not long after the same time ( three days as I remember ) the galleys that were run on ground , did quit themselves also out of that place , and by the bridge of the Hand called Puente de Sua ? oh , made their way round about the same Hand , and so by putting themselves to the main sea , escaped to a town called Rotta , not far off , but something up towards the Town of Saint Lucars , and there purchased their safety by that means . 
 Thus was this notable victory , as well by sea as by land , both begun and in effect performed , within the compass , in a manner , of fourteene hours : A thing in truth so strange and admirable , as in my judgement will rather be wondered at then believed of posterity . And if ever any notable exploit in any age was comparable to Caesars Veni , Vidi , Vici , certainly in my poor opinion it was this . 
 2S4 
 Here it is to be wished ( and perchance of some too it is looked for ) that every men particular worthy act in this days service , with the parties names also , should be put down , that thereby both they and their good deserts might be registered to all posterity : and for my part I would it were so , and wish I were able to do it . But for that I confess it is a matter that passes my power , yea , and for that I think it also a thing impossible to be precisely performed by any other , I am to crave pardon for that I rather leave it out altogether , then presume to do it maimedly : and in this point I refer the Reader only to the Map that is set forth of this journey , where it is in some part conveniently touched and specified . 
 The Town of it self was a very beautiful town , and a large , as being the chief See of the Bishop there , and having a goodly Cathedral Church in it , with a right goodly Abbey , a Nunnery , and and exceeding fine College of the Jesuites , and was by natural situation , as also by very good fortification , very strong , and tenable enough in all men's opinions of the better judgement . Their building was all of a kind of hard stone , even from the very foundation to the top , and every house was in a manner a kind of a fort or Castle , altogether flat-roofed in the top , after the Turkish manner , so that many men together , and that at ease , might walk thereon : having upon the house top , great heaps of weighty stones piled up in such good order , as they were ready to be thrown down by every woman most easily upon such as passed by , and the streets for the most part so exceeding narrow , ( I think to avoid the intolerable great heat of the Sun ) as but two men or three at the most together , can in any reasonable sort march through them , no street being broader commonly then I suppose Watling street in London to be . 
 The town is altogether without glass , excepting the Churches , yet with fair comely windows , and with fair grates of iron to them , and have very large folding leaves 255 
 of wainscot or the like . It hath very few Chimneys in it , or almost none at all : it may be some one chimney in some one or other of the lower out rooms of lest account , serving for some necessary uses , either to wash in , or the like , or else now and then perchance for the dressing of a dish of meat , having , as it should seem unto me , always a greater care and respect how to keep themselves from all kind of great heat , then how to provide for any store of great roast . It had in it by report of them that should best know it , some foure thousand and more , of very good able fighting men , and sixe hundred horsemen at the least . No question but that they were well furnished of all things appertaining thereunto , especially so many good ships lying there , and being so well stored with all manner of munition , shot , and powder , as they were . 
 Whither they had knowledge of our coming or not , I can say nothing to it : Themselves give it out that they understood not of it , but only by a Caravel the Friday at evening before we came . But whither they knew it or no , thus much I dare boldly affirm , that if the English had be possessed of that or the like Town , and had be but half so well provided as they were , they would have defended it for one two months at the least , against any power whatsoever in all Christendome . But surely GOD is a mighty GOD , and hath a wonderful secret stroke in all matters , especially of weight and moment . Whither their hearts were killed at the mighty overthrow by sea , or whither they were amazed at the invincible courage of the English , which was more then ordinary , caring no more for either small shot or great , then in a manner for so many hailstones , or whither the remorse of a guilty conscience towards the English nation , for their dishonourable and devilish practises , against her Sacred Majesty , and the Realm , ( a matter that easily begetteth a faint heart in a guilty mind ) or what other thing there was in it I know not , but be it spoken to their perpetuali shame and infamy , 256 
 there was never thing more resolutely performed of the courageous English , nor more shamefully lost of the bragging Spaniard . 
 Of what wealth this town should be , I am not able to resolve the asker : for I confess that for mine own part , I had not so much good luck , as to be partaker so much as of one penny , or penny worth . Howbeit my ill fortune makes that town never a whit the poorer . But as it should appear by the great pillage by the common soldiers , and some mariners too , and by the goodly furnitures , that were defaced by the baser people , and thereby utterly lost and spoiled , as not worth the carrying away , and by the over great plenty of Wine , Oil , Almonds , Olives , Raisins , Spices , and other rich grocery wares , that by the intemperate disorder of some of the rasher sort were knocked out , and lay trampled under feet , in every common high way , it should appear that it was of some very mighty great wealth to the first owners , though perchance , not of any such great commodi tie to the last subduers , for that I judge that the better part was most ryotously and intemperately spent and consumed . A disorder in mine opinion very much to be lamented , and if it might be by any good means remedied , in my conceit , it were a most honourable device . 
 The Wednesday , Thursday , and Friday following , the Lords general spent in counsel , about the disposing of all matters , aswell touching the town and prisoners , as also concerning all other matters , thought meet of them in their honourable wisdoms , and in all that mean while did show such honourable bounty and mercy , as is not able to be expressed . For not only the lives of every one were spared , but also there was and especial care had , that all the Religious , as well men as women , should be well and favourably entreated , whom freely without any manner of ransom or other molestation , they caused to be safely transported over to Port Saint Marry , a town in a manner as fair as Cadiz : but at that time , 
 iv 257 R 
 as the case did stand , certainly known to be of no wealth in the world , and it was some sixe or seven miles distant over against Cadiz , in a manner as Paules is against Southwarke , on the other side of the Bay , in a part of Andaluzia , subject to the territory of the Duke de Medina Sidonia . 
 Moreover , at the same instant they did appoint that worthy knight Sir Amias Preston , and some others in some convenient Barks , to transport over to the said Town safely and in good order , a hundred or more of the better sort of ancient gentlewomen , and merchants wives , who were suffered to put upon themselves , some of them two , yea , some three suits of apparel , with some convenient quanti tie of many Jewels , Chains , and other ornaments belonging to their estate and degree . Such was the heroical liberality , and exceeding great clemency , of those most honourable Lords general , thereby , as it should seem unto me , beating down that false surmised opinion , which hath be hitherto commonly spread abroad , and settled among the Spaniards : which is , That the English do trouble them and their countries , more for their gold , riches and pearl etc. then for any other just occasion . Whereas by these their honourable dealings it is manifest to all the world , that it is only in respect of a just revenge for the manifold injuries , and most dishonourable practises that have been from time to time attempted by them against us and our nation , and also in the defence of the true honour of England : which they have sought , and daily do seek , by so many sinister and reproachful devices , so much as in them lies , to deface . 
 Upon Saturday being the 26. Sir John Winkfield knight was buried , in honourable and warlike manner , so far forth as the circumstances of that time and place could permit . At whose funerals the Navy discharged a great part of their Ordinance , in such order , as was thought meet and convenient by the Lords Generals commandment . 
 258 
 The twenty seventh day being Sunday , in the Abbey the divine service was had , and a learned Sermon was made there by one Master Hopkins , the right honourable Earl of Essex his Preacher , a man of good learning and sweet utterance , and even there the same day , something before the sermon was made , these worthy Gentlemen following were knighted by the Lords General . And here I am to signify by the way that two of these were knighted three or foure days before , and some three or foure more were knighted after that time , upon certain occasions : but yet I hold it best ( and I trust without offence ) to recite their names in this place altogether . 
 The names of such noble men and gentlemen , as I1 - 6l6 - ] were knighted at Cadiz in June 1596 by the two most honourable Lords general . 
 Olr Samuel Bagnol . Sir John Leigh , alias Lee. June 21. 22. 
 O Sir Arthur Savage . Sir Richard Weston . 
 The Earl of Sussex . Sir Richard Wainman . 
 The Lord Harbert . Sir James Wootton . 27 - 
 The Lord Burk . Sir Richard Ruddal . 
 Count Lodowick . Sir Robert Mansfield . 
 Sir William Howard . Sir William Mounson . 
 Sir George D’Eureux . Sir John Bowles . 
 Sir Henry Nevel . Sir Edward Bows . 
 Sir Edmund Rich. Sir Humfrey Druel . 
 Sir Richard Leven . Sir Amias Preston . 
 Sir Peter Egomort . Sir Robert Remington . 
 Sir Anthonie Ashley . Sir John Buck . 
 Sir Henry Leonard . Sir John Morgan . 
 Sir Richard Levison . Sir John Aldridg . 
 Sir Horatio Vere . Sir John Asshindon . 
 Sir Arthur Throckmorton . Sir Matthew Browne . 
 Sir Miles Corbet . Sir John Acton . 
 Sir Edward Conway . Sir Thomas Gates . 
 Sir Oliver Lambert . Sir Gilly Mericke . 
 Sir Anthony Cook . Sir Thomas Smith . 
 259 
 Sir Christopher Heydon . 
 Sir Francis Popham . 
 Sir Philip Woodhouse . 
 Sir Alexander Clifford . 
 Sir Maurice Barkley . 
 Sir Charles Blunt . 
 Sir George Gifford . 
 Sir Robert Cross . 
 Sir James Escudamor . 
 Sir Urias Leigh . 
 Sir William Pooley . 
 Sir Thomas Palmer . 
 Sir John Stafford . 
 Sir Robert Lovel . 
 Sir John Gylbert . 
 Sir William Harvie . 
 Sir John Grey . 
 DONE Christ . prince of Portingal 
 Sir John Vanderfoord , Admiral of the Hollanders . 
 Sir Robert Dudley . 8. August . 
 I am not curious in placing these gentlemen , but put them down at a venture . Only 1 have observed , as near as I could , the just day and time when they were created . And I trust where the place of it self is so worthy and equal , there the bore naming and placing of the parties , shall breed no offence , or make a disparity . The two gentlemen that were last knighted received their knighthood in the way of our return from Cadiz : the one of them upon the sea , not far from the Bay of the Groin , at what time our ships stood upon their stays for a space , while certain Pinnaces were sent to descry what shipping was at the Groin : The other at Plimmouth in the open street , when the Lords general came from the Sermon . The one a man of long service , and good desert among the Dutch : the other of so many good parts of a worthy gentleman , as the like are seidome seen to concur in any . 
 I spoke in the beginning of her Majesties prayer , which I presumed ( though unworthy ) to translate into Latin : and now at this very time , there was some opportunity offered , for to make some use of that translation . For now being in Cadiz , attending upon my most honourable good Lord , I talked with certain of the Religious men , such as I found learned , whereof indeed there were some , though not very many . I 260 
 talked also with the Bishop of Cusco there , a grave aged comely man , and being of late chosen to that Bishopric , he was as then to have gone to the Indies , had not we then taken him prisoner , and so stayed his journey for that time . With these men ever as occasion did serve , I did seek now and then to spend some speech , and to entertain time withal , I would break with them of this our victory , and of the injuries and bad dealings of their Prince and Country offered to her Majesty , whereby she was provoked , and in a manner drawn to this actium : though otherwise of her own most excellent princely good nature , she was altogether given to peace , and quietness . And always in some part of our conferences , I would show them a copy of her Majesties prayer in Latin , which I had always of purpose ready about me , whereby it might the better appear unto them , how unwillingly , and upon how great & urgent occasions her Majesty was , as it were inforced to undertake this actium : and therewithal ! I did use now and then to bestow upon them a copy of the same in writing . They seemed in all outward show to allow of my speeches , and to praise her Majesties good inclination , and earnestly to wish that there might be a firm concord and peace again . 
 It pleased the Lords general to deal exceeding favourably with this said Bishop of Cusco : for it was their good pleasure to give him his free passage without any ransom , and therewithal to let him to understand , that they came not to deal with Churchmen , or unarmed men , or with men of peace , weaklings & children , neither was it any part of their meaning to make such a voyage for gold , silver , or any other their wealth and riches , etc. But that their only coming was to meet with their dishonourable practises , and manifold injuries , & to deal with men of war and valour , for the defence of the true honour of England : and to let them to understand , that whensoever they 261 
 attempted any base-conceited & dishonourable practice to their sovereign Queen , their Mistress , that it should be revenged to the uttermost , etc. 
 In this mean space , while the Lords general continued at Cadiz , there came to them certain poor wretched Turks , to the number of 38 , that had been a long time galleyslaves , and either at the very time of the fight by sea , or else immediately thereupon , taking the opportunity , did then make their escape , and did swim to land : yielding themselves to the mercy of their most honourable Lordship's . It pleased them with all speed to apparel them , and to furnish them with money , and all other necessaries , and to bestow on them a bark , and a Pilot , to see them freely and safely conveyed into Barbary , willing them to let the country understand what was done , and what they had seen . Whereby I doubt not , but as her Majesty is a most admirable Prince already , over all Europe , all Africk , and Asia , and throughout Christendome : so the whole world hereafter shall have just cause to admire her infinite Princely virtues , and thereby be provoked to confess , that as she hath been mightily protected from time to time , by the powerful hand of the almighty , so undoubtedly , that she is to be judged and accounted of us , to be his most sacred handmaid , and chosen vessel . And therefore , whatsoever wicked designment shall conspired and plotted against her Majesty hereafter , shall thought to be conspired , plotted , and intended against the almighty himself : and for that cause , as I trust , shall by the infinite goodness and mercy of that almighty , mightily frustrate and overthrown . 
 The 28. day being Munday , the L. Admiral came aboard the Ark again , minding there to remain for a space , as indeed he did , and upon the advice of his Physician , to deal something in physic , for that his L. found his body something out of frame . At that time it pleased his L. to write certain letters to the 262 
 Duke of Medina Sidonia , for the deliverance of English captives , who were remaining in the galleys . For by this time , it was reported , that the said Duke was come down in person with some power , and that he was either at Port S. Marry , or else at Rotta , or thereabouts . His L. did endite the letters himself , but his pleasure was , they should be turned into Latin by another : and so to be sent ( as indeed they were ) in the latin tongue unto the Duke . 
 A copy of the Lord Admirals letters to the Duke of Medina Sidonia . 
 Illustrissimo Principi Duci de Medina Sidonia . 
 ILlustrissime Princeps , ex nonnullis quibusdam Hispanis intelligimus , Excellentiam vestram jam nunc esse apud portum S. Mariae . Et quoniam in anno Domini 1588. id nobis tunc muneris assignatum erat a sereniss . nostra Regina domina mea , ut contra vos , ves-trasque copias , Ego solus pro eo tempore Generalis essem constitutus : Idcirco non opinamur vobis ignotum esse , quam mite quoddam , & humanum bellandi genus , tum hic jam in hoc ipso tempore , adversus hujus loci populum atque incolas usurpaverimus : tum etiam saepiiis antehac quam humaniter , benigneque eos omnes tractaverimus , quos ex vestris jure belli captivos acceperimus . Ex quorum numero quam multa millia , etiam gratis , nullo accepto pretio , libertate donaverimus , id putamus omnibus esse testatius , quam ut a quoquam denegetur . Quocirca , neque ullo modo nobis in mentem venire potest , ut dubitemus , quin parem etiam in vobis humanitatem adversus nostros captivos simus reperturi . Cum igitur nobis compertum jam sit , habere vos in vestris galeris , ex Reginae nostrae serenissimae Dominae meae subditis unum & quinquaginta captivos : non equidem dubitamus , quin eos omnes sitis relaxaturi , & ad nos missuri : ea lege , ac condition , ut totidem ex vestris hic captivis ejusdem loci atque ordinis , melioris etiam fortassis notae , 263 
 ac conditionis , homuncios , ad vos vicissim remittamus . Id quod nos facturos data fide spondemus , quam primum nostros captivos ex vestris manibus acceperimus . Hac in re si nostro desiderio ac voluntati parum satisfactum erit , aliud profectd tunc posthac belli genus ingrediemur , aliiimque bellandi morem cogemur , etiam inviti , & contra voluntatem prosequi . Ex Regia Anglicana class apud Cadiz ultimo Junii , stilo antiquo . 1596. 
 Carolus Howard . 
 These letters were sent by a Spaniard , and and answer was brought from the Duke with all convenient speed , and as it should seem by the L. Admirals next answer returned to him in writing , which immediately hereafter followeth , the Duke de Medina Sidonia his letters were honourable , and with good regard . 
 A copy of my L. Admirals second letter to the Duke of Medina Sidonia . 
 Illustrissimo Principi Duci de Medina Sidonia . 
 ILlustrissime Princeps , literas ab excellentia vestra hodie accepimus : quae verb nostra sit ad illas responsio , nobiles isti viri , qui vestras literas ad nos pertulerunt : plenius declarabunt . Hoc interim cupimus esse penitus persuasum Excellentiae vestrae , nos seduld operam daturos , ut in omni honorificae benignitatis humanitatisque genere , expectation ! vestrae omni ex parte respondeamus . Quod ad Anglicos nostros captivos attinet , quos ab Excellentia vestra huc ad nos crastino die missum iri expectamus , in ea re pollicemur Excellentiae vestrae , quod plenius a nobis vestrae voluntati satisfactum erit : & quid pro illis captivis tales nos captivos vobis remittemus , quales tum ab ipso Dom. Mendoza , tum ab aliis illustrib . viris , qui a Dom. Porta Carero in illorum ad nos favorem mittebantur , communi cum consensu erant ab ipsis approbati . Si vero quis alius jam captivus est vel posthac futurus erit in nostra potestate , pro cujus redemption nondum plenb conventum est & stipulatum de certo pretio persolvendo : concedimus Excellentiae 264 
 THE VOYAGE TO CADIZ vestrae , ut in hoc etiam casu vos , vestro pro arbitrio , de illis quicquid velitis , imperetis . Ex Regia class Anglicana , apud Cadiz , 3. die Julii stylo antiquo . 1596. Carolus Howard . 
 The next day after , being the 4. of July , the LL. general caused the town of Cadiz to be set on fire , and rased & defaced so much as they could , the fair cathedral Church , and the religious houses only being spared , and left unblemished . And with the town all such provision for shipping , & other things , as were serviceable for you K. use , & yet were not either so convenient for us to be carried away , or else such as we stood no whit at all in need of , were likewise at the same instant consumed with fire . And presently thereupon , their Lordship's , with as convenient speed as they could , and the whole army in such good order and leisure , as they thought best , came aboard . 
 The next day being the 5. of July , the LL. general with all the army being under sail , & now making for England , & but as yet passing the very mouth of the bay of Cadiz , a galley full of English prisoners , with a flag of truce , met us from Rotta , sent by the D. of Medina Sidonia , & sent as it should seem , one day later then his promise : but yet their flag being either not big enough , or not well placed in the galley , or not well discerned of our men , or by what other mischance I know not : but thus it was : by one of our smallest ships you sailed foremost , assoon as the said galley came within gunshot , there was a great piece discharged upon her , & at that instant there was one man slain outright , and 2. other grievously hurt . The error being espied and perceived , our ship gave over immediately from any farther shooting . Assoon as the galley came near us , my L. Admiral caused a gracious salutation to be sounded with his trumpets , & willed the captains forthwith to come aboard his ship : which they did , and then he feasted them with a very fine and honourable banquet , as the time and place might serve . And then by them under-265 
 standing of that unfortunate mischance that had happened by the shot of the said ship , he was very sorry for the same , and yet such was the merciful providence of almighty God , that even in this mischance also , he did hold his holy hand over the English . And all the harm that was done did light only upon the poor Turk , and the Spaniard himself . When this Lord had well banqueted them , he presently called for his barge , and did accompany the said galley to the Lord general the Earl of Essex , who then did ride with his ship a good distance off : and there they being in like manner most honorably received , and entertained , the Spanish gentlemen delivered up their prisoners the English captives , of whom some had been there 6 year , some 8 , or ten : yea , and some 22. year , and upward , and some of them but lately taken in S. Francis Drakes last voyage to the Indies . The number of the prisoners delivered were but 39. and no more , and were brought in , and delivered by DONE Antonio de Corolla and his brother , and by DONE Pedro de Cordua , and certain others . If you demand why , of one and fiftie Captives , there were no more delivered then was , I presuppose , ( and I think it true to ) that at that time the residue were farther off in some remote places of Spaine bestowed , and so by that means , not able at this time to be in a readiness , but yet like enough that there is some good order taken for them hereafter , to be redeemed , and sent over into England . 
 If any man presume here so far , as to inquire how it chanced , that the Lords general rested so long at Cadiz , and went no farther , and why Port S. Mary being so fair a town , and so near to them , was forborn ? and why Shear ali&s Xeres ? And why Rotta and the like ? And why this or that was done ? And why that or this left undone ? I will not answer him with our common English proverb , as I might , which is : That one fool may ask more questions in one hour , then ten discrete men can well answer in five days . 
 266 
 But that grave ancient writer , Cornelius Tacitus , hath a wise , brief , pithy saying , and it is this : Nemo tentavit inquirere in columnas Herculis , sanctifisque ac reverentius habitum est de factis Deorum credere , quim scire . Which saying , in my fancy , fits marvellous well for this purpose : and so much the rather , for that this Cadiz is that very place , ( at least by the common opinion ) where those said pillars of Hercules were thought to be placed : and , as some say , remain as yet not far off to be seen . But to let that pass , the saying bears this discrete meaning in it , albeit in a pretty kind of mystical manner uttered : That it befitteth not inferior persons to be curious , or too inquisitive after Princes actions , neither yet to be so saucy and so malapert , as to seek to dive into their secrets , but rather always to have a right reverend conceit and opinion of them , and their doings : and theron so resting our inward thoughts , to seek to go no further , but so to remain ready always to arm our selves with dutiful minds , and willing obedience , to perform and put in execution that which in their deep insight and heroical designments , they shall for our good , and the care of the common wealth determine upon . 
 This , and much less to , might suffice to satisfy any honest minded man . But yet if any will needs desire to be a little farther satisfied , albeit it need not , yet then , thus much I dare say and affirm , that upon my knowledge , the chiefest cause why Port Saint Marry , and the rest were left untouched , was this : For that it was most certainly known , that they were towns not worth the saluting of such a royal company , in which there was no manner of wealth in the world left , more then bore houses of stone , and standing walls , and might well have served rather as a stale , perchance , to have entrapped , then as a means to have enriched . And it had been more then a suspicion of folly , for such and army as this , to have sought to fight with the air , and to have laboured with great pain and charges , yea , and with 267 
 A.D. 
 I596 . 
 some evident danger too , to have overthrown that , which could very little or nothing have profited , being destroyed : and yet now , can do as little harm being left , as it is , untouched . 
 And thus much for our journey to Cadiz : for the accidents that happened by the way , for the winning , spoiling , and burning of the said town , for the overthrow of the Spanish Fleet there , and for all other by-matters that happened , as appendances to the same , both in the time of our abided there , as also at the very last hour of our coming from thence . 
 As for our return home , and our entrance into a part of Portingal by the way , with the taking , spoiling , and burning of the town of Faraon there , and marching into the Spanish confines thereabouts , etc. I mind to leave it to some other , whose chance was to be present at the actium , as my self was not , and shall of more sufficient ability to perform it . 
 