The travail of Helena . 
 Elena Flavia Augusta serenissimi Coeli Britannici Regis Haeres , & unica filia , Magni Constantini Caesaris mater , incomparabili decore , fide , religion , bonitate , ac magnificentia pia , Eusebio etiam teste , per totum resplenduit orbem : Inter omnes aetatis suae fceminas , nulla invenie - 
 batur ea in liberalibus artibus doctior , nulla in instrumentis musicis peritior , aut in linguis nationum copiosior . Innatam habebat ingenii claritudinem , oris facundiam , ac morum ornatissimam compositionem : Hebraici , Graeci , & Latin erudita . Caruerat pater alia sobole ( inquit Virumnius ) quae Regni solio potiretur . Illam propterea his instrui fecit per optimos praeceptores , ut ed commodius Regni tractaret negotia . Unde ob incredibilem ejus pulchritudinem , atque alias eximias animi & corporis dotes , Constantius Chlorus Caesar illam duxit in uxorem , 270 
 .... c - 274‘ atque ex ei filium in Britanni^ genuit Constantinum Magnum . Said eo tandem Eboraci defuncto , cum Anna illa Evangelic^ , in sancti viduitate perduravit ad ultimum vitae diem , tota Christianae religioni dedita . Sunt enim authores , qui narrent per istam , cessante persecution , pacem Ecclesiis datam : Ad tantam coelestis Philosophiae cognitionem eam ferunt post agnitum Evangelium pervenisse , ut olim multos ediderit libros , & carmina quaedam Graeca , quae hucusque & Pontico superesse perhibentur . Visionibus admonita Hierosolymam petiit , & omnia salvatoris loca perlustravit . Romae tandem octogenaria fceliciter in Christo quievit . 15. Kalendas Septembris , filio adhuc superstite , anno salutis humanae 337. Regnante apud Britannos Octavio . Hujus corpus non minimi nunc cura Veneriis servatur . 
 The same in English . 
 HElena Flavia Augusta , the heir and only daughter of Coelus sometime the most excellent king of Britaine , the mother of the Emperor Constantine the great , by reason of her singular beauty , faith , religion , goodness and godly Majesty ( according to the testimony of Eusebius ) was famous in all the world . among all the women of her time , there was none either in the liberali arts more learned , or in instruments of music more skilful , or in the diverse languages of nations more abundant then herself . She had a natural quickness or excellency of wit , eloquence of speech , and a most notable grace in all her behaviour . She was seen in the Hebrew , Greek and Latin tongues . 
 Her father ( as Virumnius reporteth ) had no other child to succeed in the kingdom after him but her , and therefore caused her to be instructed in these things by the best teachers , that thereby she might the better in time govern the Realm : so that by reason of her passing beauty , and other her excellent gifts of body and mind , Constantius Chlorus the Emperor married her , and had by her a son called Constantine the 271 
 great , while he remained in Britaine . Who at length deceasing at Yorke , this Helena ( not otherwise then Anna of whom mention is made in the new Testament ) continued a virtuous and holy widow to the end of her life . 
 There are some writers which do affirm , that persecution ceased , and peace was granted to the Christian Churches by her good means . 
 After the light and knowledge of the Gospel , she grew so skilful in divinity , that she wrote and composed diverse books , and certain Greek verses also , which ( as Ponticus reporteth ) are yet extant . Being warned by some visions she went to Jerusalem , and visited all the places there , which Christ had frequented . She lived to the age of fourescore years , and then died at Rome the 15 day of August , in the year of our redemption 337. Octavius being then king of Britaine , and her son Constantine the Emperor then also living , and her body is to this day very carefully preserved at Venice . 
 