The voyage of Edgar the son of Edward which was the son of Edmund surnamed Ironside , brother unto K. Edward the confessor , ( being accompanied with valiant Robert the son of Godwin ) unto Jerusalem , in the year of our Lord 1102. Recorded by William of Malmesburie , lib . 3. histo . fol. 58. 
 Ubsequenti tempore cum Roberto filio A.D. 1102. Godwini milite audacissimo Edgarus Hierosolymam pertendit . Illud fuit tempus quo Turei Baldwinum regem apud Ramas obsederunt : qui cum obsidionis injuriam far nequiret , per medias hostium acies effugit , solius 
 Roberti opera liberatus praeeuntis , & evaginato gladio dextra levaque Tureos caedentis . Said cum successu ipso truculentior , alacritate nimia procurreret , ensis manu excidit . Ad quem recolligendum cum se inclinasset , omnium incursu oppressus , vinculis palmas dedit . Inde Babyloniam ( ut aiunt ) ductus , cum Christum abnegare nollet , in medio foro ad signum positus , & sagittis terebratus , martyrium consecravit . Edgarus amisso milite regressus , multaque beneficia ab Imperatoribus Graecorum , & Alemannorum adeptus ( quippi qui etiam eum retinere progeneris amplitudine tentassent ) omnia pro natalis soli desiderio sprevit . Quosdam enim profecto fallit amor patriae , ut nihil eis videatur jucundum , nisi consuetum hauserint coelum . Und& Edgarus fatua cupidine illusus Angliam rediit , ubi ( ut superius dixi ) diverso fortunae ludicro rotatus , nunc remotus & tacitus , canos suos in agro consumit . 
 [ The same 
 295 
 When the author was writing of this history . 
 The same in English . 
 Afterwards Edgar being son unto the nephew of Edward the confessor , traveled with Robert the son of Godwin a most valiant knight , unto Jerusalem . And it was at the same time when the Turkes besieged king Baldwin at Rama : who not being able to endure the straight siege , was by the help of Robert especially , going before him , and with his drawn sword making a lane , and slaying the Turkes on his right hand and on his left , delivered out of that danger , and escaped through the midst of his enemies camp . But upon his happy success being more eager and fierce , as he went forward somewhat too hastily , his sword fell out of his hand . Which as he stooped to take up , being oppressed with the whole multitude , he was there taken and bound . From whence ( as some say ) being carried unto Babylon or Alcair in Egypt , when he would not renounce Christ , he was tied unto a stake in the midst of the market place , and being shot through with arrows , died a martyr . Edgar having lost his knight returned , and being honoured with many rewards both by the Greekish and by the Germane Emperor ( who both of them would right gladly have entertained him still for his great nobility ) contemned all things in respect of his native soil . For in very deed some are so inveigled with the love of their country , that nothing can seem pleasant unto them , unless they breath in the same air where they were bred . Wherefore Edgar being misled with a found affection , returned into England ; and afterwards being subject unto diverse changes of fortune ( as we have above signified ) he spendeth*now his extreme old age in and obscure and private place of the country . 
 