A second testimony of the foresaid Sighelmus his voyage unto Saint Thomas of India etc. out of William of Malmesbury his second book de gestis pontificum Anglorum , cap . de episcopis Schireburnensibus , Salisburiensibus , Wil-tunensibus . 
 Sighelmus trans mare , causa eleemosynarum regis , & etiam ad Sanctum Thomam in Indiam missus , mira prosperitate , quod quivis in hoc seculo miretur , Indiam penetravit ; indeque rediens exotici generis gemmas , quarum illa humus ferax est , reportavit . Nonnullae illarum adhuc in ecclesiae monumentis visuntur . 
 The same in English . 
 Sighelmus being for the performance of the kings alms sent beyond the seas , and travailing unto S. Thomas of India , very prosperously ( which a man would wonder at in this age ) passed through the said country of India , and returning home brought with him diverse strange and precious stones , such as that climate affordeth . Many of which stones are as yet extant in the monuments of the Church . 
 The life and travails of John Erigena . 
 Oannes Erigena Britannus nation , in Menevia urbe , seu ad fanum Davidis , & patricio genitore natus , dum Anglos Daci crudeles bellis ac rapinis molestarent , ac omnia illic essent tumultibus plena , longam ipse peregrinationem Athenas 
 usque suscepit , annosque quamplures 
 literis Graecis , Chaldaicis , & Arabicis insudavit : 
 [ IL i . 
 omnia 
 illic invisit Philosophorum loca , ac studia , imo & ipsum oraculum Solis , quod Aesculapius sibi construxerat . In-6 . ] veniens tandem quod longo quaesierat labour , in Italiam 
 & Galliam est reversus ubi ob insignem eruditionem , 
 280 
 Carolo Calvo , & postea Ludovico Balbo acceptus , Dionysii Areopagitse libros de coelesti Hierarchia , ex Constantino-poli tunc missos Latinos fecit , Anno Dom. 858. Profectus postea in Britanniam , Alphredi Anglorum Regis , & suorum liberorum factus est praeceptor , atque ipso mox adhortante , inter ocia literaria & Graeco transtulit in tres linguas , scilicet Chaldaicam , Arabicam , & Latinam , Aristotelis moralia , de secretis secretorum , seu recto regimine Principum , opus certain exquisitum . In Malms-buriensi caenobio tandem , quo recreationis gratia se contulerat , inter legendum a quibusdam discipulis malevolis interimebatur , Anno Christi , 884. 
 The same in English . 
 JOhn Erigene a Britane , descended of honourable parents , and born in the Town of S. David in Wales , seeing the Englishmen to be oppressed with the wars and rapines of the cruel Danes , and all the land in a hurly burly , he in the mean time undertook a long journey , even as far as Athens , and there spent many years in the study of the Greek , Chaidie , and Arabian tongues : he there frequented all the places and schools of the Philosophers , and the oracle also of the Sun , which Aesculapius had built unto himself . And having found at length that which he had with long travel searched , he returned again into Italie , and France , where for his singular learning , he was much favoured of the two Kings Charles and Lewes , and in his being there , he translated into Latin the books of Dionysius Areopagita concerning the Heavenly Hierarchic , which were sent from Constantinople in the year 858. After this he came back again into his own Country , and was schoolmaster unto Alphred then King of England , and his sons : and upon his request , at his times of leisure , he translated Aristotles Morals , of the Secrets of Secrets , or of the right government of Princes , out of Greek into these three tongues , Chaidie , Arabian , and Latin , 281 
 A . WORSER 
 858. 
 which he did very exquisitely . At the last , being in the Abbie of Malmsburie , whither he went for his recreation , and there according to his manner disputing , and reading to the Students , some of them misliking and hating him , rose against him , and slew him in the year of Christ , 884. 
 