The voyage of Ingulphus Abbot of Croiland unto Jerusalem , performed ( according to Florentius Wigorniensis ) in the year of our Lord , 1064 , and described by the said Ingulphus himself about the conclusion of his brief Historic . 
 A.D. 1064. 
 Go Ingulphus humilis minister Sancti Guthlaci Monasteriique sui Croilan - 
 densis , natus in Anglia , & a parentibus Anglicis , quip urbis pulcherrimae 
 Londoniarum , pro literis addiscendis in teneriori aetate constitutus , primum West-monasterio , postmodum Oxoniensi study 
 traditus eram . Cumque in Aristotele arripiendo supra multos coaetaneos meos profecissem , etiam Rhetoricam 
 A.D. 1051. 
 A.D. 1064 , According to Florentine IFigomieneie . 
 Tullii primam & secundam talo tenus induebam . Factus ergo adolescentior , fastidiens parentum meorum exiguitatem , paternos lares relinquere , & palatia regum aut principum affectans , mollibus vestiri , pomposisque laciniis amiciri indies ardentius appetebam . Et ecce , inclytus nunc rex noster Angliae , tunc adhuc comes Normanniae Wilhelmus ad colloquium tunc regis Angliae Edwardi cognati sui , cum grandi ministrantium comitatu Lon-donias adventabat . Quibus citius insertus , ingerens me ubique ad omnia emergentia negotia peragenda , cum prosper plurima perfecissem , in brevi agnitus illustrissimo comiti & astrictissimi adamatus , cum ipso Normanniam enavigabam . Factus ibidem scriba ejus , pro libito totam comitis curiam , ad nonnullorum invidiam 
 288 
 regebam ; quosque volui humiliabam , & quos volui exaltabam . Cumque juvenili calore impulsus in tam celso statu supra meos natales consistere taederem , quin semper ad altiora conscendere , instabili animo , ac nimium prurienti affectu , ad erubescentiam ambitiosus avidissime desiderarem : nuntiatur per universam Normanniam plurimos archiepiscopos imperii cum nonnullis aliis terras principibus velle pro merito animarum suarum more peregrinorum cum debita devotion Hierosolymam proficisci . De familia ergo comitis domini nostri plurimi tam milites quam clerici , quorum primus & praecipuus ego eram , cum licentia , & domini nostri comitis benevolentia , in dictum iter nos omnes accinximus : & Alemanniam petentes , equites triginta numero & ampliiis domino Maguntino conjuncti sumus . Parati namque omnes ad viam , & cum dominis episcopis connumerati septem millia , pertranseuntes prosperi multa terrarum spatia , tandem Constantinopolim pervenimus . Ubi Alexium Imperatorem ejus adorantes Agiosophiam vidimus , & infinita sanctuaria osculati sumus . Divertentes inde per Lyciam , in manus Arabicorum latronum incidimus ; evisceratique the infinitis pecuniis , cum mortibus multorum , & maximo vitas nostrae periculo vix evadentes , tandem desideratissimam civitatem Hierosolymam laeto introitu tenebamus . Ab ipso tunc patriarcha Sophronio nomine , viro veneranda canitie honestissimo ac sanctissimo , grandi cymbalorum tonitru , & luminarium immenso fulgore suscepti , ad divinissimam ecclesiam sanctissimi sepulchri , tam Syrorum , quam Latinorum solenni procession deducti sumus . Ibi quot preces inoravimus , quot lachrymas infle-vimus , quot suspiria inspiravimus , solus ejus inhabitator novit D. noster Jesus Christus . Ab ipso itaque gloriosissimo sepulchre Christi ad alia sanctuaria civitatis invisenda circumducti , infinitam summam sanctarum ecclesiarum , & oratoriorum , quae Achim Soldanus dudum destruxerat , oculis lachrymosis vidimus . Et omnibus ruinis sanctissimae civitatis , tam 
 IV 289 TO 
 A.D. 
 IO64 . 
 extra , quam intra ; numerosis lachrymis intimo affectu compassi , ad quorundam restaurationem datis non paucis pecuniis , exire in patriam & sacratissimo Jordane intingi , universique Christi vestigia osculari , desiderantissima devotion suspirabamus . Said Arabum latrunculi qui omnem viam observabant , longiiis a civitate evagari , sua rabiosa multitudine innumera non sinebant . Vere igitur accedente , stolus navium Januen-sium in porta Joppensi applicuit . In quibus , cum sua mercimonia Christiani mercatores per civitates maritimas commutassent , & sancta loca similiter adorassent , ascendentes omnes mari nos commisimus . Et jactati fluctibus & procellis innumeris tandem Brundusium , & prospero itinere per Apuliam Romam petentes , sanctorum Apostolorum Petri & Pauli limina , & copiosissima sanctorum martyrum monumenta per omnes stationes osculati sumus . Ind& archiepiscopi , caeterique principes imperii Alemanniam per dextram repetentes , nos versus Franciam ad sinistram declinantes , cum inenarrabilibus & gratiis & osculis ab invicem discessimus . Et tandem de triginta equitibus , qui de Normannia pingues exivimus , vix viginti pauperes peregrini , & omnes pedites , macie multa attenuati , reversion sumus . 
 The same in English . 
 IIngulphus and humble servant of reverend Guthlac and of his monastery of Croiland , born in England , and of English parents , at the beautiful ! city of London , was in my youth , for the attaining of good letters , placed first at Westminster , and afterwards sent to the University of Oxford . And having excelled diverse of mine equals in learning of Aristotle , I inured my self somewhat unto the first & second Rhetoric of Tullie . And as I grew in age , disdaining my parents mean estate , and forsaking mine own native soil , I affected the Courts of kings and princes , and was desirous to be clad in silk , and to wear brave and costly attire . And lo , at the same time William our sovereign king 290 
 now , but then Earl of Normandie , with a great troup of followers and attendants came unto London , to confer with king Edward the Confessor his kinsman . 1051. Into whose company intruding my self , and proffering my service for the performance of any speedy or weigh tie affairs , in short time , after I had done many things with good success , I was known and most entirely beloved by the victorious Erle himself , and with him I sailed into Normandie . And there being made his secretary , I governed the Earls Court ( albeit with the envy of some ) as my self pleased , yea whom I would I abased , and preferred whom I thought good . When as therefore , being carried with a youthful heat and lusty humour , I began to be weary even of this place , wherein I was advanced so high above my parentage , and with and inconstant mind , and affection too too ambitious , most vehemently aspired at all occasions to climb higher : [ II i . 10. ] there went a report throughout all Normandie , that diverse Archbishop's of the Empire , and secular princes were desirous for their souls health , and for devotion sake , to go on pilgrimage to Jerusalem . Wherefore out of the family of our lord the Earl , sundry of us , both gentlemen and clerks ( principali of whom was my self ) with the licence and good will of our said lord the earl , sped us on that voyage , and travailing thirtie horses of us into high Germanie , we joined our selves unto the Archbishop of Mentz . And being with the companies of the Bishops seven thousand persons sufficiently provided for such and expedition , we passed prosperously through many provinces , and at length attained unto Constantinople . Where doing reverence unto the Emperor Alexius , we saw the Church of Sancta Sophia , and kissed diverse sacred relics . Departing thence through Lycia , we fell into the hands of the Arabian thieves : and after we had be robbed of infinite sums of money , and had lost many of our people , hardly escaping with extreme danger of our lives , at length we joyfully entered into the most wished ci tie of 
 291 
 Jerusalem . Where we were received by the most reverend , aged , and holy patriarch Sophronius , with great melody of cymbals and with torchlight , and were accompanied unto the most divine Church of our Saviour his sepulchre with a solemn procession aswell of Syrians as of Latines . Here , how many prayers we uttered , what abundance of tears we shed , what deep sighs we breathed forth , our Lord Jesus Christ only knoweth . Wherefore being conducted from the most glorious sepulchre of Christ to visit other sacred monuments of the city , we saw with weeping eyes a great number of holy Churches and oratories , which Achim the Sultan of Egypt had lately destroyed . And so having bewailed with sad tears , and most sorrowful and bleeding affections , all the ruins of that most holy city both within and without , and having bestowed money for the re-edifying of some , we desired with most ardent devotion to go forth into the country , to wash our selves in the most sacred river of Jordan , and to kiss all the steps of Christ . Howbeit the thievish Arabians lurking upon every way , would not suffer us to travel far from the city , by reason of their huge and furious multitudes . Wherefore about the spring there arrived at the port of Joppa a fleet of ships from Genoa . In which fleet ( when the Christian merchant's had exchanged all their wares at the coast towns , and had likewise visited the holy places ) we all of us embarked , committing our selves to the seas : and being tossed with many storms and tempests , at length we arrived at Brundusium : and so with a prosperous journey traveling thorough Apulia towards Rome , we there visited the habitations of the holy apostles Peter and Paul , and did reverence unto diverse monuments of holy martyrs in all places throughout the city . From thence the archbishop's and other princes of the empire traveling towards the right hand for Alemain , and we declining towards the left hand for France , departed asunder , taking our leaves with unspeakable thanks and courtesies . And so at length , of 
 292 
 thirty horsemen which went out of Normandie fat , lusty , and frolic , we returned thither scarce twenty poor pilgrim's of us , being all footmen , and consumed with leanness to the bore bones . 
 A.D. 
 c . 1097. 
 