The travails of Hubert Walter bishop of Sarisburie . 
 Ubertus Walterus Sarisburiensis copus , vir probus , ingenioque ac 
 pietate 
 clarus , inter praecipuos unus eorum erat , qui post Richardum regem expugnandorum Saracenorum gratia in Syriam proficiscebantur . Cum ex Palaestina rediens , audiret in Sicilia , quod idem Richardus in inimicorum manus incidisset , omisso itinere incoepto , ad eum cursim divertebat : Quem & ille statim in Angliam misit , ut illic regii Senatus authoritate , indicto pro ejus redemption tributo pecuniam colligeret , quod & industrius fecit ac regem liberavit . Inde Cantuariorum Archiepiscopus factus , post ejus mortem Joanni illius fratri ac successori paria fidelitatis officia praestitit . Longa enim oration toti Anglorum nationi persuasit , quod vir providus , praestans , fortis , genere nobilissimus , & imperio dignissimus esset : quo salutatus a populo fuit , atque in regem coronatus . Composuit quaedam opuscula , & ex immenso animi dolore demum obiisse fertur , Anno salutis humanae 1205. cum sedisset annos 11. Menses octo , & die sex : quum vidisset ex intestinis odiis , omnia in transmarinis regionibus pessum ire , regnante Joanne . 
 The same in English . 
 HUbert Walter bishop of Sarisburie , a virtuous man , and famous for his good wit and piety , was one of the chiefest of them that followed king Richard into Syria going against the Saracens . As he returned from 346 
 Palaestina and came in his journey into Sicilia , he there herd of the ill fortune of the king being fallen into his enemies hands , and thereupon leaving his journey homeward , he went presently and in all haste to the place where the king was captived , whom the king immediately upon his coming sent into England , that by the authority of the council , a tribute might be collected for his redemption : which this Hubert performed with great diligence , and delivered the king . After this he was made Archbishop of Canterburie , and after the death of king Richard he showed the like duties of fidelity and trust to his brother John that succeeded him . For by a long oration he persuaded the whole nation of the English men , that Ke was a very circumspect man , virtuous , valiant , born of noble parentage , and most worthy of the crown . Whereupon he was so received of all the people and crowned king . He wrote certain books , and died at the last with very great grief of mind , in the year 1205 , having been archbishop the space of 11 years 8 months and sixe days , by reason of the civil discords abroad , whereby all things went topsy turvy , and in the reign of king John. 
 