The travails of Robert Curson . 
 Obertus Curson ex nobili quodam An-glorum ortus genere , disciplinis tum prophanis , tum sacris studiosus incubuit , idque ( quantum ex conjecturis colligo ) in celebratissima Oxonii Academia . Prae-stantissimis illic institutoribus usus , ex summa circa ingenuas arts industria , 
 & assiduo literarum labour , famam sibi inter suos celeberrimam comparavit . Ampliora deinde meditatus Parisiorum Lutetiam , atque Romam ipsam petiit , illic Theologus Doctor , hic vero Cardinalis effectus . Unde uterque Matthaeus Parisius , ac Westmonasterius , hoc de ipso testimonium adferunt : hic libro 2. ille 8. suorum Chronicorum . Anno Domini . 1218 ( inquiunt ) in cap-347 
 tione Damiatae jEgypti urbis , sub Joanne Brenno Hierosolymorum rege , fuit cum Pelagio Albaneiisi Magister Robertus de Curson , Anglus , Clericus celeberrimus , genere nobilis , ac Romanae Ecclesiae Cardinalis , etc. [ II i . 32. ] Bostonus Buriensis in suo Catalogo Cursonum aliquos libros composuisse narrat . Claruit anno superius numerato per praedictos testes in Anglia regnante Henrico tertio Joannis regis filio : fuitque hic diebus Honorii tertii Romani pontificis in Angliam , Bostono teste , legatus . 
 The same in English . 
 RObert Curson descended of a noble family of England , used great diligence aswell in profane as in divine studies in the famous University of Oxford ( as I conjecture . ) He had there the best schoolmasters that were to be got , and was most industrious in the arts and continual exercises of learning : by means whereof he grew to be of great renown where he lived . Afterwards thinking of greater matters he went to Paris , and thence to Room it self , and at Paris he proceeded doctor of Divinity , at Room he was made cardinali : whereupon both Matthew Paris & Matthew of Westminster produce this testimony of him , the one in his second book , the other in his eight book of Chronicles . In the year of our Lord ( say they ) 1218 , at the taking of Damiata a city of Egypt under John Bren king of Jerusalem , M. Robert Curson and English man , a most famous clerk of noble parentage , and cardinali of the church of Room , was there with Pelagius Albanensis , etc. Boston of Bury in SufFolke in his catalogue reporteth , that he wrote diverse books . He flourished in the year aforesaid by the witnesses aforesaid . Henry the third son of king John being then king of England : and by the further testimony of Boston , this Curson was legate into England in the days of Honorious the third , bishop of Rome . 
 