A note drawn out of a very ancient book remaining in the hands of the right worshipful M. Thomas Tilney Esquire , touching Sir Frederike Tilney his ancestor , knighted at Aeon in the Holy land for his valour , by K. Richard the first , as followeth . 
 Ertinuit iste liber prius Frederico Tilney de Boston , in comitatu Lincolniae militi facto apud Aeon in terra Judaeae anno regis Richardi primi tertio . Vir erat iste magnae staturae & potens in corpore : qui cum patribus suis dormit apud Tirrington juxta villam sui nominis Tilney in 
 Mershland . Cujus altitudo in salva custodia permanent ibidem usque in hunc diem . Et post ejus obitum sexdecem militibus ejus nominis Tilney haereditas illa successive obvenit , quorum unus post alium semper habitabat apud Boston praedictum : dum fratris senioris haereditas haeredi general devoluta est , quae nupta est Johanni duci Norfolciae . Eorum miles ultimus fuit Philippus Tilney nuper de Shelleigh in Comitatu Suffolciae , pater & genitor Thomae Tilney de Hadleigh in Comitatu praedicto Armigeri , cui modo attinet iste liber . Anno aetatis suae 64. Anno Domini 1556. 
 The same in English . 
 THis book pertained in times passed unto Sir Frederick Tilney of Boston in the County of Lincolne , who was knighted at Aeon in the land of Jury , in the third year of the reign of king Richard the first . This knight was of a tall stature , and strong of body , who rests interred with his forefathers at Tirrington , near unto a town in Marshland called by his own name Tilney . The just height of this knight is there kept in safe custody until this very day . Also , after this men decease , the inheritance of his lands fell successively unto 342 
 sixteene sundry knights called all by the name of Tilney , who dwelled always , one after another , at the town of Boston aforesaid , until such time as the possessions of the elder brother fell unto and heir general , which was married unto John duke of Northfolke . The last knight of that name was sir Philip Tilney late of Shelleigh in the County of Suffolke , predecessor and father unto Thomas Tilney of Hadleigh in the County aforesaid Esquire , unto whom the said book of late appertained . In the year of his age 64. and in the year of our Lord , 1556. 
 