A letter written from Manuel the Emperor of Constantinople , unto Henrie the second King of England , Anno Dom. 1177. wherein mention is made that certain of king Henries Noble men and subject's were present with the said Emperor in a battle of his against the Soldan of Iconium . Recorded by Roger Hoveden , in Annalium parte posteriore , in regno Hen . 2. fol. 316 , & 317. 
 Odem anno Manuel Constantinopolitanus imperator , habito praelio campestri cum Soltano Iconii & illo devicto , in hac forma scripsit Domino regi Angliae . 
 Manuel in Christo deo Porphyrogeni-tus , divinitiis coronatus , sublimis , potens , excelsus , semper Augustus , & moderator 
 Romanorum , Comnenus , Henrico nobilissimo regi Angliae , charissimo amico suo , salutem & omne bonum . Cum imperium nostrum necessarium reputet notificare tibi , ut dilecto amico suo , de omnibus quae sibi obveniunt ; ided & de his quae nunc acciderunt ei , opportunum judicavit declarare tuae voluntati . Igitur a principio coronationis nostrae imperium nostrum adversus dei inimicos Persas nostrum odium in cord nutrivit , dum cerneret illos in Christianos gloriari , elevarique in nomen dei , & Christianorum dominari regionibus . Quo circa & alio quidem tempore indifferenter invasit eos , & prout deus ei concessit , sic & fecit . Et quae ab ipso frequenter patrata sunt ad contritionem ipsorum & perditionem , imperium nostrum credit nobilitatem tuam non later . Quoniam autem & nunc maximum exercitum contra eos ducere proposuit , & bellum contra omnem Persidem movere , quia res cogebat . Et non ut voluit multum aliquem apparatum fecit , sicut ei visum est . Veruntamen prout tempus dabat & rerum status , potenter eos invasit . Collegit ergo circa se imperium nostrum potentias suas : 
 312 
 sed quia carpenta ducebat armorum , & machinarum , & aliorum instrumentorum conferentium civitatum expugnationibus , pondera portantia : idcirco nequaquam cum festinatione iter suum agere poterat . Ampliiis autem dum adhuc propriam regionem peragraret , antequam barbarorum aliquis adversus nos militaret in bellis adversarius , aegritudo difficillima fluxus ventris invasit nos , qui diffusus per agmina imperii nostri pertransibat , depopulando & interimendo multos , omni pugnatore gravior . Et hoc malum invalescens maxim nos contrivit . Ex quo vero fines Tureorum invasimus , bella quidem primum frequentia concrepabant , & agmina Tureorum cum exercitibus imperii nostri undique dimicabant . Said Dei gratia ex toto i nostris in fugam vertebantur barbari . Post vero ubi ei qui illic adjacet angustiae loci , quae a Persis nominatur Cibrilcimam , propinquavimus , tot Persarum turmae peditum & equitum , quorum pleraeque ab interioribus partibus Persidis occurrerant in adjutorium contribulium suorum , exercitui nostro supervenerunt , quot pene nostrorum excederent numerum . Exercitu itaque imperii nostri propter viae omnino angustiam & difficultatem , usque ad decem milliaria extenso ; & cum neque qui praeibant possent postremos defendere , neque versa vice rursus postremi possent praeeuntes juvare , non mediocriter ab invicem hos distare accidit . San^ primae cohorts permultum ab acie imperii nostri dividebantur , postremarum oblitae , illas non praestolantes . Quoniam igitur Tureorum agmina ex jam factis praeliis cognoverant , non confer sibi a front nobis repugnare , loci angustiam bonum subventorem cum invenissent , posteriora statuerunt invadere agmina , quod & fecerunt . Arctissimo igitur ubique loco existent , instabant barbari undique , i dextris & i sinistris , & aliunde dimicantes , & tela super nos quasi imbres descendentia interimebant viros & equos complures . Ad haec itaque imperium nostrum ubi malum superabundabat , reputans secum oportunum judicabat retro expectare , atque illos qui illic erant adjuvare , expectando utique contra infinita illa Persarum 
 313 
 agmina bellum sustinuit . Quanta quidem , dum ab his circundaretur , patraverit , non opus est ad tempus sermonibus pertexere , ab illis autem qui interfuerunt , forsitan discet de his tua nobilitas . Inter haec autem existent imperio nostro , & omne belli gravamen in tantum sustinente , postremae cohorts universae Graecorum & Latinorum , & reliquorum omnium generum conglobatae , quae jaciebantur ab inimicis tela non sustinentes , impactione utuntur , & ita violenter ferebantur , diim ad [ II i . 19. ] adjacentem ibi collem quasi ad propugnaculum festinarent : sed precedents impellunt nolentes . Multo autem elevato pulvere , ac perturbante oculos , & neminem permittente videre quae circa pedes erant , in praecipitium quod aderat profundissimae vallis alius super alium homines & equi sic incontinenter portati corruerunt , quod alii alios conculcantes ab invicem interemerunt non ex gregariis tantum , sed ex clarissimis & intimis nostris consanguineis . Quis enim inhibere poterat tantae multitudinis importabilem impulsum ? At vero imperium nostrum tot & tantis confertum barbaris saucians , sauciatdmque , adeo ut non modicam in eos moveret perturbationem , obstupentes perseverantiam ipsius , & non remittebatur , benfe juvante deo , campum obtinuit . Neque locum illum scandere adversarios permisit , in quo dimicavit cum barbaris . Nec quidem equum suum illorum timore incitavit , celerius aliquando ponere vestigia . Said congregando omnia agmina sua , & de morte eripiendo ea , collocavit circa se : & sic primos attigit , & ordinatim proficiscens ad exercitus suos accessit . Ex tunc igitur videns Soltanus , quod post tanta quas acciderant exercitibus nostris , imperium nostrum , sicut oportunum erat , remembering hujusmodi dispensavit , ut ipsum rursum invaderet : mittens supplicavit imperio nostro , & deprecatoriis usus est sermonibus , & requisivit pacem illius , promittens omnem imperii nostri adimplere voluntatem , & servitium suum contra omnem hominem dare , & omnes qui in regno suo tenebantur captivos absolvere , & esse ex toto voluntatis nostras . 
 314 
 Ibidem ergo per duos dies integros , in omni potestate morati sumus , & cognito quod nihil poterat fieri contra civitatem Iconii , perditis testudinibus & machinis bellicis , eo qudd boves cecidissent a telis in modo pluviae jactis , qui eas trahebant : Simul autem eo quod & universa animalia nostra irruente in illa difficillima aegritudine laborabant , suscepit Soltani depraecationem & foedera & juramenta peracta sub vexillis nostris , & pacem suam ei dedit . Inde ingressum imperium nostrum in regionem suam regreditur , tribulationem habens non mediocrem super his quos perdidit consanguineis , maximas tamen Deo gratias agens , qui per suam bonitatem & nunc ipsum honoravit : Gratum autem habuimus , qudd quosdam nobilitatis tuae principes accidit interest nobiscum , qui narrabunt de omnibus quae acciderant , tuae voluntati seriem . Casterum autem , licet contristati simus propter illos qui ceciderunt : oportunum tamen duximus , de omnibus quae acciderant , declarare tibi , ut dilecto amico nostro , & ut permultiim conjuncto imperio nostro , per puerorum nostrorum intimam consanguinitatem . Vale . Data mense Novembris , indiction tertia . 
 The same in English . 
 IN the year 1177 , Manuel the emperor of Constantinople having fought a field with the Soldan of Iconium , and vanquished him , wrote unto Henry the second king of England in manner following . 
 Manuel Comnenus in Christ the everliving God a faithful emperor , descended of the lineage of Porphyrie , crowned by Gods grace , high , puissant , mighty , always most sovereign , and governor of the Roman ; unto Henry the most famous king of England , his most deer friend , greeting and all good success . Whereas our imperiali highness thinketh it expedient to advertise you our well-beloved friend of all our affairs : We thought it not amiss to signify unto your royal Majesty certain exploits at this present achieved by us . From the beginning therefore of our inauguration 
 315 
 our imperiali highness hath maintained most deadly feod and hostility against Gods enemies the Persians , seeing them so to triumph over Christians , to exalt themselves against the name of God , and to usurp over Christian kingdoms . For which cause our imperiali highness hath in some sort encountered them heretofore , and did as it pleased God to give us grace . And we suppose that your Majesty is not ignorant , what our imperiali highness hath often performed for their ruin and subversion . For even now , being urged thereunto , we have determined to lead a mighty army against them , and to wage war against all Persia . And albeit our forces be not so great as we could wish they were , yet have we according to the time , and the present state of things , strongly invaded them . Wherefore our Majesty imperiali hath gathered our armies together : but because we had in our army sundry carts laden with armour , engines , & other instruments for the assault of cities , to and exceeding weight we could not make any great speed in our journey . Moreover , while our imperiali highness was yet marching in our own dominions , before any barbarous enemy had fought against us : our people were visited with the most grievous disease of the flux , which being dispersed in our troops destroyed and slew great numbers , more then the sword of the enemy would have done . Which mischief so prevailing , did wonderfully abate our forces . But after we had invaded the Turkish frontiers , we had at the first very often and hight skirmishes , and the Turks came swarming to fight against our imperiali troops . Howbeit by Gods assistance those miscreants were altogether scattered and put to flight by our soldiers . But as we approached unto that straight passage which is called by the Persians Cibrilcimam , so many bans of Persian footmen and horsemen ( most whereof came from the innermost parts of Persia , to succour their Allies ) encountered our army , as were almost superior unto us in number . Wherefore the army of our 
 316 
 Imperiali highness , by reason of the straightness and difficulty of the way , being stretched ten miles in length ; and the first not being able to help the last , nor yet contrariwise the last to rescue the first , it came to pass that they were very far distant asunder . And in very deed the foremost troops were much separated from the guard of our imperiali person , who forgetting their fellows behind , would not stay any whit for them . Because therefore the Turkish bans knew full well by their former conflicts that it was bootless for them to assail the forefront of our battle , and perceiving the narownesse of the place to be a great advantage , they determined to set upon our rearward , and did so . Wherefore our passage being very straight , and the infidels assailing us upon the right hand and upon the left , and on all sides , and discharging their weapons as thick as hailstones against us , slew diverse of our men and horses . Hereupon , the slaughter of our people still increasing our majesty imperiali deemed it requisite to stay behind , and to succour our bans in the rearward , and so expecting them we sustained the fierce encounter of many thousand Persians . What exploits our Imperiali person achieved in the same skirmish , I hold it needless at this time to recount : your majesty may perhaps understand more of this matter by them which were there present . Howbeit our Imperiali highness being in the midst of this conflict , and enduring the fight with so great danger , all our hindermost troops , both Greeks , Latines , and other nations , retiring themselves close together , and not being able to suffer the violence of their enemies weapons , pressed on so hard , and were carried with such main force , that hastening to ascend the next hill for their better safeguard , they urged on them which went before , whither they would or no . Whereupon , much dust being raised , which stopped our eyes and utterly deprived us of sighed , and our men and horses pressing so soar one upon the neck of another , plunged them - 
 317 
 selves on the sudden into such a steep and dangerous valley , that treading one upon another , they quelled to death not only a multitude of the common soldiers , but diverse most honourable personages , & some of our near kinsmen . For who could restrain the irresistible throng of so huge a multitude ? Howbeit our Imperiali highness being environed with such swarms of Infidels , and giving and receiving wounds ( insomuch that the miscreants were greatly dismayed at our constancy ) we gave not over , but by Gods assistance won the field . Neither did we permit the enemy to ascend unto that place , from whence we skirmished with him . Neither yet spurred we on our horse any faster for all their assaults . But marshalling all our troops together , and delivering them out of danger , we disposed them about our Imperial person ; and so we overtook the foremost , and marched in good order with our whole army . Now the Soldan perceiving that notwithstanding the great damages which we had sustained , our Imperial highness provided to give him a fresh encounter , humbly submitting himself unto us , and using submiss speeches , made suit to have peace at our hands , and promised to fulfil the pleasure of our majesty Imperiali , to do us service against all comers , to release all our subject's which were captives in his realm , and to rest wholly at our command . Here therefore we remained two days with great authority ; and considering that we Iconitmin cou^ attempt nought against the city of Iconium , having tended have ost our warlike engines both for defence and for bene besieged , battery , for that the oxen which drew them were slain with the enemies weapons , falling as thick as hailstones : and also for because all our beasts in a manner were most grievously diseased ; our majesty Imperial accepted of the Sultans petition , league , and oath being made and taken under our ensigns , and granted our peace unto him . Then returned we into our own dominions , being greatly grieved for the loss of our deer kinsmen , and yielding unto God most humble 318 
 1190. thanks , who of his goodness had even now given us the victory . We are right glad likewise that some of your Certaim noble majesties princes and nobles accompanied us in this mtnofthektng actium , who are able to report unto you all things which fa 
 have happened . And albeit we were exceedingly grieved Emperor in for the loss of our people ; yet thought it we expedient his battle to signify unto you the success of our affairs , as unto gfl^tthe&ol-our well-beloved friend , & one who is very nearly allied anoflcmwm-unto our highness Imperial , by reason of the consanguinity of our children . Farewell . Given in the month of November , and upon the tenth Indiction . 
 