The travails of Ranulph Glanvile earl of Chester . 
 Anulphus Glanvile Cestriae Comes , vir nobilissimi generis , & utroque jure eruditus , in albo illustrium virorum a me merito ponendus venit . Ita probe omnes adolescendae suae annos legibus tum humanis tum divinis consecravit , ut non prius in hominem per aetatem evaserit , quam 
 nomen decusque ab insigni erudition sibi comparaverit . Cum profecti essent Francorum Heroes Ptolemaidem , inito cum Joanne Brenno Hierosolymorum rege concilio , Damiatam TEgypti urbem obsidendam constituebant , anno salutis humanae 1218. Misit illuc Henricus rex , ab Honorio 3 Rom. Pontifice rogatus , cum magna armatorum manu Ranulphum , ad remembering Christianam juvandam . Cujus virtus , Polydoro teste , in eo bello miris omnium laudibus celebrata fuit . Quo confecto negotio , Ranulphus in patriam reversus , scripsit , De legibus Angliae librum unum . Fertur praeterea , & alia quaedam scripsisse , sed tempus edax rerum , ea nobis abstulit . Claruit anno a Servatoris nostri nativitate 1230 confectus senio , dum Henricus tertius sub Antichristi tyrannide in Anglia regnaret . 
 The same in English . 
 RAnulph Glanvile earl of Chester , a man of a very noble house , and learned in both the Laws , deserves of duty to be here placed by me in the catalogue of worthy and notable men . He applied so well all the years of his youth to the study of humane and divine Laws , that he came not so soon to the age of a man , [ II i . 33. ] as he had purchased to himself by reason of his singular learning , renown and honour . When the noble men of France went to Ptolomais , upon the counsel of John Bren king of Jerusalem , they resolved to besiege 35° 
 Damiata a city of Egypt , in the year 1218. And then Henry the king upon the motion of Honorius the third , bishop of Room , sent thither this earl Ranulph with a great power of armed soldiers , to further the enterprise of the Christians : whose valour in that war ( by the testimony of Polidor Virgil ) was marvelously commended of all men . After the end of which business , he being returned into his country , wrote a book of the laws of England . It is also reported that he wrote other books , but time the destroyer of many memorials , hath taken them from us . He flourished in the year after the nativity of Christ 1230 , being very aged , and in the reign of K. Henry the third . 
 