A preparation of a voyage of King Henrie the fourth to the Holy land against the infidels in the year 1413 , being the last year of his reign : wherein he was prevented by death : written by Walsingham , Fabian , Polydore Virgile , and Holenshed . 
 N this foureteenth and last year of king Henries reign a council was held in the White friars in London , at the which among other things , order was taken for Order taken ships and galleys to be built and made ready , and all other things necessary to be provided for a voyage , which he 
 meant to make into the Holy land , there to recover the city of Jerusalem from the infidels : for it grieved him to consider the great malice of Christian princes , that were bent upon a mischievous purpose to destroy one another , to the peril of their own souls , rather then to make war against the enemies of the Christian faith , as in conscience , it seemed to him , they were bound . We find , sayeth Fabian in his Chronicle , that he was taken with his last sickness , while he was making his prayers at Saint Edwards shrine , there as it were , to take his leave , and so to proceed forth on his journey . He was so suddenly and grievously taken , that such as were about him feared lest he would have died presently : wherefore to relieve him , if it were possible , they bore 
 455 
 him into a chamber that was next at hand , belonging to the Abbot of Westminster , where they laid him on a pallet before the fire , and used all remedies to revive him . At length he recovered his speech , and perceiving himself in a strange place which he knew not , he willed to know if the chamber had any particular name , whereunto answer was made , that it was called Jerusalem . Then said the king , Laudes be given to the father of heaven : for now I know that I shall die here in this chamber , according to the prophesy of me declared , that I should depart this life in Jerusalem . 
 Of this intended voyage Polydore Virgile writeth in manner following : 
 Ost haze Henricus Rex memor nihil homini debere esse antiquius , quam ad officium justitiae , quae ad hominum utilitatem pertinet , omne suum studium 
 confer , protinus omisso civili bello , quo pudebat videre Christianos omni tempore turpiter occupari , de republica Anglica bene gubernanda , de bello in hosts communes [ II i . 72. ] sumendo , de Hierosolymis tandem aliquando recipiendis plura destinabat , classemque jam parabat , cum ei talia agenti atque meditanti casus mortem attulit : subito enim morbo tentatus , nulla medicina sublevari potuit . Mortuus est apud Westmonasterium , annum agens quadragesimum sextum , qui fuit annus salutis humanae I4I3 - 
 The same in English . 
 Afterwards , King Henry calling to mind , that nothing ought to be more highly esteemed by any man , then to do the utmost of his endeavour for the performance of justice , which tendeth to the good and benefit of mankind ; altogether abandoning civil war ( wherewith he was ashamed to see , how Christians at all times were dishonourably busied ) entered into a more deep consideration of well governing his Realm of 456 
 1413-England , of waging war against the common enemy , and of recovering , in process of time , the city of Jerusalem , yea , and was providing a navy for the same purpose , whenas in the very midst of this his heroical actium and enterprise , he was surprised with death : for falling into a sudden disease , he could not be cured by any kind of physic . He deceased at Westminster in the 46 year of his age , which was in the year of our Lord , 1413. 
 