The voyage of Sir Thomas Chaloner to Alger with Charles the lift 1541 , drawn out of his book De Republica Anglorum instauranda . 
 Homas Chalonerus patria Londinensis , study Cantabrigensis , education aulicus , religion pius , vereque Christianus fuit . Itaque cum juvenilem aetatem , mentemque suam humanioribus studiis roborasset , Domino Henrico Knevetto a potentissimo rege Henrico ejus nominis octavo 
 ad Carolum quintum imperatorem transmisso legato , una cum illo profectus est , tanquam familiaris amicus , vel eidem a consiliis . Quo quidem tempore Carolo quinto navali certamine a Genua & Corsica in Algyram in Africa contra Tureas classem solvente ac hostiliter proficiscente , ornatissimo illo Knevetto legato regis , Thoma Chalo-nero , Henrico Knolleo , & Henrico Isamo , illustribus viris eundem in illa expedition suapte sponte sequentibus , pariterque militantibus , mirifice vitam suam Chalonerus tutatus est . Nam triremi illa , in qua fuerat , vel scopulis allisa , vel gravissimis procellis conquassata , naufragus cum se diu natatu defendisset , deficientibus viribus , brachiis manibusque languidis ac quasi enervatis , prehensa dentibus cum maxima difficultate rudenti , quae ex altera triremi jam propinqua tum fuerat ejecta , non sine dentium aliquorum jactura ac fractura seize tandem recuperavit , ac domum integer relapsus est . 
 The same in English . 
 THomas Chaloner was by birth a Londiner , by study a Cantabrigian , by education a Courtier , by religion a devout and true Christian . Therefore after he had 
 confirmed his youth and mind in the studies of good learning , when Sir Henry Knevet was sent ambassador from the mighty Prince Henry the 8. to the Emperor Charles the fift , he went with him as his familiar friend , or as one of his Council . At which time the said Charles the 5. passing over from Genoa and Corsica to Alger in Africa in warlike sort , with a mighty army by sea , that honourable Knevet the kings ambassador , Thomas Chaloner , Henry Knolles , and Henry Isham , right worthy persons , of their own accord accompanied him in that expedition , & served him in that war , wherein Thomas Chaloner escaped most wonderfully with his life . For the gaily wherein he was , being either dashed against the rocks , or shaken with mighty storms , and so cast away , after he had saved himself a long while by swimming , when his strength failed him , his arms & hands being faint and weary , with great difficulty laying hold with his teeth on a cable , which was cast out of the next gaily , not without breaking and loss of certain of his teeth , at length recovered himself , and returned home into his country in safety . 
 