The Queens Letter to the great Turke 1582. written in commendation of Master Hareborne , when he was sent Ambassador . 
 LIZABETH etc. Augustissimo invic-tissim6que principi , etc. Ciim and postu - 
 latum nostrum Caesarea vestra Majestas , anno salvatoris nostri Jesu 1580. pacis foedus nobiscum pepigerit , conjunctum cum liberalissima privilegiorum quorun-dam concession , quorum beneficio sub - 
 diti nostri cum omni securitate tutissime liberrim6que ad universas & singulas Musulmanici imperii vestri parts terra marique proficisci , in iisque commercii exercendi gratia , 
 224 
 negotiari , habitare , manner , exind^que ire & redire cum volent queant , ab iis qui sub Caesarea vestra Majestate in magistratu sunt ubique locorum protegendi defendendique sine ulla vel corporum , vel bonorum laesion : nos tantae concessionis beneficium gratum acceptiimque habentes , quantum in nobis est , approbamus confirmamusque : pollicentes in verbo regio , quod nos eandem pacem sine ulla violation sartam tectamque conservabimus : facie-miisque ut subditi nostri privilegiorum sibi indultorum concession ita utantur , ut Caesaream vestram Majestatem magnificentissimae suae liberalitatis nunquam poenitere queat . Quoniam autem concessionis hujus virtus in usu potius quam verbis , Majestatis utriiisque nostrum sententia , ponenda videtur , voluimus hunc mandatarium virum Guilielmum Hareborne , ex satellitibus quibus ad corporis nostri tutelam utimur unum , virum compluribus virtutibus ornatum , ad Caesaream vestram Majestatem ablegare , qui tum nomine nostro vobis gratias ageret , tum ut ejus opera uteremur ad eam subditorum nostrorum mercimoniorum rationem stabiliendam , tam in Imperiali vestra civitate Constantinopoli , quam aliis imperii vestri Musulmanici locis , quae ex praescripto privilegiorum , Caesareae vestrae Majestatis benignitate , conceditur , & ex usu subditorum utriiisque nostrum erit . Ad quam remembering quoniam opus illi erit Caesareae vestrae Majestatis , authori-tate , summa contention ab eadem rogamus , velit id agere apud omnes qui sub se in magistratu sunt , ut quibuscunque poterunt melioribus modis huic nostro mandatario in Caesareae vestra : Majestatis placito exequendo , adjutores sint & esse velint . Ei enim hanc curam demandavimus , in qua qualm fidem suam sit honesti liberaturus erga Majestatem utriusque nostrum neutiquam dubitamus : cui etiam , ut in omnibus sint obtemperantes nostri subditi , quantum Caesareae vestrae Majestatis concessio patitur , volumus . Praeterea , cum praeclarus vir Mustafa sacrae Caesareae vestrae Majestatis Musulmannorum interpres egregiam navarit operam ut hoc inter nos foedus fieret , rogamus summopere ut in nostram gratiam eum in v 225 p 
 A.D. 
 1582. 
 Mustafa interpres . 
 Mustafaracarum ordinem Caesarea vestra Majestas recipere dignetur . Si in his aliisque omnibus honestis causis hic noster agens subdi tique nostri Imperatoriae vestrae sublimitatis aequanimitatem senserint , florebit inter has gentes nobile commercium , & nos omnibus officiis huic vestrae Majestatis favori & benevolentiae ( si ulla ratione rebus vestris commodare poterimus ) respondere libentissime semper paratae erimus . Deus optimus maximus mundi opifex , etc. 
 The same in English . 
 ELizabeth by the grace of the most mighty God and only creator of heaven and earth , of England , France , and Ireland Queen , the most invincible and most mighty defender of the Christian faith against all kind of idolatries of all that live among the Christians and falsely profess the name of Christ , unto the most Imperiali and most invincible prince , Sultan Murad Can , the most mighty ruler of the kingdom of Turkey , sole above all , and most sovereign Monarch of the East Empire , greeting . 
 Whereas at our request your Imperiali Majesty in the year of our Saviour Jesus 1580. hath entered into a league of peace with us , whereunto was united a most large Sc bountiful grant of certain privileges , by benefit whereof our subject's may with all securi tie most safely and freely travel ! by Sea and land into all and singular parts of your Musulmanlike Empire , and in the same exercising the trade of merchandise , may traffic , dwell , remain , depart from thence , and return thither at their pleasure , and in all places be maintained and defended from all damage of bodies and goods , by such as are in authority under your Imperiali Majesty : we thankfully and gratefully receiving the benefit of so great a privilege , as much as in us lies do approve and confirm the same , promising in the word of a Prince , that we will keep the said league perfect and inviolable , and will cause our subject's so to use the grant of the 226 
 privileges given unto them , as your Imperiali Majesty shall never have occasion to repent you of your most princely liberality . And because the force of this grant , in the judgement of both our majesties , seems rather to consist in the use thereof , then in the words , we thought good to send unto your Imperiali majesty this our ambassador William Hareborne , one of the Esquires of M-our body , which both on our behalf should yield thanks Harebo ™ e unto your majesty , and also that we might use his good sa < qor t0 the endeavour for the establishing of such order in our subject's Turke . trade of merchandise , as well in your Imperiali city of Constantinople , as in other places of your Musulmanlike Empire , as according to the prescript of the privileges is granted by your princely majesties goodness , and shall be for thee . benefit e of both our subject's . For performance whereof , because he stands in need of your Imperiali Majesties authority , we earnestly beseech the same , that you would cause all those which bee in authority under your Highness , by all their best means to aid and assist this our Ambassador in executing this your Imperiali Majesties pleasure , for unto him we have committed this charge : wherein how honestly he will discharge his credit towards both our Majesties , I no whit stand in doubt : to whom also our pleasure is , that all our subject's shall be obedient , as far as the grant of your Imperiali majesty doth permit . Moreover , whereas request fir 
 that worthy personage Mustafa , your Imperiali majesties tke preferring Interpretor , hath taken speciali pains for the procuring £ us of this league between us , we earnestly beseech you that for our sakes your Imperiali Majesty would vouchsafe to advance him unto the degree of the Mustafaraks or chief pensioners . If in these and in all other honest causes , our aforesaid Agent and our subjects shall find your Imperiali Highnesses favour , a noble traffic will flourish between these nations , and we ( if by any way we may stand your State in stead ) will always most willingly be ready to requite this your Majesties favour and good will with all kind of good offices . Almighty 
 227 
 God the maker of the world preserve and keep your Imperiali Majesty , etc. 
 