[ II i . 141. ] The charter of the privileges granted to the English , & the league of the great Turke with the Queens Majestic in respect of traffic , dated in June 1580. 
 Mmensa & maxima ex potestate potentissimi , terribilibusque verbis & nunquam finienda innumerabilive elementia & ineffabili auxilio sanctissimi & pura mente colendissimi tremendissimique universitatum creatoris , princeps temporum praesentium , unicus modernae 
 aetatis monarcha , totius orbis terrarum potentibus sceptra dividere potens , clementiae , gratiaeque divinae umbra , regnorum provinciarumve , & urbium civitatumve distributor permultarum : Nos sacratissimus Caesar Muzul-manicus , Mecchae , id est domus divinae , Medinae , gloriosissimae & beatissimae Jerusalem , Aegypti fertilissimae , Jemen & Zovan , Eden & Canan , Sami paciferae & Hebes , Jabza & Pazra , Zeruzub & Hale-178 
 piae , Caramariae & Diabekirvan , & Dulkadiriae , Babyloniae , & totius triplicis Arabiae , Euzorum & Georgianorum , Cypri divitis , & regnorum Asiae , Ozakior , Camporum Maris albi & nigri , Graeciae & Mesopotamiae , Africae & Goletae , Algeris & Tripolis occidentalis , selectissimaeque Europae , Budae , & Temeswar , & regnorum transalpinorum , & his similium permultorum princeps Caesarve sacerrimus , potentissimus Murad Can , filius principis Zelim Can , qui fuit Zoleiman Can , qui fuit Zelim Can , qui fuit Paiezid Can , qui fuit Mehemed Can , etc. 
 Nos princeps potentissimus Murad Can hoc in signum nostrae Caesareae amicitiae significamus , manifestamus , qubd in temporibus modernis Regina Angliae , Franciae , & Hiberniae Elizabetha in Christianitate honoratissima Regina ( cujus mercatorum exitus sit foelicissimus ) ad nostram excelsam , & justitiae plenam , fulgidissimamve portam , quae omnibus principibus mundi est refugium & requies , per egregium Guliel-mum Harebornum literas misit suas , quibus sua majestas significavit , quod tempore praeterito quidam subditi sui venissent ad nostram portam excelsam , & suam obedientiam erga eam demonstravissent , & ob eam causam illis quoque ad nostras ditiones mercandi gratia venire & redire poscerent , venia & potestas fuisset data : & quod in locis & hospitiis eorum per mare & terram nemo auderet impedire & illis damnum facere , mandatum Caesareum fuisset datum : & quod hanc nostram gratiam , quam paucis hominibus suae majestatis demonstravissemus , universis suis subditis concederemus , petebat . Quare , quemadmodum cum serenissimis benevolentiam & obedientiam , servitiave sua demonstrantibus erga nostram portam excelsam regibus & principibus confoederatis ( ut sunt rex Gallorum , Veneti , & rex Polonorum , & caeteri ) pacem & foedus sanctissimum pepigimus : sic etiam cum praefata Regina amicitiam custodiendam , pacem & foedus conjunximus . Illius igitur homines , & universi mercatores , 179 
 A.D. 
 I$8O . 
 Foedus Turcici Imperatoris cum Regna initum . 
 sine aliquo impedimento cum suis mercibus & oneribus cunctis ad nostras ditiones Caesareas pacifice & secure veniant , & suam exerceant mercaturam , maneant in suis statibus , & secundum suos mores negocientur . Et adhaec , sua majestas significabat ex hominibus suis aliquos jamdudum captos fuisse , & in captivitate detineri , & qudd him dimitterentur petebat , & quid sicut aliis principibus nobiscum confoederatis privilegia & mandata Caesarea super foedus sanctissimum dedissemus , sic praefatae quoque Reginae privilegium & mandata Caesarea ut daremus , nostrae Caesareae celsitudini placeret . Quare secundum nostram benevolentiam & gratiam innatam , optata suae majestatis apud nos grata fuere : Et hoc nostrum privilegium justitiis plenum dedimus majestati suae : Et Beglerbegis , Zanziacbegis famulis nostris , & Kaziis , id est , judicibus , & omnibus teloniatoribus omnium locorum , portuum , & vadorum firmiter mandamus , ut donec ex parte praefatae reginae foedus , & pax , & eorum conditions articulique ( ut convenit ) custodiuntur & servantur , nostrae qu6que Caesareae celsitudinis mandata sunt : 
 Articuli hujus 1 Ut praefatae Reginae homines , & subditi ejus qui-frimte&i . busvis rebus & mercibus , oneribus & suppellectilibus per mare in magnis & parvis navibus , per terram autem homines cum oneribus & pecoribus , secure & pacifici ad nostras ditiones Caesareas veniant , & nemo illis noceat , sed securi & sine aliquo impedimento negocientur , & in suis statibus & conditionibus permaneant . 
 2 Item , si praefati homines & mercatores in suis rectis viis & negociationibus aliquo modo caperentur , sine aliqua tergiversatione dimittantur liberenturque . 
 3 Item , si naves eorum ad aliquos portus & loca venire voluerint , pacifice omni in tempore , & sine impedimento veniant , & discedant in sua loca . 
 4 Item , si in tempestatibus maris naves eorum essent in periculo & auxilio opus esset illis , naves nostrae Caesareae celsitudinis , eardmque homines , & aliorum naves hominesque statim auxilium & opem ferant illis , mandamus . 
 180 
 5 Item , si edulia suis pecuniis emere voluerint , nemo resistat illis , sed sine impedimento edulia emant . 
 6 Item , si infortunium maris naves eorum in terram projecerit , Begi & judices , & caeteri nostri subditi sint auxilio illis , merces & res eorum quae remanserint iterum reddantur illis , & nemo impediat illos . 
 7 Item , si praefatae reginae homines , eorum interprets , & mercatores , sive per terram , sive per mare mercandi gratia ad nostras ditiones venire velint , legitimo telonio , & vectigali reddito , pacifice vagentur , capitanei & reges maris & navium , & aliud genus hominum per mare vagantium in personis , & rebus eorum , pecoribilsque , ne noceant illis . 
 8 Item , si aliquis ex Anglis debtor , aut « re alieno esset obstrictus , invenirique non possit , ratione debitorum alterius nullus nisi esset fidejussor capiatur aut impediatur . 
 9 Item , si Anglus testamentum fecerit , & sua bona cuiciinque legaverit , illi dentur bona illius , & si sine testamento moreretur , consul eorum cuiciinque sociorum mortui hominis dixerit debere dari , illi dentur bona mortui hominis . 
 io Item , si Angli , & ad Angliam pertinentium locorum mercatores & interprets , in vendendis & emendis mercibus fidejussionibus & rebus aliquid negocii habuerint , ad judicem veniant , & in librum inscribi faciant negotium , & si voluerint , literas qu6que accepiant a judice , propterea quod si aliquid inciderit , videant librum & literas , & secundum tenorem eorum perficiantur negocia eorum suspecta : si autem neque in librum inscriberentur , n^que literas haberent , judex falsa testimonia non admittat , sed secundiim justitiam legem administrans non sinat illos impediri . 
 ii Item , si aliquis diceret , quod isti Christiani nostrae fidei Muzulmanicae male dixerint , & eam vituperiis affecerint , in hoc negocio etiam & aliis , testes falsi minime admittantur . 
 12 Item , si aliquis eorum aliquod facinus patraret , 
 181 
 A.D. 
 1580. 
 [ II i . 142. ] 
 & fugiens non possit inveniri , nullus nisi esset fidejussor pro alterius facto retineatur . 
 13 Item , si aliquod mancipium Anglicum inveniretur , & consul eorum peteret illud , examinetur diligenter mancipium , & si inventum fuerit Anglicum , accipiatur , & reddatur Anglis . 
 14 Item , si aliquis ex Anglis huc venerit habitandi aut mercandi gratis , sive sit uxoratus , sive sit sine uxore , non solvat censum . 
 15 Item , si in Alexandria , in Damasco , in Samia , in Tunis , in Tripoli occidentali , in Aegypti portubus & in aliis omnibus locis , ubiciinque voluerint facere Consuls , faciant : Et iterum si voluerint eos mutare , & in loco priorum consulum alios locare , libere faciant , & nemo illis resistat . 
 16 Item , si illorum interpres in arduis negotiis occupatus abesset , donec veniret interpres , expectetur , & interim nemo illos impediat . 
 17 Item , si Angli inter se aliquam litem haberent & vellent ad suos consuls ire , nemo resistat illis , sed libere veniant ad Consuls suos , ut secunditm mores eorum finiatur lis orta . 
 18 Item , si post tempus aut datum hujus privilegii , piratae , aut alii aliqui liberi gubernatores navium per mare vagantes , aliquem ex Anglis ceperint , & trans mare vel cis mare venderint , secundum justitiam examinetur : & si Anglus inventus fuerit , & religionem Muzulmani-cam assumpserit , libere dimittatur : si autem adhuc esset Christianus , Anglis reddatur , & emptores suam pecuniam ab illo petant , i quo emerant . 
 19 Item , si nostrae Caesareae Celsitudinis naves armatae exiverint ad mare , & ibi invenerint naves Anglicas merces portantes , nemo impediat illas , imo amice tractentur , & nullum damnum faciant illis : Quemadmodum Gallis , Venetis , & caeceris nobiscum confoederatis regibus , & principibus privilegium , & articulos privilegiis dedimus , & concessimus , simili modo his qu6que Anglis privilegium & articulos privilegiis dedimus & concessimus , 182 
 & contra legem divinam , & hoc privilegium , nemo unquam aliquid audeat facere . 
 20 Item , si naves magnae , & parvae in itinere & loco ubi stant detinebuntur , nemo illos audeat impedire , sed potiiis auxilio sint illis . 
 21 Item , si latrones & fures vi raperent naves illorum , naviiimque merces , magna diligentia quaerantur latrones & fures , & severissimi puniantur . 
 22 Ad extremum , Beglerbegii , & Zanziacbegi , Capitanei nostri , Mancipia , & per mare navigantes servi Capitaneorum , & Judices , & Teloniatores , & Gubernatores navium Reiz dicti , & liberi Reiz , omnes isti praefati , secundum tenorem hujus privilegii , tenoremve articulorum ejus , omnia facere teneantur , & debeant . Et donec hoc in privilegio descriptum foedus , & pax illius Majestatis ex parte sanctfe servabitur , & custodietur , ex parte etiam nostra Caesarea custodiri , & observari mandamus . 
 Datum Constantinopoli , anno nostri prophetae Sanctissimi 988 , in principio mensis Junii , anno autem Jesu 1580. 
 The interpretation of the letters , or privilege of [ II i . 143. ] the most mighty and Musumanlike Emperor Zuldan Murad Can , granted at the request of Elizabeth by the grace of the most mighty God , and only Creator of heaven and earth , of England , France and Ireland Queen , confirming a peace and league betwixt both the said Princes and their subject's . 
 E most sacred Musulmanlike Emperor , by the infinite and exceeding great power , by the everlasting and wonderful clemency , & by the unspeakable help of the most mighty & most holy God , creator of all things , to be worshipped and feared with all pureness of mind , and rever 
 ence of speech , The prince of these present times , the only Monarch of this age , able to give sceptres to 183 
 the potentates of the whole world , the shadow of the divine mercy and grace , the distributer of many kingdoms , provinces , towns and cities , Prince , and most sacred Emperor of Mecca , that is to say , of Gods house , of Medina , of the most glorious and blessed Jerusalem , of the most fertile Egypt , Jemen and Jovan , Eden and Canaan , of Samos the peaceable , and of Hebes , of Jabza , and Pazra , of Zeruzub and Halepia , of Caramaria and Diabekirvan , of Dulkadiria , of Babylon , and of all the three Arabias , of the Euzians and Georgians , of Cyprus the rich , and of the kingdoms of Asia , of Ozakior , of the tracts of the white and black Sea , of Grecia and Mesopotamia , of Africa and Goleta , of Alger , and of Tripolis in the West , of the most choice and principali Europe , of Buda and Temeswar , and of the kingdoms beyond the Alpes , and many others such like , most mighty Murad Can , the son of the Emperor Zelim Can , which was the son of Zoleiman Can , which was the son of Zelim Can , which was the son of Paiizid Can , which was the son of Mehemed Can , etc. 
 We most mighty prince Murad Can , in token of our Imperiali friendship , do signify and declare , that now of late Elizabeth Queen of England , France and Ireland , the most honourable Queen of Christendom ( to whose merchants we wish happy success ) sent her letters by her worthy servant William Hareborne unto our stately and most magnificent Porch replenished with justice , which is a refuge and Sanctuary to all the princes of the world , by which letters her Majesty signified , that whereas heretofore certain of her subject's had repaired 
 to our said stately Porch , and had showed their obedience to the same , and for that cause had desired 
 that leave and liberty might also be granted unto them , to come and go for traffics sake too and from our dominions , and that our Imperial commandment might be given , that no man should presume to hurt or hinder them , in any of their abodes or passages by sea or land , and whereas she requested that we would grant to all 
 184 
 her subject's in general , this our favour , which before we had extended only to a few of her people : therefore as we have entered into amity , and most holy league with the most excellent kings and princes our confederates , showing their devotion , and obedience or services towards our stately Porch ( as namely the French king , the Venetians , the king of Polonia and others ) so also we have contracted and inviolable amity , peace and league with the aforesaid Queen . Therefore we give licence to all her people , and merchants , peaceably and safely to come unto our Imperiali dominions , with all their merchandise and goods without any impeachment , to exercise their traffic , to use their own customs , and to buy and fell according to the fashions of their own country . 
 And further her Majesty signified unto us , that certain of her people had heretofore be taken prisoners , and were detained in captivity , and required that they might be set at liberty , and that as we had granted unto other Princes our confederates , privileges , and Imperiali decrees , concerning our most inviolable league with them , so it would please our Imperial Majesty to grant and confirm the like privileges , and princely decrees to the aforesaid Queen . 
 Wherefore according to our humanity and gracious ingrafted disposition , the requests of her Majesty were accepted of us , and we have granted unto her Majesty this privilege of ours agreeable to reason & equity . And we straightly command all our Beglerbegs , and Zanziacbegs our servants , and our Reyz , that is to say , our Judges , and all our customers in all places , havens and passages , that as long as this league and amity with the conditions , and articles thereof , are kept and observed on the behalf of the aforesaid Queen . 1 Our Imperiali commandment and pleasure is , that the people and subject's of the same Queen , may safely and securely come to our princely dominions , with their goods and merchandise , and ladings , and other commodities by sea , in great and small vessels , and by land with their carriages 185 
 and cattles , and that no man shall hurt them , but they may buy and fell without any hindrance , and observe the customs and order of their own country . 
 [ II i . 144. ] 2 Item , if the aforesaid people and merchants shall 
 at any time in the course of their journeis and dealings by any means taken , they shall be delivered and enlarged , without any excuse or cavillation . 
 3 Item , if their ships purpose to arrive in any of our ports and havens , it shall lawful for them so to do in peace , and from thence again to depart , without any let or impediment . 
 4 Item , if it shall happen that any of their ships in tempestuous weather shall be in danger of loss and perishing , and thereupon shall stand in need of our help , we will , and command that our men and ships be ready to help and succour them . 
 5 Item , if they shall willing to buy any victuals for their money , no person shall withstand them , but they shall buy the same without any disturbance to the contrary . 
 6 Item , if by any casualty their ships shall be driven on shore in peril of shipwreck , our Begs and Judges , and other our Subject's shall succour them , and such wares , and goods of theirs as shall be recovered from the loss , shall be restored to them , and no man shall wrong them . 
 7 Item , if the people of the aforesaid Queen , their interpreters and merchants , shall for traffic sake , either by land or Sea repair to our dominions paying our lawful toll and custom , they shall have quiet passage , and none of our Captains or governors of the Sea , and ships , nor any kind of persons , shall either in their bodies , or in their goods and cattles , any way molest them . 
 8 Item , if any Englishman shall grow in debt , and so owe money to any other man , and thereupon does absent himself that he can not be found , let no man be arrested or apprehended for any other men debt , except he be the surety . 
 186 
 9 Item , if any Englishman shall make his will and testament , to whom soever by the same he shall give his goods , the party shall have them accordingly , and if he die intestate , he to whom the Consuli or governor of the society shall say the goods of the dead are to be given , he shall have the same . 
 io Item , if the Englishmen or the merchants and interpreters of any places under the jurisdiction of England shall happen in the buying and selling of wares , by promises or otherwise to come in Controversy , let them go to the Judge , and cause the matter to be entered into a book , and if they will , let them also take letters of the Judge testifying the same , that men may see the book and letters , whatsoever thing shall happen , and that according to the tenor thereof the matter in controversy and in doubt may be ended : but if such things be neither entered in book , nor yet the persons have taken letters of the Judge , yet he shall admit no false witness , but shall execute the Law according to justice , and shall not suffer them to be abused . 
 11 Item , if any man shall say , that these being Christians have spoken any thing to the derogation of our holy faith and religion , and have slandered the same , in this matter as in all others , let no false witnesses in any case be admitted . 
 12 Item , if any one of them shall commit any great crime , and flying thereupon cannot be found , let no man be arrested , or detained for another men fact , except he be his surety . 
 13 Item , if any slave shall be found to be and Englishman , and their Consuli or governor shall sue for his liberty , let the same slave be diligently examined , and if he be found in deed to be English , let him be discharged and restored to the Englishmen . 
 14 Item , if any Englishman shall come hither either to dwell or traffic , whither he be married or unmarried , he shall pay no poll or head money . 
 15 Item , if either in Alexandria , Damasco , Samos , 187 
 A.D. 
 I58O . 
 Tunis , Tripolis in the west , the port towns of . / Egypt , or in any other places , they purpose to choose to themselves Consuls or governors , let them do so , and if they will altar them at any time , and in the room of the former Consuls place others , let them do so also , and no man shall restrain them . 
 16 Item , if their interpreter shall at any time absent , being occupied in other serious matters , let the thing then in question be stayed and differed till his coming , and in the mean time no man shall trouble them . 
 17 Item , if any variance or controversy shall arise among the Englishmen , and thereupon they shall appeal to their Consuls or governors , let no man molest them , but let them freely do so , that the controversy begun may be finished according to their own customs . 
 18 Item , if after the time and date of this privilege , any pirates or other free governors of ships trading the Sea shall take any Englishman , and shall make sale of him , either beyond the Sea , or on this side of the Sea , the matter shall examined according to justice , and if the party shall found to be English , and shall receive the holy religion , then let him freely be discharged , but if he will still remain a Christian , let him then be restored [ II i . 145. ] to the Englishmen , and the buyers shall demand their money again of them who sold the man . 
 19 Item , if the ships of war of our Imperiali highness shall at any time go forth to Sea , and shall find any English ships laden with merchandise , no man shall hinder them , but rather shall use them friendly , and do them no wrong , even as we have given and granted articles , and privileges to the French , Venetians , and other Kings and princes our confederates , so also we have given the like to the English : and contrary to this our divine law and privilege , let no man presume to do any thing . 
 20 Item , if either their great or small ships shall in the course of their voyage , or in any place to which 
 188 
 1581. come , be stayed or arrested , let no man continue the same arrest , but rather help and assist them . 
 21 Item , if any thieves and robbers shall by force take away any of their ships , and merchandise , let the same thieves and robbers be sought , and searched for with all diligence , and let them be punished most severely . 
 22 Last of all the Beglerbegs , and Zanziacbegs , our Captains , our slaves and servants of Captains using the sea , and our Judges , customers and governors of ships called Reiz , and free Reiz , all these , according to the tenor of this privilege and articles , shall bound to do accordingly : and , as long as the Queen of England on her part shall duly keep and observe this league and holy peace , expressed in this privilege , we also for our Imperial part , do charge and command the same so long to be straightly kept and observed . 
 Given at Constantinople , in the 988. year of our most holy prophet , in the beginning of the month of June , And in the year of Jesus 1580. 
 