A letter written in Spanish by Sir Edward Osborne , to the king of Alger , the 20. of July , 1584. in the behalf of certain English captives there detained . 
 Uy alto y poderoso Rey , 
 Sea servida vostra alteza . Como la muy alta y potentissima magestad del Gran Senor tiene hecho articulos de privilegios con la Serenissima Magestad de nuestra Reyna d’Inglatierra , para los vassallos della poder libremente yr y 
 bolver , y tratar por mar y tierra en los dominios de sum potentissima Magestad , Como a la claram paresce por los dichos articulos , de che embiamos el tractado all Senor Juan Tipton nuestro commissario , para le muestrar a vostra Alteza . Contra el tenor de los quales articulos por dos galeras the sum ciudad de Alger would sido hechado all fondo en la mar un des nuestros navios que venia de Patras , que es en la Morea , cargado de corintes y otras mercaderias , que alii se compraron , y las mass de la gente del la matados y ahogados en la mar , y el resto est an detenidos por esclavos : cosa muy contraria a los dichos articulos y privilegios . Que es occasion , que por esto supplicamos a vostra Alteza muy humilmente , que , pues que la potentissima magestad deal Gran Sennor es servida nos favorescer por los dichos articulos , tambien sea servida vostra Alteza assistirnos en ellos , otorgan-donos por vostra autoridad sum ajuda y favour , segun que esperamos , para que puedan estar libres , y bolver para anca aquellos pobres hombres ansi hechos esclavos , common dicho es . Y ansi mismo , que mand vostra Alteza dar orden a los capitanes , maestres y gente de las galeras , que nos dexen de aqui adelante hazer nuestro trafico con seys naos cada anno para Turquia a los dominios del gran Sennor a paz y a salvo , por no contrariar a los dichos nuestros privilegios , Llevando cada una de nuestras 268 
 SIR EDWARD OSBORNE’S LETTER dichas naos por se conoscer un salvo condutto de sum alta & potentissima magestad . Y con esta vostra tan senal-lada merced y favour que en esso reciberemos , quedaremos nosotros con grandissima obligation a vostra Alteza de servir la por ello , segun que el dicho Sennor Juan Tipton , a quien nos reportamos de todo lo demas , mejor informefa vostra Alteza : Cuya serenissima persona y estado supplicamos y pidimos a Dios omnipotent prosper y accrescente con toda felicitad y honra . De la ciuidad de Londres a los veynte dias de Julio deal mil y quinientos y ochenta y quatro annos . 
 All servito de vuestra Alteza por y en nombre de todos los tratantes en Turquia , Io el Mayor de Londres , 
 Edward Osborne . 
 The same in English . 
 Right high and mighty king , 
 May it please your highness to understand , that the most high and most mighty majesty of the Grand Signor hath confirmed certain articles of privileges with the most excellent majesty of our Queen of England , that her subject's may freely go and come , and traffic by sea and land in the dominions of his most mighty majesty , as appears more at large by you said articles , whereof we have sent the copy unto M. Joh. Tipton our Commissary , to show the same unto your highness . Against the tenor of which articles , one of our ships which came from Patras which is in Morea , laden with corants and other merchandizes which were bought in those parts , was sunk by 2. galleys of your ci tie of Alger , and the greatest number of the men thereof were slave and drowned in the sea , the residue being detained as slaves : And act very contrary to the meaning of the aforesaid articles and privileges : which is the occasion that by these presents we beseech your highness very humbly , that since it hath pleased the most mighty majesty of the Grand Signor to favour us with the said 269 
 A.D. 
 I584 . 
 And English ship sunk by two galleys of Alger . 
 privileges , it would please your Highness in like manner to assist us in the same , granting us by your authority , your aid and favour , according as our hope is , that these poor men so detained in captivity , as is aforesaid , may be set at liberty , & return into their country . And likewise that your highness would send to give order to the captains , master's and people of your galleys , that from henceforth they would suffer us to use . our _ traffic with sixe ships yearly into Turkey unto the dominions of the Grand Signor in peace and safety , [ IL i . 176. ] that they do not withstand those our said privileges , every one of our foresaid ships carrying with them a passport of his most high and most mighty majesty to be known by . And for that your so singular favour and courtesy which in so doing we shall receive , we on our part with all bounden duty unto your highness , will seek to honour you in that behalf , according as the said master John Tipton ( to whom we refer our selves touching all other circumstances ) shall more at large inform your highness , whose most excellent person and estate , we pray and beseech almighty God to prosper and increase with all felicity and honour . From the City of London , the 20. of July , 1584. 
 At the service of your highness , for and in the name of our whole company trading into Turkey , I Mayor of London , Edward Osburne . 
 