The Passport in Italian granted to Thomas Shingleton Englishman , by the king of Algier . 1583. 
 hey Assan Basham Vicere & lochotenente e capitan della jurisditione de Algier doniamo e concediamo libero salvo condutto a Thomas Shingleton mercadante , che possi con suo vassello e marinari de che nation se siano , e mercadantia di qual si voglia nation , andare & venire , 
 e negotiare , e contrattare liberamente in questa citta de 
 Algier & all tri lochi de la nostra jurisditione cosi di ponente comi di Levante : & cosi anchora commandiamo all capitan di mare di Algier & worser ’ altri lochi de nostra jurisditione , Rays de Vasselli & capitani de Levante , & altri capitani di vasselli tanto grossi como picholi , si commanda a qual si voglia , che trovando il sopradetto Thomas Shingleton Inglese nelli mari di Genua , Francia , Napoli , Calabria , e Sardigna con suo vassello e mercantia , & homini de che nationi si siano , non gli debba molestare , ne piggliare , ne toccare cosa de nessuna manera tanto di denare , como di qual si voglia altra robba , sotto la pena e disgratia di perdir la vita & la robba : Et per quanto havete a caro la gratia del Gran Signor nostro patron Sultan Murates Ottomano , lo lasciarete andare per suo camino senza dargli nessuno impedimento . Dato in 
 266 
 Algieri in nostro reggio Palazzo , sigillato del nostro reggio sigillo , e fermato della gran ferma , & scritto del nostro reggio Secretario , ill di 23 de Jenaro , 1583. 
 The same in English . 
 WE Assan Bassha Viceroy and lieutenant , and captain of the jurisdiction of Algier , give and grant free safeconduct to Thomas Shingleton merchant , that with his ship and mariners , of what nation soever they be , & with his merchandise of what country soever , he may go and come , and trade & traffic freely in this city of Algier , and other places of our jurisdiction , as well of the West as of the East . And in like sort we further command the captain of the sea of Algier , and other places of our jurisdiction , the Reiz of vessels & captains of the Levant , & other captains of vessels aswell great as small , whosoever they be , we do command them , that finding the foresaid Thomas Shingleton Englishman in the seas of Genua , France , Naples , Calabria , and Sardinia , with his ship and merchandise , [ II i . 175. ] and men of what nation soever they be , that they molest them not , neither take nor touch any kind of thing of theirs , neither money nor any other kind of goods , under pain and peril of losing of their lives and goods : and as you make account of the favour of the Grand Signor our lord Sultan Murates Hottoman , so see you let him pass on his way without any manner of impediment . Dated at Alger in our kingly palace , signed with our princely Signet , and sealed with our great seal , and written by our Secretary of estate , the 23. of Januarie , 1583. 
 