A letter of the honourable M. Wil. Hareborne her majesties ambass . with the grand Signior to M. Tipton , appointing him Consul of the English in Algier , Tunis , & Tripolis of Barbarie . 
 Aster Tipton , I have received among others , yours of the 10. of November 1584. by Soliman Sorda , certifying the receipt of mine of the 24. of June 1584. with the 3. commandments , which not ' being registered , let it now be done . Where you write the force of the privi - 
 lege to be broken by our ships in shooting , & therefore be lawfully taken , you are deceived , for of those taken 276 
 in them , hath the grand Signior now delivered us free , Wil. Moore , and Rob. Rawlings , & further promised the rest in like case , wheresoever they be , & that hereafter no violence shall showed , considering ours be merchant's ships which go peaceably in their voyage , & were ignorant of the order of Algier , neither knew afar off , whither they were friends or the Christians galleys in league against us , of whom they most doubted , who not suffering our ships to come into these parts , will make prize of the goods & captive the men , so as they are not to let them come nigh them : & since ours have not done contrary to the articles of the same privilege , wherein is no order for Algier prescribed us , as both by the originali now sent us , & also by the copy now sent you from London you may perceive , they according to right are as abovesaid to be set free , and their goods restored , which if it be not there accomplished as the grand Signior hath now commanded & most faithfully promised , neither yet in case of their denial , those offenders punished here , and our injuries redressed , we are to demand our Congie , & command our merchant's her majesties subject's , to end their traffic here , which in our country commodities is proved & found by the grand Signior to be so beneficial to his countries as we are assured so well thereof , as also for the honour which his ancestors never had of friendship w‘ so mighty a prince as is her majesty , he will not but maintain you faith promised her , & the intercourse in due force . And where you say y‘ the grand Signor his letters , in the behalf of the French , were no more accepted there , then of a mean man , nor took no place , that is not material to us , our letters are after another sort much more effectual . For our case & theirs be found far different , in y‘ they be not only now out of favour with him , but also the commodities which they bring hither , as sugar , paper , bracelets , ropes of baste almonds , etc. all which may be here well spared , & we contrarily so well esteemed , as he never denied us any thing since our 
 277 
 coming demanded , which neither their ambassador , nor the Venetian could have here , & therefore we rest persuaded , knowing the wisdom of the Beglerbeg , who is advised by his friends from hence , of this our credit w‘ his master , he will so respect his commandments , as to accomplish you tenor thereof according to our desire . And where you say y‘ the Janizers rule all there , I know right well y* if things be not done as the grand Signior commands , his lieutenant must answer it . And therefore I am fully persuaded if he do what he may they dare not resist him , for if they should , those rebels should not be unpunished of you grand Signior . And though they speak their pleasures among themselves there , yet they be not so brutish , but they well consider that their master you grand Signior may not be gainsaid or mocked of any . For upon his word dependeth the life or death even of the chiefest , as I have seen since my coming hither . So whatsoever these Janizaries say , they will be better advised in their deeds then to withstand their Viceroy , if he himself will use his lawful power , which if he do not , he cannot purge himself here of their evil proceedings against the grand Signiors friends : for the feet may not rule the body , but contrariwise , the head , the feet , and all the rest of the members . And for that neither for fear , affection or otherwise you omit as a faithful true subject to her majesty to do your duty , I do by my warrant going herewith charge you , & in her majesties name , to the uttermost to use your good and faithful endeavour , as becomes a true subject , & in all things that may concern her majesties good service , assisting the Chaus with the rest of our messengers in counsel , travel , & what else shall be thought requisite for your good discharge of your duty . And to you end you may boldly proceed herein as also for the good opinion sir Edward Osborne & the company have of you , and I no less persuaded of your wisdom , upright dealing , & good experience in those parts , do send you herewith the grand 278 
 Signiors & our patents for exercising the office of Consul there , in Tripolis & Tunis : by virtue of which authority you may without fear proceed as the office doth challenge in defence of our privilege , to redress all injuries ofired our nation . Which if you cannot get reformed there of the Beglerbies upon your complaint , I thereof advertised , shall do it here , and to the uttermost maintain you in all rightful causes whatsoever , doubt you not . And hereafter according to your advice , I will and do give our ships order not to fight with any galleys of Alger , but to hoist out their skiff and go aboard to show them their safeconduct , & to present the captain with a garment , & you there in such like case are to take order that they do not forceably take any thing from them . Nothing doubting but the Viceroy ( whose friehdship in her majesties behalf I desire ) will not only perform the same your just request , & according to right , restore to liberty our men since the privilege taken , but also cause those y‘ took & sunk our ships to answer the valve , which I have set down truly , and rather with the least in the Inventory translated into 
 Turkish , whereof the enclosed is the copy in English , which I send to the end you may be the better informed of my demand by this our Chaus Mahomet , with whom in all things you are to confer of matters expedient , for the honour of her majesties country , & the commodity , and liberty of poor captives , which if the Viceroy do well consider , according to his wisdom , as the grand Signior doth thereof , he shall well perceive it not only a great honour to his master as aforesaid , to continue this amity with her majesty , but chiefly to the whole estate of his kingdom exceeding profitable , which by this means shall be abundantly served with the chiefest commodities they want , with many other things of more importance to the grand Signior his contentation , not herein to be mentioned . For I know the Viceroys experienced wisdom can well consider thereof , in such sort as he will not deny to accomplish his master's commandment , & our earnest 279 
 The Inventory of our ships and goods sunk and taken by the galleys of Alger . 
 request in so small a matter as this we require , whereof I expect no refusal ! : for thereby he shall increase his honour with the grand Signior , be in credit with her majesty , be void of trouble which hereafter by future suit against him may happen , and his galleys free of such doubtful issue as doth chance , fighting with our ships . Which , as it is well known to all the world , have so great hearts as never cowardly to yield to their enemies . And that therefore in that respect ( after the proverb , like esteem of their like ) they are the more of such a valiant prince as is their Viceroy and his courageous soldiers to be in all friendship cherished and better esteemed . If the captain Bassa had be returned from Capha , I would in like manner have procured his letters , which for that he is not , I doubt nothing but that the grand Signiors will suffice . Thus commending your self and these proceedings to the almighty his merciful direction , I bid you most heartily well to fare . From my mansion Rapamat nigh Pera , this 30. of March 1585. 
 