The Queens letters to the Turke 1584. for the restitution of the ship called the Jesus , and the English captives detained in Tripolie in Barbarie , and for certain other prisoners in Argier . 
 LIZABETHA , Dei ter maximi & unici coeli terraeque conditoris gratia , Angliae , Franciae , & Hiberniae Regina , fidei Christianae contra omnes omnium inter Christianos degentium , Christique nomen falso profitentium idololatrias , invictissima & potentissima defensatrix : augustissimo , 
 invictissim6que principi , Zultan Murad Can , Musulmanici regni dominatori potentissimo , imperiique Orientis Monarchae , supra omnes soli & supremo salutem , & multos cum summa rerum optimarum affluentia foelices & fortunatos annos . 
 Augustissime & potentissime Imperator , biennio jam peracto , ad Caesaream vestram Majestatem scripsimus , ut dilectus noster famulus Guilielmus Harebornus , vir ornatissimus pro legato nostro Constantinopoli , aliisque Musulmanici imperii ditionibus , sublimi vestra autho-ritate reciperetur : simul etiam Angli subditi nostri commercium & mercaturam , in omnibus illis provinciis exerceant , non miniis liberi , quam Galli , Poloni , Veneti , 3 ” 
 Germani , caeterique vestri confcederati , qui varias Orientis parts peragrant , operam nauantes , ut mutuis commerciis conjungatur Oriens cum Occident . 
 Quae privilegia , cum nostris subditis Anglis invictissima vestra Majestas literis & diplomat suo liberalissime in-dulserit , facere non potuimus , quin quas maximas animus noster capere potest gratias , eo nomine ageremus : sperantes before , ut haec instituta commerciorum ratio maximas utilitates , & commoda utrinque , tam in imperii vestri ditiones , quam regni nostri provincias secum adferat . 
 Id ut plane fiat , ciim nuper subditi nostri nonnulli Tripoli in Barbaria & Argellae ab ejus loci incolis voluntatem vestram forte nescientibus male habiti fuerint , & immaniter di vexati , Caesaream vestram Majestatem benevole rogamus , ut per Legatum nostrum eorum causam cognoscas , & postremd earum provinciarum pros ac praefectis imperes , ut nostri libere in illis sine vi aut injuria deinceps versari , & negotia 
 gerere possint . 
 Et nos omni opera vicissim studebimus ea omnia praestare , quae Imperatoriae vestrae Majestati ullo pacto grata before intelligemus : quam Deus unicus mundi conditor optimus maximus diutissime incolumem & florentem servet . Datae in palatio nostro Londini , [ II i . 192. ] quinto die Mensis Septembris : anno Jesu Christi Servatoris nostri , 1584. Regni vero nostri vicessimo sexto . 
 regibu locis , 
 The same in English . 
 Lizabeth , by the grace of the most high God , and only maker of heaven and earth , of England , France and Ireland Queen , and of the Christian 
 faith , against all the Idolaters and false professors of the Name of Christ dwelling among the Christians , most invincible and puissant defender : to the most valiant and invincible Prince , Zultan Murad Can , the most mighty ruler of the kingdom of Musulman , and of the East 
 312 
 Empire the only and highest Monarch above all , health , and many happy and fortunate years , with great abundance of the best things . 
 Most noble and puissant'Emperour , about two years now passed , we wrote unto your Imperial ! Majesty , that our well-beloved servant , William Hareborne , a man of great reputation and honour , might be received under your high authority , for our Ambassador in Constantinople , and other places , under the obedience of your Empire of Musulman : And also that the Englishmen , being our Subject's , might exercise intercourse and merchandise in all those Provinces , no less freely then the French , Polonians , Venetians , Germane , and other your confederates , which travel through diverse of the East parts : endeavouring that by mutual traffic , the East may be joined and knit to the West . 
 Which privileges , when as your most puissant Majesty , by your letters and under your dispensation most liberally and favourably granted to our Subject's of England , we could not less doe , but in that respect give you as great thanks , as our heart could conceive , trusting that it will come to pass , that this order of traffic , so well ordained , will bring with it self most great profits and commodities to both sides , as well to the parties subject to your Empire , as to the Provinces of our kingdom .. Which thing that it may be done in plain and effectual manner , whereas some of our Subject's of late at Tripolis in Barbarie , and at Argier , were by the inhabitants of those places ( being perhaps ignorant of your pleasure ) evil entreated and grievously vexed , we do friendly and lovingly desire your Imperiali Majesty , that you will understand their causes by our Ambassador , and afterwards give commandment to the Lieutenants and Presidents of those Provinces , that our people may henceforth freely , without any violence , or injury , travel , and do their business in those places . 
 And we again with all endeavour , shall study to perform all those things , which we shall in any wise 313 
 A.D. 
 1584. 
 understand to be acceptable to your Imperiali Majesty , which God , the only maker of the world , most best and most great , long keep in health , and flourishing . Given in our palace at London , the fift day of the month of September , in the year of Jesus Christ our Saviour , 1584. And of our reign , the 26. 
 