A Letter written from Goa by Master Ralph Fitch to Master Leonard Poor abovesaid . 
 Oving friend Master Poor , etc. Since my departure from Aleppo , I have not written unto you any letters , by reason that at Babylon I was sick of the flux , and being sick , I went from thence for Balsara , which was twelve days journey down the river Tygris , where we had 
 extreme hight weather , which was good for my disease , ill fare , and worse lodging , by reason our boat was pestered with people . In eight days , that which I did eat was very small , so that if we had stayed two days longer upon the water , I think I had died : but coming to Balsara , presently I mended , I thank God . There we stayed 14 days , and then we embarked our selves for Ormuz , where we arrived the fifth of September , and were put in prison the ninth of the same month , where we continued until the 11 of October , and then were shipped for this city of Goa in the captains ship , with and 114 horses , and about 200 men : and passing by Diu & Chaul , where we went on land to Diu. water the 20 of November , we arrived at Goa the 29 Chaul-of the said month , where for our better entertainment we were presently put into a fair strong prison , where we continued until the 22 of December . It was the will of God that we found there 2 Padres , the one and Englishman , the other a Flemming . The Englishmans name is Padre Thomas Stevens , the others Padre Marco , of the order of S. Paul . These did sue for us unto the Viceroy and other officers , and stood us in as much 463 
 The Italians our great enemies for the trade in the East . 
 stead , as our lives and goods were worth : for if they had not stuck to us , if we had escaped with our lives , yet we had had long imprisonment . 
 After 14 days imprisonment they offered us , if we could put in sureties for 2000 ducats , we should go abroad in the town : which when we could not do , the said Padres found sureties for us , that we should not depart the country without the licence of the Viceroy . It does spite the Italians to see us abroad : and many marvel at our delivery . The painter is in the cloister of S. Paul , and is of their order , and liketh there very well . While we were in prison , both at Ormuz and here , there was a great deal of our goods pilfered and lost , and we have been at great charges in gifts and otherwise , so that a great deal of our goods is consumed . There is much of our things which will fell very well , & some we shall get nothing for . I hope in God that at the return of the Viceroy , which is gone to Chaul and to Diu , they say , to win a castle of the Moors , whose return is thought will be about Easter , then we shall get our liberty , and our sureties discharged . Then I think it will be our best way , either one or both to return , because our troubles have be so great , & so much of our goods spoiled and lost . But if it please God that I come into England , by Gods help , I will return hither again . It is a brave and pleasant country , and very fruitful . The summer is almost all the year long , but the chiefest at Christmas . 
 The day and the night are all of one length , very little difference , and marvelous great store of fruits . For all our great troubles , yet are we fat and well liking , for victuals are here plenty and good cheap . And here I will pass over to certify you of strange things , until our meeting , for it would be too long to write thereof . And thus I commit you to God , who ever preserve you and us all . From Goa in the East Indies the 25 of Januarie 1584. 
 Yours to command , Ralph Fitch . 464 
 