The voyage passed by sea into Aegypt , by John [ II i . 281. ] Evesham Gentleman . Anno 1586. 
 He 5 of December 1586 we departed from Gravesend in the Tiger of London , wherein was Master under God for the voyage Robert Rickman , and the 21. day at night we came to the Isle of Wight : departing from thence in the morning following we had a fair wind , so that 
 on the 27 day we came in sighed of the rock of Lisbone , and so sailing along we came in sighed of the South Cape , the 29 of the same , and on the morrow with a Westerly wind we entered the straights : and the second of January being as high as Cape de Gate , we departed from our 
 fleet towards Argier . And the 4 day we arrived at the port of Argier aforesaid , where we stayed till the first of March . At which time we set sail towards a place called Tunis , to the Eastward of Argier 100 leagues , where we arrived the 8 of the same . This Tunis is a 
 Tunis . 
 small city up 12 miles from the sea , and at the port or road where shipping doe ride , is a castle or fort called Goletta , sometime in the hands of the Christians , but now of the Turkes : at which place we remained till the third of Aprill : at which time we set sail towards Alexandria , and having sometime fair winds , sometime contrary , we passed on the 12 day between Sicilia and Malta ( where near adjoining hath been the fort and hold of the knights of the Rhodes ) and so the 19 day we fell with the Isle of Candy , and from thence to Alexandria , where we arrived the 27 of April , and there continued till the 5 of October . 
 The said city of Alexandria is and old thing decayed or The descrip-ruinated , having be a fair and great city near two fan ofAlex-miles in length , being all vaunted underneath for provision andria . of fresh water , which water comes thither but once every year , out of one of the foure rivers of paradise ( as it is termed ) called Nilus , which in September flows 
 near eighteene foot upright higher then his accustomed manner , and so the bank being cut , as it were a sluice , about thirty miles from Alexandria , at a town called Rossetto , it does so come to the said City , with such abundance , that barks of twelve tun do come upon the same water , which water does fill all the vauts , cisterns , and wells in the said City , with very good water , and does so continue good , till the next year following : for they have there very little rain or none at all , yet have they exceeding great dews . Also they have very good corn , and very plentiful : all the Country is very hight , especially in the months of August , September , and October . Also within the said City there is a pillar of Marble , called by the Turkes , King Pharaoes needle , & it is foure square , every square is twelve foot , and it is in height 90 foot . Also there is without the walls of the said City , about twentie score paces , another marble pillar , being round , called Pompey his pillar : this pillar stands upon a great square stone , every square is fifteene foot , and the same stone is fifteene foot high , and the compass of the pillar is 37 foot , and the heighth of it is 101 feet , which is a wonder to think how ever it was possible to set the said pillar upon the said square stone . The port of the said City is strongly fortified with two strong Castles , and one other Castle within the city , being all very well planted with munition : and there is to the Eastward of this Cayro . City , about three days journey the city of Grand Cayro , otherwise called Memphis : it hath in it by report of the registers books which we did see , to the number of 2400 Churches , and is wonderfully populous , and is one days journey about the walls , which was journeyed by one of our Mariners for trial thereof . Also near to the said city there is a place called the Pyramids , being , as I may well term it , one of the nine wonders of the world : that is , seven several places of flint and marble stone , foure square , the walls thereof are seven yards thick in those places that we did see : the squareness is in length 
 about twentie score every square , being built as it were a pointed diamond , broad at the foot , and small or narrow at the top : the heighth of them , to our judgement , does surmount twice the heighth of Paules steeple : within the said Pyramids , no man does know what there is , for that they have no entrance but in the one of them , there is a hold where the wall is broken , and so we went in there , having torchlight with us , for that it hath no light to it , and within the same , is as it were a great hall , in the which there is a costly tomb , which tomb they say , was made for king Pharao in his life time , but he was not buried there , being drowned in the read sea : also there are certain vauts or dungeons , which go down very deep under those Pyramids with fair stairs , but no man dare venture to go down into them , by reason that they can carry no light with them , for the damp of the earth does put out the light : the read sea is but three days journey from this place , and Jerusalem about seven days journey from thence : but to return to Cayro . There is a Castle wherein is the house that Pharaoes wives were kept in , and in the Palace or Court thereof stand 55 marble pillars , in such order , as our Exchange stands in London : the said pillars are in heighth 60 foot , and in compass 14 foot : also in the [ II i . 282. ] said City is the castle were Joseph was in prison , where to this day they put in rich men , when the king would have any sum of money of them : there are seven gates to the said prison , and it goes near fiftie yards down right : also , the water that serves this castle , comes out of the foresaid river of Nilus , upon a wall made with arches , five miles long , and it is twelve foot thick . Also there are in old Cayro two Monasteries , the one called S. Georges , the other S. Maries : & in the Courts where the Churches be , was the house of king Pharao . In this City is great store of merchandise , especially pepper , and nutmegs , which come thither by land , out of the East India : and it is very plentiful of all manner of victuals , especially of bred , roots , and 
 herbs : to the Eastwards of Cayro , there is a Well , five miles off , called Matria , and as they say , when the Virgin Marie fled from Bethleem , and came into jEgypt , and being there , had neither water , nor any other thing to sustain them , by the providence of God , and Angel came from heaven , and strake the ground with his wings , where presently issued out a fountain of water : and the wall did open where the Israelites did hide themselves , which fountain or well is walled foure square till this day . Also we were at and old City , all ruinated and destroyed , Carthage , called in old time , the great City of Carthage where 
 Hannibal and Queen Dido dwelled : this City was but narrow , but was very long : for there was , and is yet to be seen , one street three mile long , to which City fresh water was brought upon arches ( as afore ) above 2 5 miles , of which arches some are standing to this day . Also we were at diverse other places on the coast , as we came from Cayro , but of other antiquities we saw but Argier . few . The town of Argier which was our first and last port , within the straights stands upon the side of and hill , close upon the sea shore : it is very strong both by sea and land , and it is very well victualed with all manner of fruits , bred and fish good store , and very cheap . It is inhabited with Turkes , Moors , and Jewes , and so are Alexandria and Cayro . In this town are a great number of Christian captives , whereof there are of Englishmen only fifteene , from which port we set sail towards England , the seventh of Januarie , Anno 1587 , and the 30 day of the said month , we arrived at Dartmouth on the coast of England . 
 