The privilege of Peter the Prince of Moldavia granted to the English Merchants . 
 Etrus Dei gratia princeps Valachiae & Moldaviae ; significamus praesentibus , universis & singulis quorum interest ac intererit , quod cum magnifico domino Guilielmo Hareborne oratore Serenissimae ac potentissimae dominae , dominae Eliza-bethae Dei gratia Angliae , Franciae , ac 
 Hiberniae Reginae apud Serenissimum ac potentissimum Turearum Imperatorem hanc constitutionem fecerimus : Nimirum ut dehinc suae Serenitatis subditis , omnibusque mercatoribus integrum sit hic in provincia nostra commorandi , conversandi , ( nercandi , vendendi , contrahendique , imo omnia exercendi , quae mercaturae ac vitae humanae societas ususque requirit , sine ulla alicujus contradiction , 
 aut inhibition : salvo ac integro tamen jure Telonii nostri ; hoc est , ut a singulis rebus centum ducatorum pretii , tres numerent . Quod ratum ac firmum constitution nostra haberi volumus . In cujus rei firmius testimonium , sigillum nostrum appressum est . Actum in castris nostris die 27. mensis Augusti , anno Domini 1588. 
 The same in English . 
 PEter by the grace of God prince of Valachia and Moldavia ; we signify by these presents to all and singular persons , whom it does or shall concern , that we have made this agreement with the worthy gentleman William Hareborne Ambassador of the right high and mighty prince , the Lady Elizabeth by the grace of God Queen of England , France and Ireland , with the most puissant and mighty Emperor of the Turkes : To wit , that from henceforth it shall lawful for her highness subject's and all her Merchants , to remain , converse , buy , sei , bargain and exercise all such things , as the trade of merchandise , and humane society and use requires , without any hindrance or let : the right of our Custom always reserved ; That is , that they pay three ducats upon all such things as amount to the price of one hundred ducats . Which by this our ordinance we command to be surely and firmly observed ; For the more assured testimony whereof , our seal is hereunto annexed . Given in our Camp the 27. of the month of August in the year of our Lord 1588. 
 