The letters of Sinan Bassa chief counselor to Sultan Murad Can the Grand Signior , to the sacred Majesty of Elizabeth Queen of England , showing that upon her request , and for her sake especially , he granted peace unto the King and kingdom of Poland . 
 Loriosissima & splendore fulgidissima foeminarum , selectissima Princeps magnanimorum Jesum sectantium , regni inclyti Angliae Regina Serenissima Elizabetha , moderatrix rerum & negotiorum omnium plebis & familiae Nazarenorum sapientis-sima ; Origo splendoris & gloriae dulcis 
 sima ; nubes pluviarum gratissima , heres & domina beatitudinis & gloriae regni inclyti Angliae ; ad quam 69 
 omnes supplices confugiunt , incrementum omnium rerum & actionum Serenitatis vestras beatissimum , exitusque felicissimos a Creatore omnipotent optantes , mutuique & perpetua familiaritate nostra digna vota & laudes sempiternas offerentes : Significamus Ser. vestrae amicissime ; Quia sunt anni aliquot , a quibus annis potentissima Caesarea celsitudo bella ineffabilia cum Casul-bas , Principe nempe Persarum gessit ; ratione quorum bellorum in parts alias bellum movere noluit , ob eamque causam in partibus Poloniae latrones quidam Cosaci nuncupati , & alii facinorosi in partibus illis existentes , subditos Caesaris potentissimi turbare & infestare non desierunt . Nunc autem partibus Persicis compositis & absolutis , in partibus Poloniae & aliis partibus exurgentes facinorosos punire constituens , Beglerbego Graeciae exercitu aliquo adjuncto , & Principi Tartarorum mandato Caesaris misso , anno proxime praeterito pars aliqua Regni Poloniae infestata , turbata & devastata fuit , & Cosaci aliique facinorosi juxta merita sua puniti fuerunt . Quo rex Poloniae viso duos legatos ad Caesaream celsitudinem mittens , quod facinorosos exquirere , & poena perfecta punire , & ab annis multis ad portam Caesareae celsitudinis missum munus augere vellet , significavit . Caesarea autem celsitudo ( cui Creator omnipotens tantam suppeditavit potentiam , & quae omnes supplices exaudire dignata est ) supplication Regis Poloniae non accepta , iterum in regem Poloniae exercitum suum mittere , & Creatoris omnipotentis auxilio regnum ejus subvertere constituerat . Verum Legato Serenitatis vestrae in porta beata & fulgida Caesareae celsitudinis resident seize interponente , Et quod Serenitati vestrae ex partibus Poloniae , fruges , pulvis , arbores navium , tormenta , & alia necessaria suppeditarentur significante , & pacem pro regno & rege Poloniae petente , nev^ regnum Poloniae ex parte Caesareae celsitudinis turbaretur vel infestaretur intercedente , Serenitatisque vestrae hanc singularem esse voluntatem exponente , Legati serenitatis vestrae significatio & intercessio cum Caesareae celsitudini significata fuisset , In favorem sereni - 
 tatis vestrae , cui omnis honos & gratia debetur , juxta modum praedictum , ut Cosaci facinorosi exquirantur & poena perfecta puniantur , aut ratione muneris aliquantuli eorum delicta condonentur , hac inquam condition literae Caesareae celsitudinis ad Regem Poloniae sunt datae . Si autem ex parte Serenitatis vestrae foedus & pax sollicitata non fuisset , nulla ratione Caesarea celsitudo foedus cum regno Poloniae injisset . In favorem autem Serenitatis vestrae regno & Regi Poloniae singularem gratiam Caesarea celsitudo exhibuit . Quod time Serenitas vestra , quim etiam Rex & regnum Poloniae sibi certd persuadere debent . Serenitatem vestram ben^ foelicissim^que valere cupimus . Datum Constantinopoli in fine mensis Sabaum nuncupati , Anno prophetae nostri sacrati Mahumedi nongentesimo , nonagesimo , octavo . Jesu vero Anno millesimo quingentesimo nonagesimo , die duodecimo mensis Junii . 
 The same in English . [ ii . i . 295. J 
 MOst glorious , and the most resplendent of women , most select Princess , most gracious Elizabeth Queen of the valiant followers of Jesus in the famous kingdom of England , most wise governess of all the affairs and businesses of the people and family of the Nazarens , most sweet fountain of brightness and glory , most acceptable cloud of rain , inheritress & Lady of the blessedness and glory of the renowned kingdom of England , to whom in humble wise all men offer their petitions : wishing of the almighty Creator most happy increase and prosperous success unto all your Majesties affairs and actions , and offering up mutual & perpetuali vows worthy of our familiarity , with eternal praises : In most friendly manner we signify unto your princely Highness , that certain years passed the most mighty Cesarlike majesty of the Grand Signor waged unspeakable wars with Casul-bas the Prince of the Persians , in regard of which wars he would not go in battle against any other places ; and for that cause 
 certain thieves in the parts of Polonia called Cosacks , and other notorious persons living in the same parts ceased not to trouble and molest the subject's of our most mighty Emperor . But now having finished and brought to some good issue his affairs in Persia , determining to punish the said malefactors of Poland , and for that purpose committing and army unto the Beglerbeg of Grecia , and the year last passed , sending his imperiali commandment unto the Prince of the Tartars , he hath foraged , molested , and laid waste some part of the kingdom of Poland , and the Cosacks and other notorious offenders have received condign punishment . Which the king of Poland perceiving sent two Ambassadors to his imperiali Highness signifying , that he would hunt out the said malefactors , and inflict most severe punishments upon them , and also that he would better his gift , which he hath for many years heretofore ordinarily sent unto the porch of his imperiali Highness . Howbeit his imperiali majesty ( upon whom the almighty creator hath bestowed so great power , and who vouchsafeth to give ear unto all humble suppliants ) rejecting the supplication of the King of Poland , determined again to send his army against the said king , and by the help of the Almighty creator , utterly to subvert and overthrow his kingdom . By your Majesties Ambassador resident in the blessed and glorious porch of his imperiali Highness interposing himself as a mediator , signifying that from the parts of Poland you were furnished with corn , gunpowder , masts of ships , guns , and other necessaries , and craving peace on the behalf of the kingdom and king of Poland , and making intercession , that the said king might not be molested nor troubled by the means of the Grand Signor , & declaring that this was your Majesties most earnest desire ; so soon as the report and intercession of your Majesties Ambassador was signified unto the Grand Signor , for your sake , unto whom all honour and favourable regard is due , upon the condition aforesaid , namely , that the wicked Cosacks 
 might be sought out and grievously punished , or that their offences might be remitted for the valve of some small gift , upon this condition ( I say ) the letters of his imperiali Highness were sent unto the king of Poland . Howbeit had not this conclusion of league and amity been solicited on the behalf of your Majesty , his imperiali Highness would never have vouchsafed the same unto the kingdom of Poland . But for your Majesties sake his imperiali Highness hath exhibited this so singular a favour unto the said king and kingdom of Poland . And hereof your Majesty and the king of Poland ought certainly to be persuaded . We wish your Majesty most happily and well to fare . Given at Constantinople in the end of the month called Sabaum , in the year of our sacred prophet Mahomet 998 , and in the year of Jesus 1590 , the 12 of June . 
 