The second voyage made by Master William Towrson to the coast of Guinea , and the Castle of Mina , in the year 1556. with the Tiger of London , a ship of 120 tons , the Heart of London of 60 tons , and a Pinnace of sixteene tons . 
 November . 
 December . 
 Sierra Leona . 
 He fourteenth day of September , the year abovesaid , we departed from Harwich , and directed our course for the Isle of Silly , to meet there with the Heart and Pinnace , which were rigged and victualed at Bristoll , but arriving there the eight and twentieth day we 
 found them not , and therefore after long lying at hull to tarry for them , but not espying them , we turned back to Plimmouth the 12 day of October , and being there , the Heart and the Pinnace came to us , so that the 15 of November we all departed together from Plimmouth at one of the clock in the after noon , and the 28 day we had sighed of the Isle of Porto Santo , and the next day in the morning of Madera . 
 The third day of December we fell with the He of Palma , and the 9 we were thwart of Cape Blank , and found there certain Caravels fishing for Pargoes . 
 The 19 we found our selves in the height of Sierra Leona , and all this day we ran thwart of certain Currants , which did set to the West Sou that westward so fast as if it had be the overfall of a sand , making a great noise like unto a stream or tide-gate when the water is shoal : and to prove whither we could find ground in this place , we sounded and had 150 fathom , and no ground , and so departed . 
 The 30 of December we fell with the coast of Guinea , and had first sighed of it about 4 leagues off . The best mark that we could take of the place to know it was three hills , which lay Northeast and by East from us : 212 
 betwixt the Nothermost two hills there are two high and great trees standing in sighed as it were a sails breadth one from another , and a little more to the Northwestwards are certain hommocks . Having sailed somewhat into the shore we took our selves to be shot somewhat passed the river de Sestos , so that we kept about to fetch it . And a little after we had sighed of three sails of ships and two pinnaces which were in the weather of us , and having sighed of them we made our selves ready to meet them , and hailed off our ships to fetch the wind as near as we could : and having sailed about and hour or two , they also went about , and went as we went to make themselves ready , and when we had them in chase , they went away from us : but when they had made themselves ready , they kept about again , and came with us very finely appointed with their streamers , and pendants and ensigns , and noise of trum - [ II ii . 37. ] pets very bravely : so when we met , they had the weather of us , and we being determined to fight , if they had be Portugals , waved them to come under our Lee , which they denied stoutly : then we demanded of them whence they were , and they said of France , we told them again that we were of London in England . They asked of us what Portugals we had seen , we answered , none but Fishermen : then they told us that there were certain Portugall ships gone to the Mina to defend it , and that they met with another at the river de Sestos , The river of which was a ship of two hundred which they had burned , Sestos-and had saved none but the master and two or three Negroes , and certain others which were soar burned which they left a shore there . Then they desired to come aboard of us with their boats to talk with us , and we gave them leave . Then the captain of the Admiral and diverse others came aboard very friendly , desiring us to keep them company because of the Portugals , and to go to the Mina with them : we told them that we had not watered , and that we were but now fallen with the coast , and they showed us that 
 213 
 They admit certain Frenchmen into their company . 
 we were fiftie leagues passed the river de Sestos : notwithstanding there was water enough to be had , and they would help us to water with their own boats because they would have our company . And told us further , that they had be sixe weeks upon the coast , and had got but three tons of grains among them all : and when we had herd them , we made our reckoning that although the Mina were clear , yet if they did go before us , they would mar our market ; and if it were not clear , then if the Portugals were there and did take them , they would understand that we were behind , and so would wait for us . And further we made account that if we went with them we should do as well as they , if the coast were clear : if it were not clear , then by them we were assured to be the stronger . Therefore having considered thus much of their gentle offers , we told them that the next day we would confer more largely of the matter . Whereupon they desired me to come the next day to dinner to them , and to bring the master's of our ships with me , and such merchants as I thought good , promising to give us water out of their own ships if we would take it , or else to tarry with us and help us to water with their own boats and pinnaces . 
 The 31 day in the morning the Admiral sent his boat aboard for me , and I took our master's and certain of our merchants and went to him , who had provided a notable banquet for us , and entreated us very friendly , desiring us still to keep his company , promising that what victuals were in his ships , or other things that might do us pleasure until the end , we should have the one half of it , offering us if we would to forle his Flags , and to be at our commandment in all things . 
 In the end we agreed to come to and anchor , and to send our boat on shore with the Admirals boat , and one of his pinnaces , and and Almain which they had brought out of France , to seek water , as for our pinnace she 
 214 
 I557-came to and anchor to seaward of us all , and would not come at us . All this night the boats continued on shore . 
 The first day of January our boats came to us again and had found no river . Whereupon we weighed and set sail , and anchored again at another river . 
 The 2 day we went into the river and bargained , and took 5 small Elephants teeth . 
 The 3 day we took 5 more . 
 The fourth day the French Admiral and we took - And assault fifteene small teeth . This day we took thirtie men with us and went to seek Elephants , our men being ' all well armed with harquebusses , pikes , long bows , crossbows , partisans , long swords , and swords and bucklers : we found two Elephants which we stroke diverse times with harquebusses and long bows , but they went away from us and hurt one of our men . The fift day we set sail and ran along the coast . 
 The 6 day we fell with the river de S. Andre , at Rio At S. which place the land is somewhat high to the Westward Andre . of the river , and a fair Bay also to the Westward of it : but to the Eastward of it it is low land . 
 The 7 day we went into the River and found no village , but certain wild Negroes not accustomed to trade . It is a very great river and 7 fathom water in some places at the entering . Here we filled water , and after set sail . 
 The 8 day we sailed along the shore and came to the Read clifFes , and went forward in sailing the 9 day also . 
 The 10 day we came together to confer with captain Blundel Admiral of the French ships , Jerom Baudet his vice admiral , and John de Orleans master of a ship of 70 tun , and with their merchants , and agreed that when God should send us to any place where we might make sale , that we should be of one accord and not one of us hurt the market of the other , but certain of our boats to make the price for all the rest , and then 
 Captain Blundel the French Admiral . 
 215 
 The castle of Mina . 
 Cape de Tres puntas . 
 one boat to make sale for every ship . This night our boats going to the shore met with certain Negroes , who said that they had gold , and therefore we here cast anchor . 
 The ii day all the day we took but one half angel weight of 4 grains , which we took by hand , for the people of this place had no weight : the Negroes called this place Allow . 
 The 12 day we ran along the coast and found but one town , but no boats would come out to us , and therefore we went our course . 
 The 13 day I took my boat and went along the shore , and passed by diverse small towns , and was waved to come on shore at 3 places , but the sea went so high upon the shore , that it was not possible for us to land , neither could they come to us if they had had boats , as I could see none but at one place , where there was one that would have come unto us , but the Land-wash went so soar that it overthrew his boat , and one of the men was drowned , which the people lamented , and cried so soar , that we might easily hear them , and they god his body out of the sea , and carried it among them to their town . 
 The 14 day we came within Saker-shot of the castle , & straightway they set forth and Almade to descry us , and when they perceived that we were no Portugals , they ran within the town again : for there is a great town by the Castle which is called by the Negroes Dondou . Without this there lie two great rocks like Hands , and the castle stands upon a point which shows almost like and Hand . Before we came at this castle , we found the land for five or six leagues to be high land , and about seven leagues before we came to the castle , low land , until we came at the castle , and then we found the land high again . This castle stands about five leagues to the East of Cape de Tres puntas . Here I took the boat with our Negroes and ran alongst the shore till I came to the Cape 
 216 
 1557-and found two small towns , but no boats at them , neither any traffic to be had . At these places our Negroes did understand them well , and one of them went a shore at all the places and was well received of them . This night we anchored at the Cape de Tres puntas . 
 The 15 day I took our boat and went along the shore , & about 3 leagues beyond the Eastermost part of the Cape we found a fair Bay where we ran in , and found a small town and certain boats which belonged to the same town , but the Negroes in a long time would not come to us , but at the last by the persuasion of our own Negroes , one boat came to us , and with him we sent George our Negro a shore , and after he had talked with them , they came aboard our boats without fear , and I gave to their captain a basin , and two strings of Margarets , and they showed us about 5 ducats weight of gold , but they required so much for it that we would not take it , because the Frenchmen and we had agreed to make price of our goods all in one boat , and the price being made then every man to fell in his own boat , and no man to give more then the price which should be set by us all This place is called Bulle , and here the Negroes were very glad of Bulle . our Negroes , and showed them all the friendship they could , when they had told them that they were the men that were taken away being now again brought by us . 
 The Negroes here showed us that a month since there were 3 ships that fought together , & the two ships put the other to flight : and before that at the castle of Mina there were 4 ships of the Portugals which met with one Frenchman , which Frenchman caused them all to flee , which ship we took to be the Roebarge : for the Frenchmen of our company judged her to be thereabouts that time with her pinnace also . And further , that after her went a ship of twelve score nam the Shaudet all alone , and after her a ship of fourescore , and both for the Mina . And there were two others also 
 217 
 Shamma . 
 which they left , one at Cape Verde called the Leuriere of Diepe , and another at the river De Sestos , beside these 3 which all this time be in our company , whose names be these : 
 The Espoier of Hableneff which is the Admiral , whose captain is Denis Blundell . 
 The Leuriere of Roan Viceadmiral , whose master is Jerome Baudet . 
 The other is of Hunfleur whose master is called John de Orleans . 
 The sixteenth day I went along the shore with two pinnaces of the Frenchmen , and found a Bay and a fresh river , and after that went to a town called Hanta , twelve leagues beyond the Cape . At this town our Negroes were well known , and the men of the town wept for joy when they saw them , and demanded of them where Anthonie and Been had be : and they told them that they had be at London in England , and should be brought home the next voyage . So after this , our Negroes came aboard with other Negroes which brought a weight with them , which was so small that we could not give them the half of that which they demanded for it . 
 The Negroes here told us that there were five Portugall ships at the Castle and one pinnace , and that the Portugals did much harm to their Country , and that they lived in fear of them , and we told them again , that we would defend them from the Portugals whereof they were very glad . 
 The 17 day we went a shore and the Frenchmen with us , but did no great good , the Negroes were so unreasonable , we sold 80 Manellios for one ounce of gold . 
 Then we departed and went to Shamma , and went into the river with five boats well appointed with men and ordinance , and with our noises of trumpets and drums , for we thought here to have found some Portugals but there were none : so we sent our Negroes on shore , and after them went diverse of us , and were 218 
 very well received , and the people were very glad of our Negroes , specially one of their brother's wives , and one of their ants , which received them with much joy , and so did all the rest of the people , as if they had be their natural brothers : we comforted the captain and told him that he should not fear the Portugals , for we would defend him from them : whereupon we caused our boats to shoot off their bases and harquebusses , and caused our men to come on shore with their long bows , and they shot before the captain , which he , with all the rest of the people , wondered much at , specially to see them shoot so far as they did , and assayed to draw their bows but could not . When it grew to be late , we departed to our ships , for we looked every hour for the Portugals . * And here the Negroes showed us that there was and English ship at the Mina , which had brought one of the Negroes again , which Robert Gaynsh took away . 
 The 18 day we went into the river with no less strength then before , and concluded with the Negroes to give them for every Fuffe two yards and three nails of Cloth , and to take for it one angel-duckat : so that we took in all 70 Ducats , whereof the Frenchmen had fortie , and we thirtie . 
 The nineteenth day we went a shore every man for himself , and took a good quantity of gold , and I for my part took foure pound and two ounces and a half of gold , and our Hearts boat took one and twentie ounces . At night the Negroes showed us that the next day the Portugals would be with us by land or by Sea : and when we were ready to depart , we herd diverse harquebusses shoot off in the woods by us which we knew to be Portugals , which durst come no nearer to us , but shot off in the woods to see if they could fear us and so make us to leave our traffic . 
 The 20 day we manned our five boats , and also a great boat of the Frenchmens with our men and the Admirals , 12 of them in their murrians and corslets , and 
 The Negroes brought home by our men . 
 * Note . 
 Robert Gaynsh . 
 219 
 Five sails of Portingals descried . 
 the rest all well appointed , with foure trumpets , a drum and a Fife , and the boat all hanged with streamers of Silk and pendants very fair , and went into the river and trafficked , our man of war lying off and on in the river to waft us , but we herd no more of the Portugals . This day the Negroes told us that there were certain ships come into Hanta , which town is about 2 leagues to the Westward of this place . 
 This 21 day we manned our boats again & went to a place a league from this to the Westwards , and there found many Negroes with another Captain , and sold at the same rate that we had done with the others . 
 The 22 day we went a shore again and trafficked in like sort quietly , and I took 4 pound and six ounces of gold . 
 The 23 day about night the Negroes with their captain came to us and told us that the king of Portugals ships were departed from the Castle , meaning the next day to ply to the windward to come to us , giving us warning to take heed to our selves : we told them again that we were very glad of their coming , and would be ready at all times to meet them , and to assure them that we were glad of it , we sounded our trumpets , and shot off certain bases whereof the Negroes were very glad , and requested us that if the Portugals sought to hinder our traffic , to show them all the extremity that we could , promising us that if they came by land , they would advertise us thereof . 
 The 24 we went a shore with our trumpets and drums , and trafficked , and I bade the captain of the town to dinner . 
 The 2 5 day we being a shore , our ships had descried five sails of the king of Portugals , & our ships shot off ordinance to call us away , and we threw every man his cask a shore for water , and went to our ships , and by that time we had weighed and given order one to another what to do , it was night , so y‘ that night nothing was done . We set sail and lay close all night to get the 220 
 wind if we could : we were near some of them , and one shot off a piece which we judged to be the Admiral of the Portugals , to cause the rest to come and speak with him : so all this night we made our selves ready for fight . 
 The 26 we came in with the shore and had sighed of the Portugals where they rid at anchor , and we bore with them , and we gave all our men white scarffes , to the end that the Frenchmen might know one the other if we came [ II ii . 40. ] to boarding : but the night came upon us that we could not fetch them , but we anchored within demie-culverin shot of them . 
 The 27 day we weighed and so did the Portugals , and about eleven of the clock we had the wind of them , and then we went room with them , which when they perceived , they kept about to the shore again , and we after them , and when they were so near the shore that they could not well run any further on that board , they kept about again , and lay to the Seaward , and then we kept about with them , and were a head of them , and took in our topsails and tarried for them : and the first that came up was a small bark which sailed so well that she cared not for any of us , and carried good ordinance : and assoon as she came up , she shot at us , and overshot us , and then she shot at the Admiral of the Frenchmen , and shot him through in two or three places , The fight with and went forth a head of us , because we were in our the Portu5als-fighting sails : then came up another caravel under our Lee in like case which shot at us and at the Frenchman , and hurt two of his men and shot him through the main mast . And after them came up the Admiral under our Lee also , but he was not able to do us so much harm as the small ships , because he carried ordinance higher then they , neither were we able to make a good shot at any of them , because our ship was so weak in the side , that she laid all her ordinance in the Sea : wherefore we thought to lay the great ship aboard , and as soon as the French Admiral went room with 
 221 
 him , he fell a stern and could not fetch him , and after he fell a stern of two caravels more and could fetch none of them , but fell to Leeward of them all : and when he was to Leeward , he kept about to the shoreward , and left us , and then we put out our topsails and gave them chase , and both the other Frenchmen kept the wind , and would not come near us , and our own ship was a stern so that she could not come to us : and after we had followed them about two hours to the seaward , they kept about again towards the shore , thinking to pay us as they went along by , and to have the wind of the French Admiral which before ran in towards the shore , and we kept about with them , and kept still the wind of them thinking that our Viceadmiral and the other would have followed us as we willed them to do : but after that the Portugall was passed by them , and every one had shot at us and our Viceadmiral , both our Viceadmiral and the two Frenchmen , & our own pinnace left us in the laps , and ran to seaward , and we ran still along , and kept the wind of them to succour the French Admiral , who was under all of their Lees , and when they met with him , every one went room with him , and gave him the broad side , and after they cast about again , and durst not board him , because they saw us in the weather of them , or else without doubt they had taken or sunk them , for three of them which were the smallest , went so fast that it was not possible for a ship to board them , and carried such ordinance that if they had had the weather of us , they would have troubled 3 of the best ships that we had , and as for their Admiral and Viceadmiral they were both notably appointed . 
 When the Frenchman was clear of them , he lay as near the wind as he could , and we followed them still towards the shore , and then the Admiral ran to Sea after the rest , and left us all alone : and when the Portugals perceived that we were alone , and gave them chase , they kept about with us and we with them , to keep the wind of them , and we ran still within base 
 222 
 shot of them , but they shot not at us , because we had the weather of them , and saw that they could do us no hurt : and thus we followed one another until night , and in the night we lost them , but as for all the rest of our ships , they packed on all the sails that they could and ran to sea , and as they themselves confess , they prayed for us , but as for help at their hands we could have none . 
 The 28 day we met with our Viceadmiral , our pinnace , and two of the Frenchmen , and the third was fled which was a ship of fourscore tun , and belonged to Roan : and when I had the sighed of the rest of our ships , I took our skiff and went to them to know why they lost us in such a case , and John Kire made me answer that his ship would neither rear nor steer , and as for the pinnace , John Davis made me answer that she would do nothing , and that he could carry her no further , for her rudder was broken , so that the Heart was glad to tow her . Then I went to the French Admiral , and found himself to be a man of good stomach , but the one half of his men were sick and dead : and then I talked with the smaller Frenchman , and he made me answer that he could do nothing , saying , that his ship would bear no sail , and had 16 of his men dead and sick , so he made us plain answer that he was able to do nothing . After this the Frenchmen durst not anchor for fear of the Portugales . 
 The 29 day the master of the pinnace came to us and said that they were not able to keep her any longer , and then we viewed her and seeing there was no remedy , her rudder with all the iron work being broken both aloft and below , we agreed to break her up and to put the men into the Hart. So we took out of her foure bases , one anchor , and certain fire wood , and set her on fire , and afterwards ran along the coast . 
 The thirtie day we went in to the shore , and spoke with certain Negroes , who told us that some French 
 223 
 [ II ii . +I . J 
 ships had be there , but we could not bargain with them they were so unreasonable . 
 The 31 day I went to shore but did not traffic . Februarie . The i day of Februarie we weighed , seeing we could not bring the Negroes to any reason , and came to another place which stands upon and hill . 
 The third day I went to a town foure leagues from us , and shot off two pieces , and the Captain came to us , and I sent Thomas Rippen a land who knew the Captain , and assoon as he came on shore the Captain knew him and diverse of the Negroes who then began to ask for me , and having told the Captain that I was in the boat , he made no longer tarrying but by and by caused two boats to be put to the Sea , and came to me himself , and when he saw me , he cried to me before he came to the boat and seemed to be the gladdest man alive , and so did all the company that knew me , and I gave him a reward as the manner of the Country is , and caused the Frenchmen to give another , promising the next day to give him wine : and that night because it was late , he would not talk of any price , but left me a pledge , and took another of me and so departed . 
 The 4 day going on shore , I found that the ships of France which had been there , had done much hurt to our markets , but yet I took five ounces and a half of gold . 
 The fift day I took eight ounces and one eight part of gold : but I saw that the Negroes perceived the difference in Cloth betwixt ours and that which the Frenchmen had , which was better , and broader then ours : and then I told captain Blundel that I would go to the Leeward , because I perceived that being there where his Cloth was sold , I should do no good , whereof he was sorry . 
 The 6 day there came and Almade & Negroes aboard me , requesting me to come to their town for they had much gold and many merchants : and so I went and found their old Captain gone , and another in his place : but this night we did not good , because the merchants 
 224 
 1557-were not come down : so he required a pledge which I let him have , and took another of him . 
 The 7 day George our Negro came to us , who had George °ur followed us at the least 30 leagues in a small boat , and Negro-when he came , the Negroes and we soon concluded of price . I took this day five pound and one ounce , and 3 quarters of gold . This Negro we had left at Shamma at the time of the fight , who said that he saw the fight being on shore , and that when we were gone from the Portugals , the Portugals came into their river , and told them that the Englishmen had slain two Portugals with ^•oPo^tu^s a piece , which was in deed out of our ship , and they ' 
 required harbour there , but the captain of Shamma would not suffer them . 
 The 8 day we took nineteene pound three ounces and a half . 
 The 9 day we took two half . 
 pound 
 six ounces and a 
 The 10 day three pound . 
 The 11 day came to us Jerome Bawdet the Viceadmiral of the Frenchmen and his pinnace , and he showed us that where we left them there was no good to be done , and said he would go to the Eastward , but we told him he should not : and thereupon commanded him to go to his company which he was appointed to be with , which he refused to do until we had shot three or foure pieces at their pinnace , and when the ship saw that , she kept about , and ran to Seaward , and durst come no nearer to us , so the pinnace went after her . We took this day one pound five 
 The Frenchmen bridled by the English . 
 ounces . 
 The 12 day there came one of the Frenchmens pinnaces to us laden with cloth , and would have made sale , but I would not suffer him , and therefore took him and sent him aboard of our ship , and caused him to ride there all day . We took five pound six ounces and a half . 
 The 14 day we took of some Negroes 4 ounces of gold . 
 vi 225 p 
 The offer of the king to the English to built a Fort. 
 A town in circuit as big as London . 
 The 16 we came to another town . 
 The 17 day I went a shore and understood that 3 of the Portugall ships were at the Castle , and the other two at Shamma . The captain of this town was gone to the principali town , to speak with their king , and would return shortly as they told me , and so he did , and brought me a weight and measure , and I sent a man to see that principali town , and their king . The Portugall ships rid so near us , that within 3 hours they might be with us , yet were all contented to tarry for sales . 
 The 18 day certain of the kings servants came to us , and we took one pound two ounces , and one eight part of gold . 
 The 10 day we took five pound one ounce . 
 The 20 day one pound and foure ounces . 
 The 21 I took foure pound and one ounce , and the Negroes inquired for fine cloth , and I opened two pieces which were not fine enough , as they said , but seeing that we had no other , they bought of them . At night I provided a gift , or present , and sent one merchant and a mariner with it to the king , to certify him of our want of victuals , by reason whereof we could not stay long : for in deed we searched our ship , and the most part of our beer was leaked out of all our barrels . 
 The 22 day we took three ounces and a half . 
 The 23 our men came from the king Abaan , and told us , that he had received them very friendly , but he had little gold , but promised , if we would tarry , to send into all his country for gold for us , and he willed our men at their coming home to speak to our king to send men and provision into his country , to built a castle , and to bring Tailors with them , to make them apparel , and good wares , and they should be sure to fell them : but for that present the Frenchmen had filled them full of cloth . 
 This town stands about foure leagues up in the land , and is , by the estimation of our men , as big in circuit as London , but the building is like to the rest of 226 
 the country . They have about this Town great store of the wheat of the Country , and they judge , that on one side of the town there were one thousand rikes of Wheat , and another sort of Corn which is called Mill , which is much used in Spaine . About this town they keep good watch every night , and have to warn the watchmen certain cords made fast over their ways , which led into the town , and certain bells upon them , preAe so that if any man touch the cords , the bells ring , and then the watchmen run forth of their watch houses to see what they be : and if they be enemies , if they pass the cord , they have provision with certain nets hanged over the ways , where they must pass , to let fallen upon them , and so take them , and otherwise then by the ways it is not possible to enter the town , by reason of the thickets and bushes which are about the same , and the town is also walled round abqut with long cords , and bound together with sedge and certain barks of trees . 
 When our men came to the town , it was about five of the clock in the morning , for there they travel always in the night by reason of the heat of the day : and about nine of the clock , the king sent for them , for there may no man come to him before he be sent for , and then they would have carried their present with them : but the Negroes told them , that they must be three times brought before him , before they might offer their gift : and when they came to him , he talked with them , and received them very friendly , and kept them about half and hour , and then they departed , and after that sent for them again three times , and last of all , they brought him their present , which he received thankfully , and then caused a pot of wine of Palm to be brought forth , and made them drink : and before they drink , both here and in all the Country , they use certain ceremonies . 
 First , they bring forth their pot of drink , and then they make a hold in the ground , & put some of the drink into it , and they cast the earth upon it , which 
 The kings friendly entertainment of our men . 
 Their ceremonies in drinking . 
 227 
 they dug forth before , and then they set the pot upon the same , then they take a little thing made of a goord , and with that they take out of the same drink , and put it upon the ground in three places , and in diverse places they have certain bunches of the pills of Palm trees set in the ground before them , and there they put in some drink , doing great reverence in all places to the same Palm trees . 
 All these ceremonies first done , the king took a cup of gold , and they put him in wine , and he drank of it , and when he drank , the people cried all with one voice , Abaan , Abaan , with certain other words , like as they cry commonly in Flanders , upon the Twelfe night , The kinning drinks : and when he had drunk , then they gave drink to every one , and that done , the king licensed them to depart , and every one that departeth from him boweth 3 times towards him , and waveth with both hands together , as they bow , and then do depart . The king hath commonly sitting by him 8 or 10 ancient men with grey beards . 
 This day we took one pound and 10 ounces of gold . 
 The 24 day we took 3 pound and 7 ounces . 
 The 25 we took 3 ounces and 3 quarters . 
 The 26 we took 2 pound and 10 ounces . 
 The 27 two pound and five ounces . 
 The 28 foure pound , and then seeing that there was no more gold to be had , we weighed and went forth . 
 The first day of March we came to a town called Mowre . Mowre , but we found no boats nor people there : but being ready to depart , there came two Almades to us [ II ii . 43. ] from another town , of whom we took two ounces and a half of gold : and they told us that the Negroes that dwelled at Mowre were gone to dwell Lagova . at Lagova . 
 They returns . The second day we came thwart of the castle , and about two leagues off , and there saw all the five Portugall ships at anchor , and this day by night we fetched Shamma . 
 228 
 The third day we had sighed of one tall ship , of about two hundred tons , in the weather of us , and within less then two leagues of our ships , and then we saw two more a stern of her , the one a ship of five hundred or more , and the other a pinnace : and these were a new fleet at that present arrived out of Portugall . Whereupon we weighed , and made shift to double out of the land , and then the wind coming to the Southsouthwest , the Heart going room with them fell three leagues to the leewards of us . These Portugals gave us the chase from nine of the clock in the morning , till five at night , but did no good against us . At last , we perceiving the Admiral to be far a stern of his company , because his main topmast was spent , determined to cast about with them again , because we were sure to weather them , and the wind being as it was , it was our best course : but the Heart was so far to the leeward , that we could not do it , except we would loose her company , so that we took in some of our sails , and went room with him : which when he perceived , he loofFed to , and was able to lie as near as he did before . At night , when we came to him , he would not speak to us : then we asked of his company why he went so room ; and they made excuse that they were able to bear no sail by , for fear of bearing their foretopmast over board : but this was a simple excuse . 
 The fourth day , being put from our watering place we began to seethe our meat in salt water , and to rebate our allowance of drink , to make it endure the longer : and so concluded to set our course thence , for our own country . 
 The 12 of March I found my self thwart of Cape das palmas . 
 The 16 day we fell with the land , which we judged to be the Cape Mensurado , about which place is very much high land . 
 The 18 day we lost sighed of the Heart , and I think the wilful Master ran in with the shore of purpose 
 229 
 Ships of Portugall . 
 Cape Mensurado . 
 A French bravado . 
 to loose us , being offended that I told him of his own folly . 
 The 27 day we fell in sighed of two small Lands , which lie by our reckoning sixe leagues off the headland of Sierra Leona : and before we came in sighed of the same Lands , we made our reckoning to be forty or thirty leagues at the least off them . Therefore all they that sail this way are to regard the currents which set Northnorthwest , or else they may be much deceived . 
 The 14 of Aprill we met with two great ships of Portugall , which although they were in the weather of us , yet came not room with us , whereby we judged that they were bound for Calicut . 
 The 18 day we were in the heighth of Cape verde . 
 The 24 we were directly under the tropic of Cancer . 
 The first day of May Henry Wilson our Steward died : and the next day died John Underwood . 
 The fift day we were in the heighth of S. Michael . 
 The 23 we had sighed of a ship in the weather of us , which was a Frenchman of 90 tun , who came with us as stoutly and as desperately as might be , and coming near us perceived that we had be upon a long voyage , and judging us to be weak , as in deed we were , came nearer us , and thought to have laid us aboard , & there stepped up some of his men in armour , and commanded us to strike sail : whereupon we sent them some of our stuff , crossebarres , and chainshot , and arrows , so thick , that it made the upper work of their ship fly about their ears , and we spoiled him with all his men , and tore his ship miserably with our great ordinance , and then he began to fallen a stern of us , and to pack on his sails , and get away : and we seeing that , gave him foure or five good pieces more for his farewell ; and thus we were rid of this French man , who did us not harm at all . We had aboard us a French man a Trumpeter , who being sick , and lying in his bed , took his trumpet notwithstanding , and sounded till he could found no more , and so died . 
 230 
 The 28 we conferred together , and agreed to go into Severne , and so to Bristoll , but the same night we had sighed of the Lizard , and by reason of the wind , we were not able to double the lands end to go into Severne , but were forced to bear in with the Lizard . 
 The 29 day , about nine of the clock in the morning , we arrived safely in Plimmouth , and praised God for our good arrival . 
 