The third and last voyage of M. William [ H. ii . 44 - ] Towrson to the coast of Guinie , and the Castle de Mina , in the year 1577. 
 He thirtieth day of January , the year abovesaid , we departed out of the found of Plimmouth , with three ships , and a pinnace , whereof the names are these : 
 1 The Minion Admiral of the fleet . 
 2 The Christopher Viceadmiral . 
 3 The Tiger . 
 4 A pinnace called the Unicorn : being all bound for the Canaries , and from thence , by the grace of God , to the coast of Guinie . 
 The next day , being the last of this month , we met with two hulks of Dantzick , the one called the Rose , a ship of foure hundred tons , and the other called the Unicorn , of and hundred and fifty tons , the Master 
 It is to be understood , that at this time there was war betwixt 
 of the Rose was called Nicholas Mass , and the Master England and of the Unicorn Melchior White , both laden at Bour - France-deaux , and for the most part with wines . When we came to them , we caused them to hoist forth their boats , and to come and speak with us , and we examined every one of them apart , what French men's goods they had in their ships , and they said they had none : but by the contrarieties of their tales , and by the suspicion which we gathered of their false chartar-parties , we perceived that they had French men's goods in them : we therefore caused one of them to fetch up his bills of 
 231 
 lading , and because he denied that he had any , we sent certain with him , who caused him to go to the place where he had hid them , and by the differences of his bills of lading , and his talk , we gathered , as before , that they had Frenchmens goods . Whereupon we examined them straightly , and first the Purser of the Unicorn , which was the smaller ship , confessed that they had two and thirty tons and a hogshead of a French men . Then we examined the Master in like case , and he acknowledged the same to be true . Then we examined also the Master of the great ship , and he confessed that he had and hundred and eight and twenty tons of the same French men , and more they would not confess , but said that all the rest was laden by Peter Lewgues of Hamburg , to be delivered to one Henry Summer of Camphire , notwithstanding all their letters were directed to Hamburg , and written in Dutch without , and within in French . 
 When they had confessed that they had thus much French men's goods within their ships , we conferred together what was best to be done with them . William Cretton and Edward Selman were of the opinion , that it should be good either to carry them into Spaine , and there to make sale of the goods , or else into Ireland , or to return back again into England with them , if the wind would permit it . But I , weighing what charge we had of our Master's , first by mouth , and afterwards by writing , that for no such matter we should in any case prolong the time , for fear of losing the voyage , and considering that the time of the year was very far spent , and the money that we should make of the wines not very much , in respect of the commodity which we hoped for by the voyage , persuaded them that to go into Ireland , the wind being Easterly as it was , might be and occasion that we should be locked in there with that wind , and so loose our voyage : and to carry them into Spaine , seeing they sailed so ill , that having all their sails abroad , we kept them company only with our foresailes , 
 232 
 and without any top sails abroad , so that in every two days sailing they would have hindered us more then one ; and beside that ( the wind being Easterly ) we should not be able to seize the coast with them : beside all this the loss of time when we came thither was to be considered , whereupon I thought it not good to carry them any further . 
 And as for carrying them into England , although the wind had be good , as it was not , considering what charge we had of our Master's , to shift us out of the way for fear of a stay by reason of the wars , I held it not in any wise convenient . 
 But notwithstanding all this , certain of our company not being herewith satisfied went to our Master to know his opinion therein , who made them a plain answer , that to carry them into any place , it was not the best The French way nor the profit of their Master's . And he told them further , that if the time were prolonged one month sfime longer before they passed the Cape , but a few men war upon would go the voyage . All these things considered , we the loss of all paused , and determined at the last , that every man Cales-should take out of the hulks so much as he could well bestow for necessaries , and the next morning to conclude what should be further done with them . So we took out of them for us foureteene tons and a half of wine , and one tun we put into the pinnace . 
 More we took out one hogshead of Aquavitae . 
 Sixe cakes of rozzen . 
 A small halser for ties : and certain chestnuts . 
 The Christopher took out , [ II ii . 45. ] 
 Ten tons of wine , and one hogshead . 
 A quantity of Aquavitae . 
 Shall-lines . 
 Chestnuts . 
 Sixe double bases with their chambers . And their men broke up the hulks chests , and took out their compasses , and running glasses , the sounding lead and line , and candles : and cast some of their beef over 
 233 
 board , and spoiled them so much , that of very pity we gave them a compass , a running glass , a led and a line , certain bred and candles , and what apparel of theirs we could find in their ship , we gave them again , and some money also of that which William Crompton took for the ransom of a poor Frenchman , who being their Pilot down the River of Bordeux , they were not able to set him a shore again , by reason of the foul weather . 
 The Tiger also took out of the smaller hulk sixe or seven tons of wine , one hogshead of Aquavitae , and certain rozzen , and two bases he took out of the great hulk . 
 The first day of February in the morning we all came together again saving W. Crompton who sent us word that he was contented to agree to that order which we should take . 
 Now Edward Selman was of this opinion , that it was not best to let the ships depart , but put men into them to carry them into England , which thing neither we nor our Master would agree unto , because we thought it not good to unman our ships going outward , considering how dangerous the time was : so that in fine we agreed to let them depart , and give them the rest of the wine which they had in their ships of the Frenchmens for the fraught of that which we had taken , and for their ordinance , rozzen , aquavitae , chestnuts , and other things which the company had taken from them . So we received a bill of their hands , that they confessed how much Frenchmens goods they had , and then we let them depart . 
 The io day we reckoned our selves to be 25 leagues from the Grand Canary , and this day about nine of the clock our pinnace brake her rudder , so that we were forced to tow her at the stern of the Minion , which we were able to do , and yet kept company with the rest of our ships . About eleven of the clock this day we had sighed of the Grand Canary . 
 234 
 The 11 day when we came to the Hand we perceived that it was the He of Tenerif , 8c then in deed we had sighed of the Grand Canary , which lies 12 leagues to the Eastwards of Tenerif : and because the road of Tenerif is foul ground , and nothing was there to be got for the helping of our pinnace , having the wind large , we agreed to go with the Grand Canary . 
 The 12 day we came into the road of the town of Canarie , which lies one league from the same town . And after we had shot off diverse pieces of ordinance to salute the town and the castle , the governor and captains of the Hand sent to us which were the captains , of the ships , requiring us to come a shore . And when we came to them they received us very friendly , offering us their own Jennets to ride to the town , and what other friendship they could show us : and we went to the town with two English Merchants which lay there , and remained in their house that day . The second day following we came aboard to deliver our merchandise , and to get our pinnace mended . 
 The 14 day came into the road the Spanish fleet which was bound to the Emperors Indies , which were in number nineteene sail , whereof sixe were ships of foure hundred and five hundred a piece , the rest were of two hundred , and hundred and fifty , and of and hundred . When they were come to and anchor they saluted us with ordinance , and so we did them in like case . And afterwards the Admiral ( who was a knight ) sent his pinnace to desire me to come to him ; and when I came to him he received me friendly , and was desirous to hear somewhat of the state of England and Flanders . And after he had made me a banquet , I departed ; and I being gone unto the boat , he caused one of his gentlemen to desire Francisco the Portugall , which was my interpreter , to require me to furle my flag , declaring that he was general of the Emperors fleet . Which thing ( being come aboard ) Francisco showed me : and because I refused to furle it , and kept it forth still , 235 
 A.D. ! 577 - 
 Two English Merchants Liters in the Grand Canary . 
 The Spanish West Indian fleet of nineteen sail . 
 certain of the soldiers in the ships shot diverse harquebus shot about the ship , and over the flag : and at the same time there came certain gentlemen aboard our ship to see her : to whom I said , that if they would not cause those their men to leave shooting , I would shoot the best ordinance I had thorough their sides . And when they perceived that I was offended , they departed , and caused their men of war and soldiers to shoot no more , and afterwards they came to me again , and told me that they had punished their men . That done , I showed them the ship , and made them such cheer as I could , which they received very thankfully : and the day following they sent for me to dine with them , and sent me word that their General was very sorry that any [ II ii . 46. ] man should require me to furle my flag , and that it was without his consent : and therefore he requested me not to think any ungentleness to be in him , promising that no man of his should misdemean himself . 
 The 17 day we set sail in the road of Grand Canary , and proceeded on our voyage . 
 The 20 in the morning we had sighed of the coast of Barbarie , and running along the shore we had sighed Rio del Oro. of Rio del Oro , which lies almost under the tropic of Cancer . 
 The 21 day we found ourselves to be in 20 degrees and a half , which is the heighth of Cape Blank . 
 The 25 we had sighed of the land in the bay to the Northward of Cape Verde . 
 Francis The 26 I took Francisco and Francis Castelin with Castehn . me , anj went ; unto p [ nnessej anj so went to the Tiger which was nearer the shore then the other ships , and went aboard her , and with her and the other ships we ran West and by South , and Westsouthwest , until about foure of the clock , at which time we were Cape verde . hard aboard the Cape , and then we ran in Southwest , and beyond the Cape about foure leagues we found a Foure Hands , fair Hand , and beside that two or three Hands , which 236 
 were of very high rocks , being full of diverse sorts of seafowl , and of pigeons , with other sorts of land-fowls , and so many , that the whole Hand was covered with the dung thereof , and seemed so white as if the whole Hand had be of chalk ; and within those Hands was a very fair bay , and hard aboard the rocks eighteene fathom water , and fair ground . And when we perceived the bay , and understanding that the Frenchmen had a great trade there , which we were desirous to know , we came to and anchor with the Tiger . And after that the Minion and the Christopher anchored in like case : then we caused the pinnace to run beyond another Cape of land , to see if there were any place to trade in there . 
 It being near night I took our cock and the Tigers skiff , and went to the Hand , where we god certain fowls like unto Gannards : and then . I came 
 A great trade of the Frenchmen at Cape verde . 
 aboard again and took two of the Gannards which we had taken , and carried them to the captain of the Christopher , and when I had talked with him , I found him not willing to tarry there , neither was I desirous to spend any long time there , but only to attempt what was to be done . The Master of the Christopher told me he would not tarry , being not bound for that place . 
 The 27 the Captain of the Tiger and Edward Selman came to me , and John Makeworth from the Christopher , and then we agreed to take the pinnace , & to come along the shore , because that where we rid no Negroes came to us , and the night before our pinnace brought us word that there was a very fair fare Hand Hand . And when I came beyond the point I found it v^re^c^ietrade so , and withal a goodly bay , and we saw upon the main > a e ' certain Negroes which waved us on shore , and then we came to and anchor with the pinnace , and went a shore with our cock , and they showed us where their trade was , and that they had Elephants teeth , musk , & hides , and Elephants offered us to fetch down their Captain , if we would ‘ send a man with them , and they would leave a pledge for ' 
 237 
 him : then we asked them when any ship had be there ; and some of them said not in eight months , others , in sixe months , and others in foure , and that they were Frenchmen . 
 Then we perceiving the Christopher not willing to tarry , departed from them , & set sail with the pinnace and went aboard the Tiger . 
 The io day of March we fell with the coast of Guinea , five leagues to the Eastward of Cape de Monte , beside a river called Rio das Palmas . 
 The ii we went to the shore , and found one man that could speak some Portuguise , who told us that there were three French ships passed by ; one of them two months past , and the other one month past . At this place I received nineteene Elephants teeth , and two ounces and half a quarter of gold . 
 The 12 we set sail to go to the river de Sestos . 
 The 13 at night we fell with the same river . 
 The 14 day we sent in our boats to take water , and rummaged our ships , and delivered such wares to the Christopher and Tiger , as they had need of . 
 The 15 we came together , and agreed to send the Tiger to another river to take in her water , and to see what she could do for grains . After that we took merchandise with us , and went into the river , and there we found a Negro which was born in Lisbone , left there by a ship of Portugal which was burned the last year at this river in fighting with three Frenchmen ; and he told us further , that two months passed there were three Frenchmen at this place ; and sixe weeks passed there were two French ships at the river ; and fifteene days passed there was one . All which ships were gone towards the Mina . This day we took but few grains . 
 The 19 day considering that the Frenchmen were gone before us , and that by reason of the unwholesome airs of this place foureteene of our men in the Minion were fallen sick , we determined to depart , and with all speed to go to the Mina . 
 238 
 The 2i we came to the river de Potos , where some [ II ii . 47. ] of our boats went in for water , and I went in with Rio de Potos . our cock , and took 12 small Elephants teeth . 
 The 23. day , after we had taken as many teeth as we could get , about nine of the clock we set sail to go towards the Mina . 
 The 31 we came to Hanta , and made sale of certain Manillios . 
 The first Aprill we had sighed of five sail of Portugals , They descry whereupon we set sail and went off to sea to get the s^ile °f wind of them , which we should have had if the wind * e ortu^a had kept his ordinary course , which is all the day at the Southwest , and Westsouthwest : but this day with a flaw it kept all the day at the East , and Eastsoutheast , so that the Portugals had the wind of us , and came room with the Tiger and us until night , and brought themselves all save one , which sailed not so well as the rest , within shot of us : then it fell calm , and the wind came up to the Southwest , howbeit it was near night , and the Christopher , by means of her boat , was about foure leagues to the leewards of us . We tacked and ran into the weather of the Admiral , and three more of his company , and when we were near him we spoke to him , but he would not answer . Then we cast about and lay The fight . in the weather of him ; and casting about he shot at us , and then we shot at him , and shot him foure or five times thorough . They shot diverse times thorough our sails , but hurt no man . The Tiger and the pinnace , because it was night , kept out their sails , & would not meddle with them . After we had thus fought together 2 hours or more , and would not lay him aboard because it was night , we left shooting one at the other , and kept still the weather of them . Then the Tiger and the pinnace kept about and came to us , and afterwards being near the shore , we three kept about and lay to the sea , and shot ofF a piece to give warning to the Christopher . 
 This night about 12 of the clock , being very little wind , and the Master of the Tiger asleep , by the ill 
 239 
 work of his men the ship fell aboard of us , and with her shear-hooks cut our main sail , and her boat being betwixt us was broken and sunk , with certain merchandise in her , and the ships wales were broken with her outleger : yet in the end we cleared her without any more hurt , but she was in hazard to be broken down to the water . 
 The second day we had sighed of the Christopher , and were near unto her , so that I took our boat and went to her . And when I came thither , they showed me , that after the Portugals had left us , they went all room with him , and about twelve a clock at night met him , and shot at him , and he at them , and they shot him thorough the sails in diverse places , and did not other great hurt . And when we had understood that they had been with him as well as with us , we agreed altogether to seek them ( if we might find them ) and keep a weather our places of traffic . 
 The third day we ran all day to the Southwestwards to seek the Portugals , but could have no sighed of them , and hailed into the shore . 
 The fourth day , when we had sighed of land , we found that the currant had set us thirty leagues to the Eastwards of our reckoning , which we wondered at : for the Lagua . first land we made was Lagua . Then I caused our boat to be manned , and the Christophers also , and went to the shore and took our Negro with us . And on shore we learned that there were foure French ships upon the Perinnen . coast ; one at Perinnen , which is six leagues to the Weamba . Westward of Laguoa : another at Weamba , which is foure leagues to the Eastward of Laguoa : a third at Perecow . Perecow , which is foure leagues to the Eastward of Egrand . Weamba : and the fourth at Egrand , which is foure leagues to the Eastward of Perecow . 
 When we had intelligence of these news we agreed to go to the Eastwards with the French men to put them from their traffic , and shot off two or three pieces in our boats to cause the ships to way : and having be 
 340 
 about one hour under sail , we had sighed of one of the French men under sail , hailing off from Weamba to whom we gave chase , and agreed in the night for fear of overshooting them , that the Minion should first come to anchor , and after that about three hours , the Tiger and the Christopher to bear along all night . 
 The 5. day we found three of the French ships at anchor : one called La foye de Honfleur , a ship of 220 tons , another called the Ventereuse or small Roebarge of Honfleur , of 100 tons , both appertaining to Shawdet of Honfleur , the third was called the Mulet de Batuille a ship of 120 tons , and this ship belonged to certain Merchants of Roan . 
 When we came to them , we determined to lay the Admiral aboard , the Christopher the Viceadmiral , and the Tiger the smallest : but when we came never them they weighed , and the Christopher being the headmost & the weathermost man , went room with the Admiral : the Roebarge went so fast that we could not fetch her . The first that we came to was the Mulet , and her we laid aboard , and our men entered and took her , which ship was the richest except the Admiral : for the Admiral had taken about 80 pound of gold , and the Roeberge had taken but 22 pound ; and all this we learned of the Frenchmen , who knew it very well : for they were all in consort together , and had be upon the coast of Mina two months and odd days : howbeit the Roeberge had be there before them with another ship of Diepe , and a caravel , which had beaten all the coast , and were departed one month before our arriving there , and they three had taken about 700 pound of gold . 
 Assoon as we had laid the ship aboard , and left certain men in her to keep her , we set sail and gave chase to the other two ships , and chased them all day and night , and the next day until three a clock in the afternoon , but we could not fetch them : and therefore seeing that we brought our selves very far to 
 vi 241 Q 
 A.D. 
 1511 - 
 The English board the Frenchmen . 
 [ II ii . 48. ] 
 Fifty pound of glide taken in the French prize . 
 Benin . 
 Our men die ofsicknesse . 
 leeward of our place , we left the chase , and kept about again to go with the shore . 
 The 7 day I sent for the captain , merchants & Master's of the other ships , and when they came we weighed the gold which we had from the Frenchmen , which weighed fifty pound and five ounces of gold : this done , we agreed to put men out of every ship into the prize to keep her . 
 The 12 day we came to the further place of the Mina called Egrand , and being come to and anchor , discharged all the merchants goods out of the prize , and would have sold the ship with the victuals to the Frenchmen , but because she was leak they would not take her , but desired us to save their lives in taking them into our own ships : then we agreed to take out the victuals and sink the ship , and divide the men among our ships . 
 The 15 at night we made and end of discharging the prize , and divided all the Frenchmen except foure which were sick and not able to help themselves ; which foure both the Christopher and the Tiger refused to take , leaving them in their ship alone in the night , so that about midnight I was forced to fetch them into our ship . 
 The 15 of April , moving our company for the voyage to Benin , the most part of them all refused it . 
 The 16 , seeing the unwillingness of the company to go thither , we determined to spend as much time upon the coast as we could , to the end we might make our voyage , and agreed to leave the Minion here at Egrand , the Tiger to go to Pericow which is foure leagues off , and the Christopher to go to Weamba , which is ten leagues to the weatherward of this place : and if any of them both should have sighed of more sails then they thought good to meddle withal , to come room with their fellows : to wit , first the Christopher to come with the Tiger , and then both they to come with us . 
 We remained in this place called Egrand , until the last day of April , in which time many of our men fell 242 
 sick ; and sixe of them died . And here we could have no traffic with the Negroes but three or foure days in the week , and all the rest of the week they would not come at us . 
 The 3 of May not having the pinnace sent us with cloth from the other ships , as they promised , we sold French cloth , and gave but three yards thereof to every fuffe . 
 The 5 day the Negroes departed , and told us they would come to us again within foure days , which we determined there to tarry , although we had diverse of our men sick . 
 The 8 day , all our cloth in the Minion being sold , I called the company together , to know whither they would tarry the sale of the cloth taken in the prize at this place or no : they answered , that in respect of the death of some of their men , and the present sickness of twenty Sickness . more , they would not tarry , but repair to the other ships , of whom they had herd nothing since the 27 of April : and yet they had our pinnace with them , only to carry news from one to another . 
 The 9 day we determined to depart hence to our fellows , to see what they had done , and to attempt what was to be done at the town of DONE John. 
 The 10 day in the morning we sat sail to seek the Christopher and the Tiger . 
 The 11 day the captain of the Christopher came to us , and told us that they could find small doings at the places where they had be . 
 The 12 William Crompton and I in our small pinnace went to the Tiger and the Christopher at Perenine . 
 The 13 we sent away the Tiger to Egrand , because we found nothing to do at Perenine , worth the tarrying for . 
 The 14 our great pinnace came to us , and presently we put cloth into her , and sent her back to Weamba , where she had be before , and had taken there ten pound of gold . 
 243 
 The 15 the Minion came to us , and the next day we went a shore with our boats , and took but one ounce of gold . 
 The 19 day having set sail we came to and anchor before Mowre . Mowre , and there we tarried two days , but took not and ounce of gold . 
 [ II ii . 49. J The 21 we came to and anchor before DONE Johns town . 
 The 22 we manned our boats and went to shore , but the Negroes would not come at us ; then the Captain of the Christopher and I took a skiff and eight men with us , and went and talked with the Negroes , and they said The great that they would send a man to the great town , where ‘ john m DONE John himself lay , to advertise him of our coming . 
 ’ The 23 we went a shore again , and the Negroes told 
 us that this day the merchants of DONE John would come down : so we tarried there until night , and no man would come to us : but diverse of the Negroes made us signs to depart . 
 The 24 the Captain of the Christopher took his boat & went to Mowre , and when he came thither , certain Negroes came to him to know the price of his wares , but in the end there came and Almade , which he judged came from the castle , and caused all the Negroes to depart from him : and when he saw they would come no more to him , he went a shore and took certain men with him , and then the Negroes cast stones at them , & would not suffer them to come up to their town . And when they saw that , they took certain of the Almades , and put them to the sea , and afterwards departed . The same morning I went a shore at DONE Johns town , and took a white flag with me , but none of the Negroes could come to me , which caused us to judge that the Portugals were in the town . After this , our boat came to us well manned , and I sent one man up to the town with a white flag in his hand , but when he was come thither , all the Negroes went away & would not speak with him . Then I sent one alone into the woods after them , but 
 244 
 they in no case would come to us . When we saw that , we took twelve goats and fourteene hens , which we found in the town , and went aboard without doing any further hurt to the town : and when I came aboard , I found our pinnace come from Cormatin , which had taken Cormatin . there two pound & five ounces of gold . Then after much ado with the froward Mariners , we went thitherwards with our ship , and the Christopher went to Mowre . 
 The 25 day the Master of the Christopher sent his boat to the shore for ballast , and the Negroes would have beaten the company from the shore , whereupon the the company resisted them , and slew and hurt diverse of them , and having put them to flight , burned their town , and brake all their boats . 
 The 26 day our pinnace came to us from Cormatin , and had taken two pound & eleven ounces of gold : and John Sheriff told us that the Negroes of that place were very desirous to have a ship come back again to their town . 
 The 27 we weighed and went to Cormatin . 
 The 28 the Christopher came to us from Mowre , and trafficked there two days . 
 The second day of June the Tiger came to us from Egrand , and the pinnace from Weamba , and they two had taken about fifty pound of gold since they departed from us . 
 The 4 day we departed from Cormatin to ply up to Shamma , being not able to tarry any longer upon the coast for lack of victuals , and specially of drink . 
 The 7 day we had sighed of five of the king of Portugals ships , which came to and anchor beside the castle . 
 The 8 day George and Binny came to us , and brought with them about two pound of gold . 
 The 10 day in the morning I took our small pinnace , and the Captain of the Christopher with me , and manned her well , and went to the castle to view the Portugals ships , and there we found one ship of about 300 tun , and foure caravels : when we had well viewed 24s 
 them , we returned back again to our ships which we found seven leagues at sea . 
 The 11 day in the morning we found our selves well shot towards Shamma , & the Tiger with us , but the Minion & the pinnace had not weighed that night , so that we were out of sighed of them : and having brought our selves in the weather of the Portugals ships , we came to and anchor to tarry for the Minion , or else we might have fetched Shamma . At night the Minion and the pinnace came up to us , but could not fetch so far to the weatherward as we , and therefore they anchored about a league a weather The castle , and we weighed in the Christopher , and went room with her . 
 The 12 day the Tiger came room with us , and she and the Christopher finding themselves to stand in great need of victuals , would have gone with the Portugals ships to have fetched some of them forth : but our master and company would in no case consent to go with them , for fear of hanging when we came home : and the other two ships being folly minded to have gone , and fearing that their own company would accuse them , durst not go to them . 
 After this , by reason of the want of victuals in the pinnace , which could receive no victuals from the other ships , but from us only , we took out all our men , and put twelve Frenchmen into her , and gave them victuals to bring them to Shamma . 
 [ II ii . 50. ] The 19 day the Tiger and Minion arrived at Shamma , Note - and the Christopher within two leagues off them , but could not fetch the wind by reason of the scantness of the wind , which hath be so scant , that in fifteene days we have plied to the windwards but twelve leagues , which before we did in one day and a night . 
 The 20 day I took our pinnace , and went to the town of Shamma to speak with the captain , and he told me that there was no gold there to be had , nor so much as a hen to be bought , and all by reason of 246 
 the accord which he had made with the Portugals , and I seeing that departed peaceably from him . 
 The 2i I put such things as we had into our small pinnace , and took one merchant of our ship , and another of the Tiger , and sent her to Hanta , to attempt , if she could do any thing there . That night they could do nothing but were promised to have gold the next day . 
 The next day ( which was the 22 ) being come , we sent our pinnace to Hanta again , but there neither the captain nor the Negroes durst traffic with us , but enticed us from place to place , and all to no purpose . 
 This day we put away our pinnace , with five and They put the twenty Frenchmen in her , and gave them such victuals Trenchmen as we could spare , putting fifteene of them to the ransom the of sixe crowns a man . pinnace . 
 The 23 of June our pinnace came to us from Hanta , and told us that the Negroes had dealt very ill with them , and would not traffic with them to any purpose . 
 The 24 we took our boat and pinnace and manned them well , and went to the town of Shamma , and Shamma burned because the Captain thereof was become subject to the tyk English . Portugals we burned the town , and our men seeking the spoil of such trifles as were there found a Portugals chest , wherein was some of his apparel , and his weights , and one letter sent to him from the castle , whereby we gathered that the Portugall had be there of a long time . 
 The 25 day , about three of the clock at afternoon , Their retume we set sail , and put into the sea , for our return to homewardEngland . 
 The last day of this month we fell with the shore again , and made our reckoning to be eighteene leagues to the weatherward of the place where we set off " . When we came to make the land , we found our selves to be eighteene leagues to the leeward of the place , where we set ofF , which came to pass , by reason of the extreme currant that runneth to the Eastward : when we perceived The currant . 
 247 
 The description of the lie of 8. Thome . 
 our selves so abused , we agreed to cast about again , and to lie as near the wind as we could , to fetch the line . 
 The seventh of July we had sighed of thee He of S. Thome , and thought to have sought the road to have anchored there : but the next morning the wind came about , and we kept our course . 
 The ninth , the wind varying , we kept about again , and fell with the Hand of S. Thome , and seeking the road , were becalmed near the Hand , and with the currant were put near the shore , but could have no ground to anchor : so that we were forced to hoist out our pinnace , and the other ships their skifs to tow from the Hand , which did little good , but in the end the wind put us three leagues off the shore . 
 The tenth day the Christopher and the Tiger cast about , whereby we judged them to have agreed together , to go seek some ships in the road , and to leave us : our men were not willing to go after them , for fear of running in with the Hand again , and of putting our selves into the same danger that we were in the night before : but we shot off a piece , and put out two lights , and they answered us with lights again : whereupon we kept our course , and thought that they had followed us , but in the morning we could not see them , so that they left us willingly , and we determined to follow them no more . But the eleventh day we altered our opinion and course , and consented to cast about again for the Hand , to seek our ships ; and about foure of the clock in the afternoon we met with them . 
 The 13 we fell again with the Hand of S. Thome ; and the same night we found our selves directly under the line . 
 This Hand is a very high Hand , and being upon the West side of it , you shall see a very high pike , which is very small , and straight , as it were the steeple of a church , which pike lies directly under the line , and at the same South end of the Hand to the Westward thereof lies a small Hand , about a mile from the great Hand . 
 248 
 The third of August we departed from the He of S. 
 Thome , & met the wind at the Southwest . 
 The 12 day we were in the height of Cape verde . 
 The 22 day we fell with one of the Isles of Cape verde , called The He of Salt , and being informed by a Scotish °f man that we took among the Frenchmen upon the Salt ' coast , that there were fresh victuals to be had , we came to and anchor there . 
 The 23 day in the morning we manned our skiff , and went a shore , and found no houses , but we saw foure men , which kept themselves always far from us , as for cattle we could find none , but great store of goats , [ II ii . 51. ] and they were so wild , that we could not take above three or foure of them : but there we had good store of fish , and upon a small Hand which lay by the same we had great store of sea-birds . 
 At night the Christopher brake her cable , and lost and anchor , so that she could tarry no longer , so we all weighed , and set sail . Upon the same Hand we left the Scotish man , which was the occasion of our going aland at that place , but how he was left we could not tell : but , as we judged , the people of the Hand found him sleeping , and so carried him away : for at night I went my self to the Hand to seek him , but could hear nothing of him . 
 The 24 day the Master of the Tiger came aboard us , & told us that his men were so weak , and the ship so leak , that he was not able to keep her above the water , and therefore requested us to go back again to the Hand , that we might discharge her , and give her up : but we entreated him to take pain with her a while , and we put a French Carpenter into her , to see if he could find the leak . This day we took a view of all in our men , both those that were hold , and the sick also , and we found that in all the three ships , were not above the coast thirty found men . of Guinie . 
 The 25 we had sighed of thee He of S. Nicholas , and the day following , of the other Isles , S. Lucia , S. Vincent , 249 
 and S. Anthony ; which foure Isles lie the one from the other Northwest and by West , Southeast and by East . The 26 we came again with the Hand of S. Anthony , and could not double the Cape . This day Philip Jones , the Master of the Christopher , came aboard us , who had been aboard the Tiger , and told us that they were not able to keep the Tiger , because she was leak , and the Master very weak , and said further , he had agreed with the Master and the company , that if the next day we could double the Hand , we should run to the leeward of it , and there discharge her : but if we could not double it , then to put in betwixt the Hand of S. Vincent and S. Anthony , to see if we could discharge her . 
 The third day of September I went aboard the Tiger , with the Master and merchants with me , to view the ship and men : and we found the ship very leak , and only six labouring men in her , whereof one was the Master gunner : so that we seeing that they were not able to keep the ship , agreed to take in the men , and of the goods what we could save , and then to put the ship away . 
 The fift day we went to discharge the Tiger . 
 The eight day , having taken out the artillery , goods , The Tiger victuals , and gold of the Tiger , we gave her up 25 given up . degrees by North the line . 
 The 27 we had sighed of two of the Isles of the Azores , S. Marry , and S. Michael . 
 The fourth of October we found our selves to be 41 degrees and a half from the line . 
 The sixt day the Christopher came to us , and willed us to put with the Cape , for they also were so weak , that they were not able to keep the sea , and we being weak also , agreed to go for Vigo , being a place which many English men frequent . 
 The 10 day the Christopher went room with the Cape , but we having a merry wind for England , and fearing the danger of the enemies , which ordinarily lie 25° 
 about the Cape : beside , not knowing the state of ’ our country and Spaine , and although it were peace , yet there was little hope of friendship at their hands , considering the voyage that we had made , and we also being so weak , that by force and violence we could come by nothing , and doubting also that the King of Portugall knowing of our being there , might work some way with the Council of Spaine to trouble us : and further , considering that if we did put in with any harbour , we should not be able to come out again , till we sent for more men into England , which would be a great charge , and loss of time , and means of many dangers . All these things pondered , we agreed to shoot ofF two pieces of ordinance , to warn the Christopher , and then we went our course for England : she hearing our pieces followed us , and we carried a light for her , but the next day in the morning it was thick , and we could not see her in the afternoon neither , so that we suspected that either she was gone with Spaine , or else that she should put forth more sails then we in the night , and was shot a head of us , so that then we put forth our topsails , and went our course with England . 
 At the time when the Christopher left us , we were within 120 leagues of England , and 45 leagues Northwest and by West from Cape Finister : and at the same time in our ships we had not above sixe Mariners and sixe Merchants in health , which was but a weak company for such a ship to seek a foreign harbour . 
 The 16 day , about sixe of the clock at night , we met with a great storm at the Westsouthwest , & West , and our men being weak , and not able to Extreme handle our sails , we lost the same night our main « eaineueof sail , foresail , and spreetsaile , & were forced to lie a mrmen ' hulling , until the eighteenth day , and then we made ready and old course of a foresail , and put it to the yard , and therewith finding our selves far shot into the [ II ii . 52. ] sleeve , we bore with our own coast ; but that before - 
 ’S1 
 sail continued not above two hours , before it was blown from the yard with a freat , and then we were forced to lie a hull again , until the nineteenth day of October in the morning , and then we put and old bonnet to our foreyard , which , by the good blessing and providence of God , brought us to the He of Wight , where we arrived the 20 of October in the afternoon . 
 