The relation of one William Rutter to M. Anthony Hickman his master touching a voyage set out to Guinea in the year 1562 , by Sir William Gerard , Sir William Chester , M. Thomas Lodge , the said Antony Hickman , and Edward Castelin : which voyage is also written in verse by Robert Baker . 
 Cape verde . 
 Rio de Sestos . 
 The Minion . 
 Orshipfull sir , my duty remembered , this shall to declare unto you the discourse of this our voyage , since our departure out of England from Dartmouth ; at which time I gave you to understand of our departure , which was the 25 of February 1562. Then having a prosper 
 ous wind we departed from thence , and sailed on our voyage until we arrived at Cavo verde the 20 of March , making no abided there , but sailed along the coast to our first appointed port Rio de sestos , at which port we arrived the third of Aprill in the morning , having the sighed of a Frenchman , who assoon as he perceived us , set sail and made to the sea : in the mean time we came to and anchor in the road : and after that he had 
 espied our flag , perceiving us to be Englishmen , he bore with the shore , & hailed our ships with his ordinance , at which time we the merchant's of both the ships were in the river in traffic , and had understanding of the Negroes that he had be there three days before our coming : so we concluded together , that if he sent his pinnace to traffic , we would not suffer him , until we had taken further order with their captain & merchants . In the afternoon the pinnace came into the river , whose men we willed to make no traffic until we had talked further with their captain , whom we willed that night to come aboard our admiral ; which was done . At which said time M. Burton and John Munt went aboard the Minion where the Frenchmen were , & there concluded that they 258 
 should tarry by us eight days , and suffer us quietly to traffic , wherewith they were not well pleased . Whereupon the next morning they departed from us , sailing alongst the coast to the Eastward towards Potis , which he did to hinder our traffic that way : wherefore the merchants of the Minion & we concluded ( forasmuch as at that present we understood that there were no sails passed alongst ) that we should go before , to the end we might not be hindered of our traffic by the Frenchmen ; which thing we did : and at our coming thither we found the Frenchman in traffic to the West of Potis , by whom we passed , & arrived at Rio de Potis the 12 of Rio de Potis . April , where we remained in traffic until the 15 of the said month , and then departed from thence along the coast towards Sant Andre , where we appointed by agree - Ri » de S. meant to tarry for the Minion : and the 17 at night we ^ ” dre . came to the river of S. Andre ; in which very day the Minion came unto us , telling us that they met at cavo das das Palmas a great ship and a carveil of the king of Portugals Palmas-bound to the Mina , who gave chase unto them , and shot freely at them , and the Minion in her defence returned her the like : but God be praised the Minion had no hurt for that time . In the end we concluded to hasten 
 towards cavo de tres puntas to have put them from the de tres castle , if by any means we might ; and when we funtas-were come to the Cape , we lay a hull one night and two days , and doubting they had be passed , the Minion went near the shore , and sent her merchant's to a place called Anta , where beforetime we had traffic , and the - Anta . next morning very early being the 21 of the said month , we again had sighed of the ship and the caravel a good way to seaboard of us . Then we presently set sail , and bore with the foremost of them , hoping to have god between the castle and them , but we came short of our purpose , which was no small grief unto us all ; and when they had got the castle to friend , they shot at us freely , and we at them , and the castle at us ; but we profited little . In the afternoon we set sail & came to the town 
 259 
 of DONE Juan called Equi , where the 22 in the morning we went a shore to traffic , but the Negroes would not until they had news from DONE Luis , for at that time DONE Juan was dead , and the 23 came DONE Luis his son [ IL ii . 55. ] and Pacheco minding to traffic with us , at which said Two galies . day came two galies rowing along the shore from the castle , minding to keep us from our traffic . The 24 we set sail and chased the galies to the castle again . The Negroes being glad of that required us to go to Mown . Mowre , which is some 3 leagues behind , and thither would they come for that they stood in fear of the Portugals , and there we remained for the merchants that came out of the country which were come with their gold , but Anthonio dONE Luis his son , and Pacheco were aboard the Minion . And the 25 in the morning came the two galies from the castle again unto us , the weather being very calm , they shot at us and hit us 3 times , and shortly after the wind came from the shore , at which instant we descried the ship , & the caravel coming towards us , then we weighed and set sail , and bore as near unto them as we could : but it was night or ever we met with them , and the night being very dark we lost them . The next day plying to the shore , Cormantin . at night we agreed to go with Cormantin , but the next morning being the 28 we were but a little distant from the great ship and the 2 galies , having no wind at all , and the caravel hard aboard the shore . Then being calm , came the 2 galies rowing to the stern of the Minion , and fought with her the most part of the forenoon : and in the fight a mischance happened in the Much hurt Minions steward-room by means of a barrel of powder done tn the took £re wherewith were hurt the master gunner , firing a barrel the steward , and most part of the gunners ; which the of gunpowder . galies perceiving , began to be more fierce upon them , and with one shot cut half her foremast in twaine , that without present remedy she was not able to bear sail , and presently upon this the great ship sent her boat to the galies , who suddenly departed from us . And after 
 260 
 their departure we went aboard the Minion to counsel what were best to be done , at which time they were soar discomfited . Whereupon we devised what was best to be done : and because we knew that the Negroes neither would nor durst traffic so long as the galies were on the coast ; it was therefore agreed that we should prepare our selves to depart to Rio de Sestos , and so we departed that day . The 14 of May in the morning we fell with the land , and when we came to it , we doubted what place it was , and sent our boats on land to know the truth , and we found it to be Rio de Barbos , which is to the Eastward of sant Andre , and there remained in getting of water until the 21 , where we lost the day before 5 of our men by means of overthrowing our black pin - 
 A.D. 
 1562. 
 They return . 
 Rye de Barbs . 
 The black 
 nasse . The 22 we departed from thence to Rio de Sesto , where we arrived the 2 of June , and the 4 we departed 
 from Rio de Sesto , and arrived ( God be thanked ) the 6 of August within sighed of the Start in the West part of England , our men being very sick and weak . We have not at this present above 20 found men that are able to labour , and we have of our men 21 dead , and many more very soar hurt and sick . Master Burton hath be sick this 6 weeks , and at this present ( God strengthen him ) is so weak that I fear he will hardly escape . Herein enclosed your worship shall receive a brief of all the goods sold by us , 8c also what commodities we have received for the same . Thus I leave to trouble your worship , reserving all things else to our general meeting , and to the bringer hereof . From aboard the Primerose the 6 of August 1563. 
 Your obedient servant 
 William Rutter . 
 There are brought home this voyage An. 1563. Elephants teeth 166. weighing 1758 pounds . Grains 22 buts full . 
 