The voyage of M. George Fenner to Guinie , and the Islands of Cape Verde , in the year of 1566. with three ships , to wit , the Admiral called the Castle of Comfort , the May Flower , and the George , and a Pinnace also : 
 Written by Walter Wren . 
 He 10 day of December , in the year abovesaid , we departed from Plimmouth , and the 12 day we were thwart of Ushant . 
 The 15 day in the morning being Sunday , we had sighed of Cape Finister , and the same night we lost the company 
 of our Admiral , wherefore we sailed along the coast of Portugall , hoping that our Admiral had be before us . The 18 day we met with a French ship of whom we made inquiry for our Admiral , but he could not tell us news of him : so we followed our course to the Hands of the Canaries . 
 The 25 day in the morning we fell with a small Hand called Porto Santo , & within 3 hours we had sighed of another Hand called Madera which is 6 leagues from Porto Santo . 
 The said 25 day being the day of the Nativity , we hoist out our boat , and fetched master Edward Fenner captain of the May Flower aboard us , being in the George , with the master whose name was Robert Cortise and others of the said ship , and feasted them with such cheer as God had sent us . 
 The 28 day we fell with and Hand called Tenerif , which is 27 leagues from the said Hand , and on the East side thereof we came to and anchor in 40 fathom water , within a base shot of the shore , in a little Bay wherein were 3 or 4 small houses : which Bay and houses were distant from a little town called Santa Cruz , a league or thereabouts , and as we road in the said Bay , we might see 266 
 and Hand called The grand Canary which was 6 or 7 leagues from us . 
 The 29 day the May Flower for that she could not fetched into you road where we were at and anchor , by reason the wind was off the shore , & because she bore more roomer from the land then we did , in the morning came bearing in with the town of Santa Cruz , thinking to come to and anchor in the road against the town , and before she came within the reach of any of their ordinance , they shot at her foure pieces which caused her to come room with us , and came at last to and anchor by us . And about one of the clock in the afternoon , the forenamed captain of the May Flower wrote a letter a shore , directing it to the head officer of the town of Santa Cruz , to the intent to understand the pretense of the shooting off the said ordinance . 
 The letter being written , Robert Courtise master of thee May Flower , and Walter Wren were appointed to deliver the same a land at 3 or 4 houses to be conveid to the foresaid town , and so went with six men in the boat , and rowed to the shore as near as they might , for setting the boat on ground , for the sea went cruelly at the shore . 
 The people stood in number 30 persons with such armour as they had : the foresaid Wren called to them in Spanish , declaring to them that they had a letter which they would very gladly have conveid unto the town , showing that they would traffic with them as merchants , desiring their help for the conveyance of the same letter . With that one of the Spaniards willed us to come on land , and we should be welcome , but doubting the worst , the said Walter answered them that they would not come on land , until they had answer of their letter which they had brought . 
 Whereupon one of the Spaniards unrayed himself , and leapt into the water , and swam to the boat , whom we received . And he saluted us , and demanded what our request was : we made him answer , that by misfortune 267 
 we lost the company of our Admiral , and being bound to this Hand to traffic for wines and other things necessary for us , do here mind to stay until he come . 
 Concerning our letter he made us answer , that he would with all diligence carry it , and deliver it according to the direction , and so the said Walter knit the letter in a bladder , and delivered it unto him , and also gave him foure royals of Spanish money for his pains : and promising that we should have answer of it , he took his leave and swam again on shore , where the people stood ready to receive him . And after that they had talked with him , and understood our meaning , some of them threw up their hats , & the other put them off holding them in their hands , and made us very courteous signs , always desiring that the boat would come a land , but we resaluting them rowed back again aboard . 
 The 30 day the Governors brother of Santa Cruz came aboard the May Flower with sixe or seven Spaniards with him , who concluded with the Captain that we might come a shore and traffic with them , but that day we did not , for we had no sufficient pledge of theirs for our assurance . Our Captain entertained them well , and at their departure gave them foure pieces of ordinance for a farewell , and bestowed upon them two cheeses with other things . 
 The said Governors brother promised our Captain that he should have sufficient pledges the morrow following , which was not done , whereupon we grew suspicious , and went not that day a shore . 
 The first day of January our captain sent Nicholas Day and John Sumpter a shore , who were very well entertained with as many of our company as went after them . 
 In the said Hand is a marvelous high hill called the Pike , which is a far off more like a cloud in the air , then any other thing : the hill is round and somewhat small at the top , it hath not be known that ever any man could go up to the top thereof . And although 268 
 it stand in 28 degrees which is as hight in January , as it is in England at Midsummer , yet is the top of the said hill Winter and Summer seidome without snow . 
 In this Island about two leagues from the said Santa Cruz is a city called Anagona . 
 The third day we departed about the Western point of the Island , about 12 or 14 leagues from Santa Cruz , into a Bay which is right against the house of one Petro de Souses , in which Bay we came to and anchor the 5 day , where we herd that our Admiral had be there at and anchor 7 days before us , and was gone thence to and Island called Gomera , whereupon we set sail presently to seek him . 
 The 6 day we came to and anchor against the town of Gomera , where we found our Admiral , which was very joyful of our coming , and we also of his sighed . 
 In the said road we found Edward Cook in a tall ship , and a ship of the Coppersmiths of London , which the Portugals had treacherously surprised in the Bay of Santa Cruz , upon the coast of Barbarie , which ship we left there all spoiled . 
 Our General & merchants bought in the said town for our provision , 14 buts of wine , which cost 15 ducats a but , which were offered us at Santa Cruz in Tenerif for 8 , 9 , and 10 ducats . 
 The 9 day we departed from this road to another Bay , about 3 leagues off , and there took in fresh water : & so the 10 day we set sail towards Cape Blank , which is on the coast of Guinea . 
 They meet their Admiral again . 
 The 12 day we fell into a Bay to the Eastward of Cape Pargos , which is 35 leagues from Cape Blank . But having no knowledge of that coast , we went with Cape Blank , and at the fallen of the land we sounded and had 16 fathom water two leagues from the shore . The land is very low and white sand . Upon the fallen of the A good caveat . said coast beware how you borrow in 12 or 10 fathom , for within 2 or 3 casts of the led you may be on ground . 
 269 
 The foolish rashness of Wil. Bats persuading the company to land unarmed . 
 The 17 day we set sail from Cape Blank , directing our course South and by East , & South among , and so fell into a Bay to the Eastward of Cape Verde , about 16 leagues , and about sixe leagues from the shore . The said land seemed unto us as if it had be a great number of ships under sail , being in deed nothing else but the land which was frill of Hammoks , some high some low , with high trees on them . We bore with the said land till we were within 3 leagues of the shore , and then we sounded , and found 28 fathom water , black oase . This day we saw much fish in sundry skulls swimming with their noses with the brim of the water . 
 Passing along this coast we might see two small round hills , seeming to us about a league one from the other , which is the Cape , and between them are great store of trees , and in all our days sailing we saw no land so high as the said two hills . 
 The 19 day we came to and anchor at the Cape , in a road fast by the Westermost side of two hills in 10 fathom of water where you may ride in five or sixe fathom , for the ground is fair , and always you shall have the wind off the shore . And as soon as we were all at and anchor , our general came aboard us , and with him the master of the Admiral , whose name was William Bats , and with them the captain of the Viceadmiral , whose name was master Edward Fenner , and Robert Curtise the master , and dined aboard of us being in the George , wherein was Captain John Heiwood , and John Smith of Hampton master , and there we concluded to go aland , which was half a mile from us : and by the counsel of William Bats both Captain and merchants and diverse of the company went without armour : for he said , that although the people were black and naked , yet they were civil : so that he would needs give the venture without the consent of the rest to go without weapon . Thus they rowed to shore , where , we being in the ship might see a great company of Negroes naked , walking to and from by the sea side where the 
 270 
 landing place was , waiting for the coming of our men , who came too soon , and landed to their loss as it fell out afterwards . 
 There went a shore the Admirals skiff , and the May Flowers boat , and in them the number of 20 persons or thereabouts , as M. George Fenner the general , his brother M. Edward Fenner , Thomas Valentine , John Worm and Francis Leigh merchants , John Haward , William Bats , Nicholas Day , John Tomson and others . 
 At their coming to the shore there were 100 Negroes or upward , with their bows and arrows : our Captains and merchant's talked with them , & according to the use of the country , the one demanded pledges of the other , & they were content to deliver 3 of their Negroes for 5 of our men . Our 5 men's names were these , John Haward , Wil. Bats , Nich. Day , Joh. Tomson , & John Curtise : these were delivered them , and we received 3 Negroes into our Admirals skiff . 
 Our men being a shore among the Negroes , began to talk with them , declaring what ware and merchandise we had , as woollen cloth , linen cloth , iron , cheese & other things . The Negroes answered again , they had civet , musk , gold and grains , which pleased our captains and merchants very well . Then the Negroes desired to have a sighed of some of our wares , to the which our merchants were content , and forthwith sent aboard one of the boats for part of their merchandise , and in the mean time while the boat went to the ship , our five men were walking on the shore with the Negroes , and our general and merchants stayed in the other boat by the sea side , having the 3 Negroes with them . 
 Our boat then came again and brought iron and other merchandise , with bred , wine , and cheese which they gave unto them . Then two of the Negroes ( which were the pledges ) made themselves sick , desiring to go a shore , promising to send other two for them . 
 271 
 [ II ii . 59. ] 
 Civet , musk , gold & grains , the commodities of Cafe Verde . 
 Captain Haiward perceiving that our men had let the Negroes come a shore , asked what they meant , and doubting the worst began to draw towards the boat , and two or three of the Negroes followed him . And when he came to the boat they began to stay him , and he made signs unto them that he would fetch them more drink and bred : notwithstanding , when he was entering into the boat , one of them caught him by the breeches and would have stayed him , but he sprang from him and leapt into the boat , and as soon as he was in , one of the Negroes a shore began to blow a pipe , and presently the other Negro that was in our boat sitting on the boats side , and master Worms sword by him , suddenly drew the sword out of the scabbard , and cast himself into the Sea and swam a shore , and presently the Negroes laid hands on our men that were on shore , and took three of them with great violence , and tore all their apparel from their backs and left them nothing to cover them , and many of them shot so thick at our men in our boats , that they could scarce set hand to any Oar to row from the shore , yet ( by the help of God ) they god from them with their boats , although many of them were hurt with their poisoned arrows : and the poison is uncurable , if the arrow enter within the skin and draw blood , and except the poison be presently sucked out , or the place where any man is hurt be forthwith cut away , he dieth within foure days , and within three hours after they be hurt or pricked , wheresoever it be , although but at the little toe , yet it striketh up to the heart , and takes away the stomach , and causeth the party marvellously to vomit , being able to brook neither meat nor drink . 
 The Negros having used our men with such cruelty , whose names were Nicholas Day , William Bats and John Tomson , led them away to a town which was within a mile of the water side , or thereabouts . 
 The 20 day we sent to land a boat or skiff wherein 
 272 
 were eight persons , and one of them was the foresaid John Tomson and our interpreter which was a Frenchman , ( for there was one of the Negroes which spoke good French : ) and they carried with them two harquebusses , two targets and a manteli . 
 The cause of sending them was to learn what ransom they demanded for Bats and Day whom they detained . And when they came to the shore and told the Negroes what they desired , they went and fetched them from among the trees , and brought them lose among fortie or fiftie of them . And being come within a stones cast of the sea side , William Bats brake from them , and ran as fast as he could into the sea towards the boat , and he was not so soon in the water but he fell down , either being out of breath or his foot failing him in the sand being soft : so that the Negroes came and fell on him and took him and haled him , that we thought they had torn him in pieces : for they tore again all the apparel from his back , so that some of them carried our men again to the town , and the rest shot at us with their poisoned arrows , and hurt one of our men called Androwes in the small of the leg , who being come aboard , ( for all that our Surgeons could do ) we thought he would have died . 
 Our general ( notwithstanding all this villainy ) sent again to them , and offered them any thing that they desired for the ransom of our men , but they would not deliver them : giving us this answer : That there was in the foresaid road , three weeks before we came , and English ship which had taken three of their people , and until we did bring or send them again , we should not have our men although we would give our three ships with their furniture . 
 The 2i day a French ship of the burden of 80 tons ( or thereabouts , ) came to the place where we were , being bound to traffic at the Cape : we told them of the detaining of our two men by the Negroes : and seeing that these Frenchmen were very well welcome vi 273 s 
 A.D. 
 1567. 
 A French interpreter far Cape Verde . 
 The danger of poisoned arrows . 
 The answer of the Negroes . 
 [ II ii . 60. ] 
 to the Negroes , we wished them to see whither they could procure them again of the Negroes , and bring them along with them , and our general promised the Frenchmen 100 li . to obtain them . So we committed the matter to the Frenchmen and departed . 
 Of our men that were hurt by the Negroes arrows , foure died , and one to save his life had his arm cut off . Androwes that was last of all hurt , lay lame not able to help himself : only two recovered of their hurts . So we placed other men in the rooms of those that we lost , and set sail . 
 The 26 day between Cape Verde and Bona vista we saw many flying fish of the bigness of herrings , whereof two flew into our boat , which we towed at our stern . 
 The 28 day we fell with and Hand called Bona vista , which is from Cape Verde 86 leagues . The Northside of the said Hand is full of white sandy hills and dales , and somewhat high land . 
 The said day we came to and anchor within the Westermost point , about a league within the point , and found in our sounding fair sand in ten fathom water , but you may go near till you be in five or six fathom , for the ground is fair . 
 As soon as we were at and anchor , our general sent his pinnace a land , and found five or sixe small houses , but the people were fled into the mountains : and the next day he sent a shore again , and met with two Portugals , who willingly went aboard with his men , and at their coming he welcomed them , although they were but poor & simple , and gave each of them a pair of shoes , and so set them a shore again . 
 The 30 day we weighed & sailed into a Bay within a small Hand about a league from us , and took plenty of diverse sorts of fish . The foresaid Hand lies in sixteene degrees . And if you mean to anchor in the said Bay , you may borrow in foure or five fathom of the Southermost point of the said Hand , which you may see 274 
 ... I567 ' when you ride in the road . But beware of the middle of the Bay , for there lies a ledge of rocks , which at a admonttl , > n-lowe water breaks , yet there is three fathom water over them . 
 The last day of Januarie our general with certain of his men went a shore in the Bay to the houses , where he found 12 Portugals . In all the Island there were not Banished above 30 persons , which were banished men for a time , Portu&a^-some for more years , some for less , and among them there was one simple man which was their captain . 
 They live upon goats flesh , cocks , hens , and fresh water : other victuals they have none , saving fish , which they esteem not , neither have they any boats to take them . 
 They reported that this Island was given by the king of Portugall to one of his gentlemen , who hath let it forth to rend for one hundreth ducats a year , which rend is reared only in goats skins . For by their Great steer of speeches there hath be sent forth of the said Island SPates-into Portugall 40000 skins in one year . 
 We were to these men marvelously welcome , and to their powers very well entertained , and they gave us the flesh of as many hee-goates as we would have , and took much pains for us in taking them , and bringing them from the mountains upon their asses . 
 They have there great store of the oil of Tortoises , which Tortoise is a fish which swimmeth in the Sea , with a shell on his back as broad as a target . It rains not in this Island but in three months of the year , from the midst of July to the midst of October , and it is here always very hight . Kine have be brought hither , but by reason of the heat and drought they have died . 
 The 3 of February we departed from this Island , and the same day fell with another Island called the Island of The lie of Maiyo , which is 14 leagues from the other Island : there hois in the midst of the way between these two Hands a danger which is always to be seen . 
 We anchored in the Northwest side of the said He in a fair Bay of eight fathoms water and fair sand , but 
 275 
 here we stayed not , but the fourth day weighed and sailed to another Hand called S. Jago , which lies off the said Hand of Maiyo East and by South , and about five leagues one from the other . Being come within the Westermost point , we saw a fair road , and a small town by the water side , and also a fort or platform by it : there we purposed to come to anchor , and our merchants to make some sale . But before we came within their shot , they let fly at us two pieces , whereupon we went roomer and sailed along the shore two or three leagues from the road , where we found a small Bay and two or three small houses , where we came to and anchor in 14 fathom fair ground . 
 Within and hour after we had anchored we might see diverse horsemen and footmen on the land right against us riding and running to and from . 
 The next day being the fift of Februarie , a great company of their horsemen and footmen appeared on the shore side , unto whom our general sent to understand whither they would quietly traffic with them : And they sent him word again , desiring that they might speak with him , promising that if he came to traffic as a merchant he should be welcome , and also that he should have any thing that he or the merchant would with reason demand . 
 When this answer was brought unto our general he was very glad thereof and the whole company , and presently ( with as much speed as he could ) he caused his boats to be made ready : but doubting the villainy of the Portugales , he armed his boats putting a double base in the head of his pinnace , and two single bases in the head of the Skiff , and so sent to the May-floure and the George , and willed them in like sort to man their two boats . 
 These boats being thus manned and well appointed , our general entered into his Skiff , and with the rest rowed to the shore where were threescore horsemen or more , and two hundreth footmen ready to receive them . Our general marveiled that they came in so great a 276 
 number and all armed , and therefore with a flag of truce sent to them to know their pleasure : and they answered him with many fair promises and oaths , that their pretence was all true , and that they meant like Gentlemen and Merchants to traffic with him , declaring also that their Captain was coming to speak with him , and therefore desired our general to come and speak with him himself . 
 With this answer the boat returned , and then our general caused his pinnace to row to them , and as he came near the shore they came in a great company with much obeisance , opening their hands and arms abroad , bowing themselves with their bonnets off , with as much humble salutations outwardly as they might : earnestly desiring our general and Merchants to come on land to them , whereunto he would not agree without sufficient gages of Gentlemen and Merchants . At length they promised to send two gages to our Generals contentment , promising fresh water , victuali , money , or Negroes for ware , if it were such as they liked : and therefore desired our general and Merchants to send them a shore in writing the quantity of their wares , and the names of them : all which our general departed to perform , looking for their answer the morrow following . And being gone a little from the shore , he caused his bases , curriers , and harquebusses to be shot off , and our ships in like case shot off five or sixe pieces of great ordinance , and so came aboard to prepare the note . The Portugales most of them departed , saving those that were left to watch and to receive the note , which about foure or five a clock in the afternoon was sent , and it was received . But all the purposes of the Portugals were treason of villainously to betray us ( as shall appear hereafter ) although we meant in truth and honesty , friendly to our men _ traffic with them . 
 There was to the Westwards of us and about two leagues from us , a town behind a point fast by the sea side , where they had certain Caravels , or ships and 277 
 also two Brigandines , whereof they ( with all the speed that they might ) made ready foure Caravels , and both the brigandines which were like two Galleys , and furnished them both with men and ordinance as much as they could carry , and as soon as it was night , they came rowing and falling towards us : so that the land being high and weather somewhat cloudy or mystie , and they coming all the way close under the shore we could not see them till they were right against one of our ships called the May-floure . 
 By this time it was about one or two of the clock in the morning , and the May-floure road nearer them then the other two by a base shot , so that they made a sure account either to have taken her or burned her . In the mean time our men that had the watch ( little thinking of such villainous treacheries after so many fair words ) were singing and playing one with the other , and made such a noise , that ( being but a small gale of wind , and riding near the land ) they might hear us from the shore : so that we supposed that they made account that we had espied them , which indeed we had not , neither had any one piece of ordinance primed , or any other thing in a readiness . 
 They came so near us that they were within gunshot of us , & then one of our men chanced to see a light , & then looking out spied the 4 ships , and suddenly cried out , Galleys , galleys , at which cry we were all amazed , and forthwith they shot at us all the great ordinance that they had , and their harquebusses , and curriers , and so lighted certain tronkes or pieces of wild fire , and all of them with one voice ( as well they on the shore as they in the ships ) gave a great shout , and so continued hallowing with great noises , still approaching nearer and nearer unto the May-floure . We ( with all the speed that we might ) made ready one piece of ordinance and shot at them , which caused them somewhat to stay , so they charged their ordinance and shot at us freshly again , and while they shot this second time at us , we had 278 
 made ready three pieces which we shot at them , but they approached still so near , that at last we might have shot a sheaf arrow to them . Whereupon we having a gale of wind off the shore hoised our foresail , and cut our cable at the hawse , and went toward our Admiral , and they continued following and shooting at us , and sometime at our Admiral , but our Admiral shot one such piece at them , that it made them to retire , and at length to warp away like traitorous villains , and although they thus suddenly shot all their shot at us , yet they hurt neither man nor boy of ours , but what we did to them we know not . 
 But seeing the villainy of these men we thought it best to stay there no longer , but immediately set sail towards and Hand called Fuego , 12 leagues from the said The Isle of Island of S. Jago . At which Island of Fuego we came to and anchor the 11 day of this month , against a white chapel in the West end of the said Island , within half a league of a little town , and within a league or thereabouts of the uttermost point of the said Island . 
 In this Island is a marvellous high hill which does burn continually , and the inhabitants reported that about three years passed the whole Island was like to be burned with the abundance of fire that came out of it . 
 About a league from the said chapel to the Westward is a goodly spring of fresh water , where we had as much as we would . Wheat they have none growing here , but a certain seed that they call Mill , and certain peason Mill. like Guinie peason , which Mill makes good bread , but they have here good store of rother beasts and goats . 
 Their merchandise is cotton , which grows there . Cotton in The inhabitants are Portugals which have command - FueSP-ment from the king to traffic neither with Englishmen nor Frenchmen for victuali or any other thing , except they be forced so to do . 
 There lies off this Island another called Ilha Brava , The Isle of which is not passing two leagues over , it hath good store Brava - 
 279 
 Afrill . 
 Wood . 
 May . 
 of goats and many trees , but there are not passing three or foure persons dwelling in it . 
 The 25 day of February we departed towards the Islands of Azores : and on the 23 day of March we had sighed of one of them called Flores , and then we might see another Island to the Northward of it called Cuervo , lying two leagues or thereabouts off the other . 
 The 27 we came to and anchor in Cuervo over against a village of about twelve simple houses ; but in the night by a gale of wind , which caused us to draw our anchor after us , we hoised sail and went to the aforesaid Island of Flores , where we saw strange streams of water running down from the high cliffs by reason of the great abundance of rain that had suddenly fallen . 
 The 29 day we came again to Cuervo and cast anchor , but a storm arose and continued seven or eight hours together , so that we let slip a cable and anchor , and after the storm was allayed we came again thinking to have recovered the same , but the Portugals had either taken it , or spoiled it : the cable was new and never wet before , and both the cable and anchor were better worth then 40 li . So that we account our selves much beholding to the honest Portugales . 
 The 18 day of April we took in water at the Island of Flores , and having anchored , our cable was fretted in sunder with a rock and so burst , where we lost that cable and anchor also , and so departed to our coast . 
 Then we set sail to and Island nam Faial , about the which lie three other Islands , the one called Pico , the other Saint George , and the other Graciosa , which we had sighed of on the eight and twentieth day . 
 The 29 we came to and anchor in the Southwest side of Faial in a fair bay , and 22 fathom water against a little town where we had both fresh water and fresh victuali . In this Island by the report of the inhabitants , there grows certain green woad , which by their speeches is far better then the woad of S. Michael or of Tercera . 
 The 8 day of May we came to Tercera where we met 
 280 
 with a Portugall ship , and being destitute of a cable and anchor , our general caused us to keep her company , to see if she could conveniently spare us any . The next morning we might see bearing with us a great ship and two Caravels , which we judged to be of the king of Portugals Armada , and so they were , whereupon we prepared our selves for our defence . The said ship was Portugall one of the kings Galliasses , about the burden of foure Ga^u if hundred tons , with about three hundred men in her , the +°° umes ' ship being well appointed with brass pieces both great and small , and some of them so big that their shot was as great as a men head , the other two Caravels were also very warlike and well appointed both with men and munition . 
 As soon as they were within shot of us , they waved us amain with their swords , we keeping our course , the greatest ship shot at us freely and the caravel also , and 
 [ II ii . 63. ] 
 fight between one English ship 
 we prepared our selves , and made all things clear for our safeguard as near as we could . Then the great ship shot at us all her broad side , and her foure greatest pieces Portugals . 
 that lay in her stern , and therewith hurt some of our men , and we did the best we could with our shot to requite it . At last two other Caravels came off the shore , and two other pinnaces full of men , and delivered them aboard the great ship , and so went back again with two men in a piece of them . The ship and the Caravel gave us the first day three fights , and when the night was come they left off shooting , yet notwithstanding kept hard by us all the night . In the mean time we had as much as we could do all the night to mend our ropes , and to strengthen our bulwarks , putting our trust in God , and resolving our selves rather to die in our defence then to be taken by such wretches . 
 The next day being the 10 of May in the morning , there were come to aid the said Portugals foure great Armadas or Caravels more which made seven , of which 4 three of them were at the least 100 tons a piece , the other not so big , but all well appointed and full of men . 
 281 
 All these together came bearing with us being in our Admiral , and one of the great Caravels came to lay us aboard ( as we judged ) for they had prepared their false nettings , and all things for that purpose , so that the Gallias came up in our larboard side , and the Caravel in our starboard side . 
 Our Captain and Master perceiving their pretence , caused our gunners to make all our ordinance ready with crossebarres , chaineshotte and hailshot : so the ship and Caravel came up , and as soon as they were right in our sides , they shot at us as much ordinance as they could , thinking to have laid us presently aboard : whereupon we gave them such a heat with both our sides , that they were both glad to fallen astern of us , & so paused the space of two or three hours being a very small gale of wind . 
 Then came up the other five and shot all at us , and so fell all astern of us , & then went to counsel together . 
 Then our small bark nam the George came to us , and we conferred together a great space . And as the Portugall ships and Caravels were coming to us again , our bark minding to fallen astern of us and so to come up again , fell quickly upon the lee , and by reason of the little wind , it was so long before she could fill her sails again , that both the ship and Caravels were come up to us , and she falling in among them made reasonable shift with them , but they god a head of her , so that she could not fetch us : then 5 of the Caravels followed her , but we saw she defended her self against them all . 
 Then came the great ship and the Caravel to us , and fought with us all that day with their ordinance . 
 The May-floure our other consort being very good by the wind , took the benefit thereof and halde all that day close by the wind , but could not come near us . So when night again was come , they gave over their fight and followed us all the night . 
 282 
 In these many fights it could not otherwise be but needs some of our men must be slain , ( as they were indeed ) and diverse hurt , and our tackle much spoiled : yet for all this we did our best endeavour to repair all things , and to stand to it to the death with our assured trust in the mercy and help of God . 
 This night the May-floure came up to us , and our Captain told them his harms and spoils , and wished them if they could spare half a dosen fresh men to hoist out their boat and send them to him , but they could not spare any , and so bore away again . Which when our enemies saw in the next morning that we were one from another , they came up to us again and gave us a great fight with much hallowing and hooping , making account either to board us or else to sink us : but although our company was but small , yet lest they should see us any whit dismayed , when they hallowed we hallowed also as fast as they , and waved to them to come and board us if they durst , but that they would not , seeing us still so courageous : and having given us that day foure fights , at night they forsook us with shame , as they came to us at the first with pride . 
 They had made in our ship some leaks with their shot which we again stopped with all speed , and that being done , we took some rest after our long labour and trouble . 
 The next day in the morning the May-floure came to us , and brought us sixe men in her boat which did us much pleasure , and we sent to them some of our hurt 
 The 7 Portugal : depart with shame from one English ship . 
 men . 
 Then we directed our course for our own country , and by the second day of June we were near to our June . own coast and sounded being thwart the Lyzard . 
 The third day we had sighed of a ship which was 
 a Portugall , who bore with us , and at his coming to us [ 11. ii . 64. ] ( the weather being calm ) our Captain caused him to hoist forth his boat to come aboard to speak with him , and at their coming our Captain and Merchants 
 283 
 demanded of them what ware they had , and whither they were bound , and they made answer that their lading was sugar and cotton . Then our Captain and Merchants showed them five Negroes that we had , and asked them whither they would buy them , which they were very desirous to do , and agreed to give for them 40 chests of sugar , which chests were small having not above 26 loaves in a piece : so they with their boat did fetch five of the chests and delivered them and went for more , and when they had laden their boat and were come again , we might see bearing with us A Portugall a great ship and a small , which our Captain supposed tandin^au ' to men war or Rovers , and then willed thee their Mames ) Portugales to carry their sugar to their ship again , defended by purposing to make our selves ready for our defence . our men from But the Portugales earnestly entreated our Captain not wers - so to forsake them , and promised him ( if he would safeguard them ) to give him above the bargain ten chests of sugar : whereupon our Captain was content , and the Portugall not being good of sail , we spared our topsails for her : so at last the foresaid ship bore with us , and ( seeing that we did not fear them ) gave us over . And the next morning came two others bearing with us , and seeing us not about to fly a jot from them forsook us also . 
 The 5 day of June we had sighed of the Start , and about noon we were thwart of the bay of Lime , and so sounded and had 35 fathom water . 
 The sixt day we came in at the Needles and so came to and anchor under the Isle of Wight at a place called Meadhole , and from thence sailed to Southhampton where we made and end of this voyage . 
 