The Ambassage of M. Edmund Hogan , one of the sworn Esquires of her Majesties person , from her Highness to Mully Abdelmelech Emperor of Marocco , and king of Fes and Sus : in the year 1577 , written by himself . 
 Edmund Hogan being appointed Ambassador from the Queens Majesty to the above nam Emperor and King Mully Abdelmelech , departed with my company and servants from London the two and twentie day of Aprill 1577 , being embarked in the good ship called 
 the Gallion of London , and arrived in Azafi a port of Barbarie the one and twentie day of May next following . Immediately I sent Leonell Edgerton a shore with my letters directed to John Williams and John Bampton , who dispatched a Trottero to Marocco to know the kings pleasure for my repair to the Court , which letters came to their hands on the Thursday night . 
 They with all speed gave the king understanding of it , who being glad thereof sped the next day certain Captains with soldiers and tents , with other provision to Azafi : so that upon Whitsunday at night the said Captains with John Bampton , Robert Wash-borne , and Robert Lion , and the kings officers came late to Azafi . 
 In the mean time I remained a board , and caused some of the goods to be discharged for lightning of the ship , and I wrote in my letter that I would not land , till I knew the Kings pleasure . 
 The 22 day being Saturday , the Make-speed arrived in the road about two of the clock in the afternoon . 
 The 27 day , being Whitsunday , came aboard the Gallion John Bampton , and others , giving me to understand how much the King rejoiced of my safe 285 
 M. Hogan his arrival at Azafi in Barbarie . May . 
 In Barbary they have no Inns but they lodge in open fields where they can find water . 
 arrival , coming from the Queens Majesty , and how that for my safe conduct to the Court he had sent foure Captains and and hundred soldiers well appointed , with a horse furnished which he used himself to ride on with all other furniture accordingly : they wished me also to come on land in the best order I could , as well for my self as my men , which I did , having to the number of tenne men , whereof three were trumpeters . 
 The ships being foure appointed themselves in the best order they could for the best show , and shot off all their ordinance to the valve of twentie Marks in powder . 
 At my coming a shore , I found all the soldiers well appointed on horseback , the Captains and the Governor of the town standing as near the water side as they could , with a Jennet of the kings , and received me from the boat declaring how glad his Majesty was of my safe arrival , coming from the Queens Majesty my Mistress , and that he had sent them to attend upon me , it being his pleasure that I should tarry there on shore five or sixe days for my refreshing . 
 So being mounted upon the Jennet , they conducted me through the Town into a fair field upon the Seaside where was a tent provided for me , and all the ground spread with Turkey carpets , and the Castle discharged a peal of ordinance , and all things necessary were brought into my tent , where I both took my table and lodging , and had other convenient tents for my servants . 
 The soldiers environed the tents , and watched about us day and night as long as I lay there , although I sought my speedier dispatch . 
 On the Wednesday towards night , I took my horse and traveled ten miles to the first place of water that we could find , and there pitched our tents till the next morning , and so traveled till ten of the clock , 286 
 and then pitched our tents till foure , and so traveled as long as day light would suffer about 26 miles that day . 
 The next day being Friday I traveled in like order but eight and twentie miles at the most , and by a River being about sixe miles within sighed of the City of Marocco we pitched our tents . 
 Immediately after came all our English merchants , and the French on horseback to meet me , and before night there came and Alcaid from the king with fiftie men , & diverse mules laden with victuali and banquet , for my supper , declaring unto me how glad the king showed himself to hear of the Queens Majesty , and that his pleasure was I should be received into his country as never any Christian the like : and desired to know what time the next day I would come into his city , because he would that all the Christians as also his nobility should meet me , and willed John Bampton to be with him early in the morning , which he did . 
 About seven of the clock being accompanied with the French and English merchants , and a great number of soldiers , I passed towards the city , and by that time I had traveled 2 miles , there met me all the Christians of the Spaniards and Portugals to receive me , which I know was more by the kings commandment then of any good wills of themselves : for some of them although they speak me fair hung down their heads like dogs , and especially the Portugales , and I countenanced them accordingly . 
 So I passed on till I came within two English miles of the Ci tie , and then John Bampton returned , showing me that the king was so glad of my coming , that he could not devise to do too much , to show the good will that he did owe to the Queens Majesty , and her Realm . 
 His counsellors met me without the gates , and at the entry of the gates , his footmen & guard were 287 
 A.D. 
 1577 - 
 The singular humanity of the king to our Ambassador . 
 The Spaniards and Portugales were commanded by the king in pain of death , to meet the English Ambassador . 
 The king of Spaine sought to disgrace the Queen if her Ambassador . 
 placed on both sides of my horse , and so brought me to the kings palace . 
 The king sat in his chair with his Counsel about him , as well the Moors as the Elchies , and according to his order given unto me before , I there declared my message in Spanish , and made delivery of the Queens Majesties letters , and all that I spoke at that present in Spanish , he caused one of his Elchies to declare the same to the Moors present , in the Larbe tongue . 
 Which done , he answered me again in Spanish , yielding to the Queens Majesty great thanks , and offering himself and his country to be at her Graces commandment , and then commanded certain of his Counsellors to conduct me to my lodging , not being far from the Court . 
 The house was fair after the fashion of that country , being daily well furnished with all kind of victuali at the kings charge . 
 The same night he sent for me to the Court , and I had conference with him about the space of two hours , where I thoroughly declared the charge committed unto me from her Majesty , finding him conformable , willing to pleasure and not to urge her Majesty with any demands , more then conveniently she might willingly consent unto , he knowing that out of his country the Realm of England might be better served with lacks , then he in comparison from us . 
 Further he gave me to understand , that the king of Spaine had sent unto him for a licence , that and Ambassador of his might come into his country , and had made great means that if the Queens majesty of England sent any unto him , that he would not give him any credit or entertainment , albeit ( said he ) I know what the king of Spaine is , and what the Queen of England and her Realm is : for I neither like of him nor of his religion , being so governed by the Inquisition that he can do nothing of himself . 
 288 
 Therefore when he comes upon the licence which I have granted , he shall well see how little account I will make of him and Spaine , and how greatly I will extol you for the Queens majesty of England . 
 He shall not come to my presence as you have done , [ II ii . 66. ] and shall daily : for I mind to accept of you as my companion and one of my house , whereas he shall attend twentie days after he hath done his message . 
 After the end of this speech I delivered Sir Thomas Greshams letters , when as he took me by the hand , and led me down a long court to a palace where there ran a fair fountain of water , and there sitting himself in a chair , he commanded me to fit down in another , and there called for such simple Musicians as he had . 
 Then I presented him with a great base Lute , which king °f he most thankfully accepted , and then he was desirous Boarie sent to hear or the Musicians , and 1 told him that there was fa Musicians . great care had to provide them , and that I did not doubt but upon my return they should come with the first ship . 
 He is willing to give them good entertainment with provision of victuali , and to let them live according to their law and conscience wherein he urges none to the contrary . 
 I find him to be one that lives greatly in the fear of God , being well exercised in the Scriptures , as well in the old Testament as also in the New , and he bears a greater affection to our Nation then to others because of our religion , which forbiddeth worship of Idols , and the Moors called him the Christian king . 
 The same night being the first of June , I continued with him till twelve of the clock , and he seemed to have so good liking of me , that he took from his girdle a rich gift short dagger being set with 200 stones , rubies and turkeys , bestowed and did bestow it upon me , and so I being conducted Ambassador . returned to my lodging for that time . 
 The next day because he knew it to be Sunday & our Sabbath day he did let me rest . But on the munday in the afternoon he sent for me , and I had conference with him again , and music . 
 vi 289 TO 
 Likewise on the tuesday by three of the clock he sent for me into his garden , finding him laid upon a silk bed complaining of a soar leg : yet after long conference he walked into another Orchard , where as having a fair banqueting-house and a great water , and a new galley in it , he went aboard the galley and took me with him , and passed the space of two or three hours , showing the great experience he had in Galleys , wherein ( as he said ) he had exercised himself eighteene years in his youth . 
 After supper he showed me his horses and other commodities that he had about his house , and since that night I have not seen him , for that he hath kept in with his soar leg , but he hath sent to me daily . 
 June , The 13 of June at sixe of the clock at night I had 
 again audience of the king , and I continued with him till midnight , having debated as well for the Queens commission as for the well dealing with her merchants for their traffic here in these parts , saying , he would do much more for the Queens majesty and the Realm , Take offers of offering that all English ships with her subject's may with t£nkllsft00ur good security enter into his ports and dominions as merchant's . we^ in trade of merchandise , as for victuali & water , as also in time of war with any her enemies to bring in prizes and to make sales as occasion should serve , or else to depart again with them at their pleasure . 
 Likewise for all English ships that shall pass along his coast of Barbarie , & thorough the straits into the Levant seas , that he would grant safe conduct that the said ships and merchants with their goods might pass into the Levant seas , and so to the Turks dominions , and the king of Argiers , as his own , and that he would write to the Turke and to the king of Argier his letters for the well using of our ships and goods . 
 Also that hereafter no Englishmen that by any means may be taken captives , shall be sold within any of his dominions : whereupon I declared that the Queens majesty accepting of these his offers was pleased to confirm the intercourse & trade of our merchants within 
 290 
 .... I577-this his country , as also to pleasure him with such commodities as he should have need of , to furnish the A necessities and wants of his country in trade of mar - Prwiso-chandize , so as he required nothing contrary to her honour and law , and the breach of league with the Christian princes her neighbours . 
 The same night I presented the king with the case of combes , and desired his majesty to have special regard that the ships might be laden back again , for that I found little store of saltpeter in readiness in John Bamptons hands . He answered me that I should have all the assistance therein that he could , but that in Sus he thought to have some store in his house there , as also that the Mountainers had made much in a readiness : I requested that he would send down , which he promised to do . 
 The eighteene day I was with him again and so continued there till night , and he showed me his house with pastime in ducking with water-Spaniels , and baiting bulls with his English dogs . 
 At this time I moved him again for the sending down to Sus , which he granted to do , and the 24. day [ II ii . 67. ] there departed Alcaid Mammy , with Lionell Edgerton , and Rowland Guy to Sus , and carried with them for our accounts and his company the kings letters to his brother Muly Hammet , and Alcaid Shauan , and the Viceroy . 
 The 23. day the king sent me out of Marocco to his garden called Shersbonare , with his guard , and Alcaid Mamoute , and the 24. at night I came to the court to see a Morris dance , and a play of his Elchies . He promised me audience the next day being Tuesday , but he put it off till Thursday : and the Thursday at night I was sent for to the king after supper , and then he sent Alcaid Rodwan , and Alcaid Gowry to confer with me , but after a little talk I desired to be brought to the King for my dispatch . And being brought to him , I preferred two bills of John Bamptons which he had made for provision of Saltpeter : also two bills for the 
 291 
 The Emperor of Manco his privileges to the English . 
 quiet traffic of our English Merchants , and bills for sugars to be made by the Jewes , as well for the debts past , as hereafter , and for . good order in the Ingenios . Also I moved him again for the Saltpeter , and other dispatches , which he referred to be agreed upon by the two Alcaydes . But the Friday being the 20. the Alcaydes could not intend it , and upon Saturday Alcaid Rodwan fell sick , so on Sunday we made means to the King , and that afternoon I was sent for to confer upon the bargain with the Alcaydes and others , but did not agree . 
 Upon Tuesday I wrote a letter to the King for my dispatch , and the same afternoon I was called again to the Court , and referred all things to the King , accepting his offer of Saltpeter . 
 That night again the King had me into his Galley , and the Spaniels did hunt the duck . 
 The Thursday I was appointed to way the 300. kintals gross of Saltpeter , and that afternoon the Tabybe came unto me to my lodging , showing me that the king was offended with John Bampton for diverse causes . 
 The Sunday night late being the 7. of July , I god the King to forgive all to John Bampton , and the King promised me to speak again with me upon Munday . 
 Upon Tuesday I wrote to him again for my dispatch , and then he sent Fray Lewes to me , and said that he had order to write . 
 Upon Wednesday I wrote again , and he sent me word that upon Thursday I should come and be dispatched , so that I should depart upon Friday without fail , being the twelfth of July . 
 So the friday after according to the kings order & appointment I went to the court , & whereas motion and petition was made for the confirmation of the demands which I had preferred , they were all granted , and likewise the privileges which were on the behalf of our English merchants requested , were with great favour and readiness yielded unto . And whereas the Jewes there resident were to our men in certain round 
 292 
 sums indebted , the Emperor's pleasure and commandment was , that they should without further excuse or delay , pay and discharge the same . And thus at length I was dismissed with great honour and speciali countenance , such as hath not ordinarily be showed to other Ambassadors of the Christians . 
 And touching the private affairs entreated upon betwixt her Majesty and the Emperor , I had letters from him to satisfy her highness therein . So to conclude , having received the like honourable conduct from his Court , as I had for my part at my first landing , I embarked my self with my foresaid company , and arriving not long after in England , I repaired to her Majesties court , & ended my Ambassage to her highness good liking , with relation of my service performed . 
 