The Ambassage of Master Henry Roberts , one of the sworn Esquires of her Majesties person , from her highness to Mully Hamet Emperor of Marocco and the King of Fesse , and Sus , in the year 1585 : who remained there as Liger for the space of 3. years . Written briefly by himself . 
 Pon and incorporation granted to the Company of Barbary Merchants resident in London , I Henry Roberts one of her Majesties sworn Esquires of her person , was appointed her highness messenger , and Agent unto the aforesaid Mully Hamet Emperor of Marocco , king 
 of Fesse , and Sus. And after I had received my Commission , instructions , and her Majesties letters , I departed from London the 14. of August in the year 1585. in a tall ship called the Ascension , in the company of the Minion and Hopewell , and we all arrived in safety at Azafi a port of Barbary , the 14. of September next following . The Alcaide of the town ( being the kings officer there , and as it were Mayor of the place ) received me with all humanity and honour , according to the custom of the Country , lodging me in the chiefest house of the town , from whence I dispatched a messenger ( which in their language they call a Trottero ) to advertise the Emperor of my arrival : who immediately gave order , and sent certain soldiers for my guard and conduct , and horses for my self , and mules for mine own and my companies carriages . Thus being accompanied with M. Richard Evans , Edward Salcot , and other English Merchants resident there in the Country , with my train of Moors and carriages , I came at length to the river of Tensist , which is within foure miles of Marocco : and there by the water side I pitched my tents under the Olive trees : where I met 426 
 with all the English Merchants by themselves , and the French and Flemish , and diverse other Christians , which attended my coming . And after we had dined , & spent out the heat of the day , about foure of the clock in the afternoon we all set forward towards the City of Marocco , where we arrived the said day , being the 14. of September , and I was lodged by the Emperors appointment in a fair house in the Judaria or Jury , which is the place where the Jewes have their abided , and is the fairest place , and quietest lodging in all the City . 
 After I had reposed my self 3. days , I had access to the kings presence , delivered my message and her Majesties letters , and was received with all humanity , and had favourable audience from time to time for three years : during which space I abided there in his Court , as her Majesties Agent and Ligier : and whensoever I had occasion of business I was admitted either to his Majesty himself , or to his vice Roy , whose name was Alcaid Breme Saphiana , a very wise and discreet person , and the chiefest about his Majesty . The particulars of my service , for diverse good and reasonable causes , I forbear here to put down in writing . 
 After leave obtained , and and honourable reward bestowed by the Emperor upon me , I departed from his Court at Marocco the 18. of August 1588. towards a garden of his , which is called Shersbonare , where he promised me I should stay but one day for his letters : howbeit , upon some occasion I was stayed until the 14. of September at the kings charges , with 40. or 50. shot attending upon me for my guard and safety . 
 From thence at length I was conducted with all things necessary to the port of Santa Cruz , being sixe days journey from Marocco , and the place where our ships do commonly take in their lading , where I arrived the 21. of the same month . In this port I stayed 43. days , and at length the second of November I embarked my self , and one Marshok Reiz a Captain and 427 
 a Gentleman , which the Emperor sent with me upon and Ambassage to her Majesty : and after much torment and foul weather at Sea , yet Newyears day I came on land at S. Ives in Cornwall , from whence passing by land both together up towards London , we were met [ II ii . 118. J without the city with the chiefest merchants of the Barbary Company , well mounted all on horseback , to the number of 40. or 50. horse , and so the Ambassador and my self being both in Coach , entered the city by torchlight , on Sunday at night the 12. of January 1589. 
 