A brief relation of the great magnificence and [ II ii . 102. ] rich traffic of the kingdom of Pegu beyond the East India , written by Frey Peter of Lisbon , to his cousin Frey Diego of Lisbon , from Cochin . 
 Received your letters in the harbour of Damaon by a caravel of advice that came from Malacca , which brought shot , powder , and other provision for the furnishing of foure galleys and a great gallion , which are now in building , to keep our coast for fear of great 
 store of men of war , being Moors , which trouble us very soar . At that instant when I received your letters I was newly come from the kingdom of Pegu , where I had remained one year and and half , and from thence I departed to the city of Cochin in October 1587. The news which I can certify you of concerning these 
 VI 385 2 B 
 The coast of India greatly troubled with Moores . 
 countries' are : That this king of Pegu is the mightiest king of men , & the richest that is in these parts of the world : for he brings into the field at any time , when he hath wars with other princes , above a million of fighting men : howbeit they be very lean and small people , and are brought unto the field without good Abundant of order . He is lord of the Elephants , and of all the gold gold , silver , ancj si | ver mines , and of all the pearls and precious Ppredous^tones stones : so that he hath the greatest store of treasure in Pegu. that ever was herd of in these parts . The country 
 people call him The God of truth and of justice . I had great conference with this king , and with the head captain of the Portugals , which is one of the country . They demanded of me many questions as touching the law and faith of Jesus Christ , and as touching the Ten Commandments . And the king gave his consent that our Order should built a Church in his country , which was half built ; but our perverse and malicious Portugals plucked it down again : for whereas it is a country wherein our nation gain very much by their commodities , they fearing that by the building of this Church there would be greater resort thither , and so Tie great their trade should be impaired , if their great gains 
 gain of thee should be known unto others then those which found 
 PeguSa 5 W this country out first , therefore they were so unwilling 
 ' that the building of this Church should go forward . Our Portugals which are here in this realm are worse people then the Gentiles . I preached diverse times among those heathen people ; but being obstinate they say , that as their father's believed so they will believe : for if their forefathers went to the devil so they will . Whereupon I returned back again to our monastery to certify our father provinciali of the estate of this New found Pegu the best country . It is the best and richest country in all this tun ? iSin all Eatest India ; isthought to be richer then China . theEastlndia . / am atrayd that the wars which his Majesty hath 
 with England will be the utter undoing and spoil of Spaine : for these countries' likewise are almost spoiled 386 r 
 . .... with civil wars , which the Moors have against the Gentiles : for the kings here are up in arms all the country over . Here is and Indian which is counted a prophuie Prophet , which hath prophesied that there will a Dragon arise in a strange country , which will do great hurt to a&ams ? mn ' Spaine . How it will fallen out , only God does know . 
 And thus I rest : from this monastery of Cochin the 28 of December , 1589. 
 Your good cousin and assured friend friar Peter of Lisbon . 
 