Certain remembrances of and intended voyage to Brasill , and the River of Plate , by the Edward Cotton , a ship of 260 Tons of Master Edward Cotton of Southhampton , which perished through extreme negligence near Rio grande in Guinie , the 17 of July 1583. 
 ARticles of Covenants agreed upon between Edward Cotton Esquire , owner of the good ship called the Edward Cotton of Southhampton , and of all the merchandizes in her laden , of the one part , and William Huddie gentleman , Captain of the said ship , John Hooper his Lieutenant , John Foster Master , Hugh Smith Pilot for the whole voyage , and William Cheesman merchant , on the other part . 
 i observe and keep the daily order 
 hOW °f Common prayer aboard the ship , and the company to be called there-OlS unto , at the least once in the day , to 
 □ BsS oSrk be pronounced openly . 
 vyjer 2 Item , that they be ready with the ■ ■ ■ first fair wind , to set sail and sails in the voyage , and not to put into any port or harbour , but being forcibly constrained by weather , or other apparent and urgent cause . 
 3 Item , that they take in , at or about the Isles of Cape Verde , to the quantity of 25 or 30 tons of salt , to be employed among other the owners merchandise , at Santos , and S. Vincent , to his only behoof , and the rest of the salt , so much as shall be needed for victuali , and for saving of the hides to be kept aboard , 8c the same salt to be provided either at the fishermen's hands near the said Isles for truck of commodities , or else to be taken in at the aforesaid Isles , at the discretion of the abovenamed . 
 4 Item , upon the due performance of this voyage , the owner binds himself by this deed , to yield unto any 
 408 
 1583-such of the company , as shall refuse their shares before they depart from the coast of England , 20 marks a single share , for the duty of the whole voyage , making not above 75. shares single in the whole . 
 5 Item , the company according as they be appointed by the officers of the said ship above nam , shall at all times be most ready to do their painful endeavour , not only aboard , but in all labours at the land , according to the direction given by the above nam officers , upon pain of forfeiture of their shares and wages , the same to be divided among the company . 
 6 Item , that the shares be taken at their return out of all the train oil , and hides of the seals , and of all other commodities got by their handy labour , and of the salt that shall be vended and other commodities , at , or near the coast of Brasill , to allow after 9 li . the tun freight , whereof one third to go to the company . 
 7 Item , that if any man shall practise by any devise or devises whatsoever , to altar the voyage from the true purpose and intent of the owner , viz. to make their first port at Santos , and Saint Vincent , and there to revictuall and traffic , and from thence to the river of Plate to make their voyage by the train , and hide of the seals , [ II ii . 111. ] with such other commodities as are there to be had , according as the owner , with diverse that have government in the said ship , are bound to her highness by their deeds obligatory in great sums , that all such practisers , upon due proof made , shall lose their whole entertainment due by shares or otherwise for this said voyage to be adjudged by the Captain , his Lieutenant , the Master , Pilot , and merchant , or three of them at the least , whereof the Captain to be one . 
 8 Item , that the pinnace be ready at all times to serve the merchants turn upon his demand , to take in wares and commodities , and to carry and recary to and from the shore , when , and as oft as need shall be , and to give due attendance at the merchant and merchants direction , during the whole voyage . 
 409 
 9 Item , that no head or chief officer being set down for such and officer under the hand of the owner , at the going to sea of the said ship , shall or may be displaced from his said place or office , without great cause , and his misdemeanour to be adjudged by the Captain , and his Lieutenant , the Master , the Pilot , and the merchant , or by the consent of three of them at the least . 
 10 Item , that upon the return of the ship to the coast of England , the Master and Pilot put not into any port or harbour , to the Westward of Southhampton , but forced by weather , or such like urgent cause . 
 William Huddie . John Foster . 
 John Hooper . William Cheesman . 
 Hugh Smith . 
 A direction as well for the Captain , and other my friends of the ship , as especially for William Cheesman Merchant , for the voyage to the river of Plate . 
 [ * your coming to the Isle of Saint Sebastian , upon the coast of Brasill , you shall according to your discretions , make sale of such commodities , as you may think will be thereabouts well vented , and likewise to buy commodities without making longer stay there then your 
 victuals be providing , but rather to bespeak commodities against your return from the river of Plate , especially of Amber , Sugar , Green ginger , Cotton wool , and some quantity of the peppers of the country there . Also for Parats and Munkies , and the beast called Serrabosa . Also you shall barrel up of the beef called Petune , two or three barrels , and to loose no good opportunity , to gather of the Indian figs , and the grains of them to preserve dry , in such quantity as conveniently may be done : and touching the making of the train , and preserving of the hides , I leave it wholly to the order and the discretion of 
 410 
 the chief of the company . Also that in any road where the ship shall ride upon the coast of America , trial be made with the drags , for the pearl Oysters , and the same being taken , to be opened and searched for pearl in the presence of the Captain , his Lieutenant , the Master , the Pilot , and merchant , or three of them , whereof the Captain or his Lieutenant to be one , and to remain in the custody of the Captain and merchant , under two locks , either of them to have a key to his own lock , and that a true inventory be delivered also to the Master and Pilot of the said pearl or other jewels of price got in the said voyage , to the intent that no party be defrauded of his due , and that no concealment be made of any such thing upon‘forfeiture , the party to loose his share and duty for the voyage that shall so conceal and not reveal it unto the officers above nam . Also to do your best endeavour to try for the best Over of gold , silver , or other rich metals whatsoever . Forget not also to bring the kernels and seeds of strange plants with you , the Palmito with his fruit enclosed in him . Serve God , keep good watch , and stand always upon your guard . 
 Edward Cotton . 
 These things being thus ordered , and the ship of the burden of 260 tons , with 83 men of all sorts furnished , and fully appointed for the voyage , began to set sail from Hurst Castle upon Friday the 20 of May , Anno 1583 , and the 17 day of July ensuing fell with the coast of Guinie , to take in fresh water , where , through mere dissolute negligence , she perished upon a sand , with the most part of the men in her , as appears by the confession of one that escaped , the substance and tenor whereof is this . 
 [ The confession 411 
 [ II ii . 112. ] The confession of William Bends Master's Mate 
 in the Edward Cotton , the 21 of October , Ann. 1584. 
 Rio grande . 
 One Coxe and old English man buried alive by the Moors of Rio grande in Guinea . 
 HE say , that the 17 day of July , Anno 1583. having some lack of fresh water , they put room upon the coast of Guinie , where they were set upon a sand about 8 leagues from the shore , and this Examinate , with 29 more , god into the pinnace , who arrived in and Island , being desolate of people , and five miles in compass , where they rested 18 days through force of weather , having nought to eat but grass . The rest of the company the ship being split in two , and in quarters , god them into one of thee after quarters , and by the help of rafts came also a shore into another Island near to Rio grande , where they all died as he supposeth . 
 The other 30 in the pinnace , at the end of 18 days , departed that Island , and came to Saint Domingo , where coming on shore , they were taken of the Moors , & stripped naked . And they buried one Coxe and old man alive , notwithstanding his pitiful lamentation and skrikings : the rest having Rice and water allowed them , lived there a certain time . This Examinate was at last sold to a Portugall , with whom he dwelled the space of a quarter of a year , and in the end , a Portugall Caravel coming thither , his master jaded the same with Negroes , and he obtained leave of his master to go in the same Caravel , & by that means arrived at Lisbone , and from thence came into England the 17 of October , 1584 , leaving behind him of his company alive , Richard Hacker , John Baker , John Mathew , and a boy , with two others which were gone beyond Saint Domingo : all which , as he says , were so sick and diseased , that he judgeth them to be long before this time dead . 
 