Este es un traslado bien y fielmente sacado da una carta real deal Rey Muley Harriet de Fes y Emperador de Marruecos , cuyo tenor es este , que Segue . 
 On el nombre de Dios piadoso y miseri-cordioso , etc. El siervo de Dios soberano , el conquistador per sum causa , el successor en sal^ado por Dios , Emperador de los Moros , hijo del Emperador de los Moros , Jariffe , Haceni , el que perpetue sum honra , y ensalge sum estado . Se pone 
 este nuestro real mandado en manos de los criados de nuestras altas puertas los mercadores Yngleses ; para que por el sepan todos los que la present vieren , come nuestro alto Conseio les anpara con el favour de Dios de todo aquello , que les enpeciere y dannare en qualquiera manera , que fueren offendidos , y en qualquiera viaie , que fueren , ninguno les captivari en estos nuestros reynos , y puertos , y lugares , que a nos pertenescen : y ? iue les cubre el anporo de nuestro podor de qualquiera atiga ; y ningun los impida con mano de enemistad , ni se dara causa , de que se agravien en qualquiera manera con el favour de Dios y de sum amparo . Y mandamos si los Alcaydes de los nuestros puertos y fortalezas , y a los que en estos nuestros reynos tienen cargo , y a toda la gente common , que no les alleguen en ninguna manera , 428 
 con orden , de que sean offendidos en ninguna manera ; 
 y esto serA necessariam ente : Que es escri ta en los medios dias de Rabel , segundo anno de nueve gientos , y noventa y seys . 
 Concorda el dia d’esta carta con veynte dias de Margo del anno de mil y quiniento y ochenta y siete , lo qual the Abdel Rahman el Catan , interpret per sum Magestad saqu& , y romange de verbo ad verbum , como en el se contiene , y en Fee dello firmo de my number , fecho ut supra . 
 Abdel Rahman el Catan . 
 The same in English . 
 This is a copy well and truly translated of and edict of Muley Hamet king of Fez and Emperor of Marocco , whose tenor is as follows : to wit , that no Englishmen should be molested or made slaves in any part of his Dominions , obtained by the aforesaid M. Henry Roberts . 
 N the Name of the pitiful and the merciful God , etc. The servant of the supreme God , the conqueror in his cause , the successor advanced by God , the Emperor of the Moors , the son of the Emperor of the Moors , the JarifFe , the Hageny , whose honour God long 
 increase and advance his estate . This our princely commandment is delivered into the hands of the English merchants , which remain in the protection of our stately palaces : to the end that all men which shall see this present writing , may understand that our princely counsel will defend them by the favour of God , from any thing that may impeach or hurt them in what sort soever they shall wronged : and that , which way soever they shall travail , no man shall take them captives in these our kingdoms , ports , and places which belong unto us , which also may protect and defend them by our 429 
 authority from any molestation whatsoever : and that no man shall hinder them by laying violent hand upon them , and shall not give occasion that they may be grieved in any sort by the favour and assistance of God . And we charge and command our officers of our havens and fortresses , and all such as bear any authority in these our dominions , and likewise all the common people , that in no wise they do molest them , in such sort that they be no way offended or wronged . And this our commandment shall remain inviolable , being registered in the midst of the month of Rabel in the year 996. 
 The date of this letter agreeth with the 20. of March 1587. which I Abdel Rahman el Catan , interpretor for his Majesty , have translated and turned out of the Arabian into Spanish word for word as is contained therein : and in witness thereof have subscribed my name as aforesaid . 
 Abdel Rahman el Catan . 
 