The Queens Majesties letters to the Emperor of Marocco . 
 The Queens letters to the Emperor . 
 Uy alto , y muy poderoso Sennor , Aviendo entendido de part de nuestro Agent la mucha aficion , y volontad , que nos teneys , y quanta honra , y favour le hazeys por amor nuestro , para dar nos tanto mayor testimonio de vuestra amistad , hemos recebido de lo uno y de 
 lo otro muy grande contento , y satisfaction : y assy no podemos dexar de agradesceroslo , como mereceys . Vues-tras cartas hemos tambien recibido , y con ellas holga-donos infinitamente , por venir de part de un Principe , a quien tenemos tanta obligation . Nuestro Agent nos would escripto sober ciertas cosas , que desseays ser os embiadas de aqui : Y , aunque queriamos poder os en ello puntualmente complazer , como pidiz , would succedido , que las guerras , en que stamos all present occupadas , no nos lo consienten deal todo : Hemos perd mandado , que se os satisfaga en parte , y conform A lo que por agora la necessitad nos permit , common mass particularment os lo declarara nuestro Agent : esperando , que lo reciberreys en buena parte y conform all animo , con que os lo concedemos . Y porque nos would sido referido , que aveys prometido de proceder contra un Juan Herman vassallo nuestro , ( el qual nos would gravemente offendido ) de la manera , que os lo demandaremos , avemos dado orden a nuestro dicho Agent de deziros mass parcularmente lo que desseamos ser hecho a cerca deste negocio , rogando os , que lo mandeys assi com-plir : y que seays servido de favorescer siempre all dicho Agent , y tener lo en buen credito , como hasta agora aveys hecho , since permiter , que nadie os haga mudar 43 2 
 1587-de parecer a cerca de las calumnias , que le podran levantar , ny dudar , que no complamos muy por entero todo , lo que de nuestra parte os prometiere . Nuestro Sennor guard vostra muy alta y muy poderosa persona . Hecha en nuestra Corte Real de Grenewich a 20. de Julio 1587. 
 The same in English . 
 Right high and mighty Prince , Having understood from our Agent the great affection and good will which you bear us , and how great honour and favour you show him for our sake , to the end to give us more ample testimony of your friendship , we have received very great 
 contentment & satisfaction , aswell of the one as of the other : and withal we could not omit to magnify you , according to your desert . We have also received your letters , and do not a little rejoice thereof , because they come from a prince unto whom we are so much beholden . Our Agent hath written unto us concerning certain things which you desire to be sent unto you from hence . And albeit we wish that we could particularly satisfy you , as you desire , yet it is fallen out , that the wars , wherein at this present we be busied , will not suffer us fully to do the same : nevertheless , we have commanded to satisfy you in part , and [ IL ii . 120. ] according as the present necessity doth permit us , as our Agent will declare unto you more particularly , hoping you will receive it in good part , and according to the good will wherewith we grant the same . And because it hath be signified unto us that you have promised to proceed in justice against one John Herman John Herman our subject , which hath grievously offended us , in such a ” is sort as we have sent word unto you , we have given * order to our said Agent to inform you more particularly in that which we desire to be done in this business , praying you also to command the same to be 
 vi 433 2 e 
 The governor ofS . Michael taken prisoner . 
 put in execution : and that it would please you always to favour our said Agent and to hold him jn good credit , as you have done hitherto , not suffering your self to be changed in your opinion , for all the false reports which they may raise against him , nor to doubt that we will not accomplish at large all that he shall promise you on our behalf . Our Lord keep and preserve your right high and mighty person . Written in our royal Court at Greenwich the 20. of July 1587. A voyage to the Azores with two pinnaces , the one called the Serpent , and the other the Marry Spark of Plimouth , both of them belonging to Sir Walter Ralegh , written by John Evesham Gentleman , wherein were taken the governor , of the Isle of Saint Michael , and Pedro Sarmiento governor of the Straits of Magalanes , in the year 1586. 
 