A voyage to Benin beyond the Country of Guinea , set forth by Master Bird and Master Newton Merchants of London , with a ship called the Richard of Arundell , and a Pinesse ; Written by James Welsh , who was chief Master of the said voyage , begun in the year 1588. 
 Pon the twelft of October we weighed our anchors at Ratcliffe and went to Blackwall . And the next day sailing from thence , by reason of contrary wind and weather , we made it the 25. of October before we were able to reach Plimouth , and there we stayed ( to our great expense of 
 victuals ) for lack of wind and weather unto the 14. of December . 
 On Saturday the said 14. of December we put from thence , and about midnight were thwart of the Lizart . Rio deal on is Thursday the second of January we had sighed of the 
 in 22 . degrees , land near Rio del oro , God be thanked , and there had and 47. mm. 22 > jegrees of latitude , and 47. minutes . 
 45° 
 The thirde of January we had sighed of Cavo de las Barbas , and it bore Southeast five leagues ofF . 
 The 4. we had sighed of the Crosiers in the morning . 
 Tuesday the 7. day we had sighed of Cavo verde , and I find this place to be in latitude 14. degrees , and 43. minutes , being 4. leagues from the shore . 
 Friday the 17. Cavo de Monte bore off us North Northeast , we sounded and had 50. fathom black oase , and at 2. of the clock it bore North Northwest 8. leagues off . And Cavo Mensurado bore of us East and by South , and we went Northeast with the main : here the currant sets to the East Southeast alongst the shore , and at midnight we sounded and had 26. fathom black oase . 
 The 18. in the morning we were thwart of a land much like Cavo verde , and it is as I judge 9. leagues from Cavo Mensurado ; it is a hill sadlebacked , and there are 4. or 5. one after another : and 7. leagues to the Southward of that , we saw a row of hills sadlebacked also , and from Cavo Mensurado are many mountains . 
 The 19. we were thwart Rio de Sestos , and the 20. Cavo dos Baixos was North & by West 4. leagues ofF the shore , and at afternoon there came a boat from the shore with 3. Negroes , from a place ( as they say ) called Tabanoo . And towards evening we were thwart of and Island , and a great many of small Islands or rocks to the Southward , and the currant came out of the Souther-boord : we sounded and had 3 5 fathoms . 
 The 21. we had a flat hill that bore North Northeast ofF us , and we were from the shore 4. leagues , and at 2. a clock in the afternoon we spoke with a Frenchman riding near a place called Ratire , and another place hard by called Crua . This Frenchman carried a letter from us to M. Newton : we laid it on hull while we were writing of our letter ; and the current set us to the Southward a good pace alongst the shore South Southeast . 
 The 25. we were in the bite of the bay that is to the Westward of Capo de Tres puntas : the currant did set East Northeast . 
 A.D. 
 1589. 
 Cavo de las Barbas . 
 Crosiers . 
 Cavo Verde , in 14. deg . 
 43. m . 
 Cavo de Monte . 
 Cavo Mensurado . 
 Rio de Sestos . Cavo dos Baixos . 
 Tabanoo . 
 A French ship at Ratire . 
 Crua . 
 A currant to the Southeastward . 
 451 
 The 28. we lay sixe glasses a hull tarrying for the pinesse . 
 Cavo de tres The last of January the middle part of Cape de tres funtas . puntas was thwart of us three leagues at seven of the 
 clock in the morning : and at eight the pinesse came to and anchor : and we proved that the current sets to the Eastward : and at sixe at night the uttermost land bore East and by South 5. leagues , and we went Southwest , and Southwest and by South . 
 Saturday the first of February 1588. we were thwart of a Round foreland , which I take to be the Eastermost part of Capo de tres puntas : and within the said Round foreland was a great bay with and Island in the said bay . 
 The Castle of The second of February we were thwart of the Castle Mtna - of Mina , and when the thirde glass of our Lookout was spent , we spied under our Larboard-quarter one of their Boats with certain Negroes , and one Portugale in [ II ii . 127. ] the Boat , we would have had him to come aboard , but he would not . And over the castle upon the high rocks Two white we did see as it might be two watch-houses , and they did watch-houses . show very white : and we went eastnortheast . 
 The 4 in the morning we were thwart a great high hill , and up into the land were more high ragged hills , Monte Re - and those I reckoned to be but little short of Monte dondo . Redondo . Then I reckoned that we were 20 leagues Southeastward from the Mina , and at 11 of the clock I saw two hills within the land , these hills I take to be 7 leagues from the first hills . And to seaward of these hills is a bay , and at the east end of the bay another hill , and from the hills the lands lie very low . We went Eastnortheast , and East and by North 22 leagues , and then East along the shore . 
 Villa longam . The 6 we were short of Villam longam , and there we met with a Portugall Caravel . 
 The 7 a fair temperate day , and all this day we road before Villam longam . 
 The 8 at noon we set sail from Villam longam , and 452 
 1589-ten leagues from thence we anchored again and stayed all that night in ten fathom water . 
 The 9 we set sail , and all alongst the shore were very thick woods , and in the afternoon we were thwart a river , & to the Eastward of the river a little way off Rio de Lagos , was a great high bush-tree as though it had no leaves , and at night we anchored with fair and temperate weather . 
 The 10 we set sail and went East , and East and by South 14 leagues along the shore , which was so full of thick woods , that in my judgement a man should have much to do to pass through them , and towards night we anchored in 7 fathom with fair weather . 
 The 11 we sailed East and by South , and three leagues from the shore we had but 5 fathom water , and all the wood upon the land was as even as if it had been cut with a pair of gardeners sheeres , and in running of two leagues we discerned a high tuft of trees upon the brow of a land , which showed like a Porpose head , and when we came at it , it was but part of the land , and a league further we saw a headland very low and full of trees , and a great way from the land we had very shallow water , Very shallow then we lay South into the sea , because of the sands for water-to get into the deep water , and when we found it deep , we anchored in five fathom thwart the river of Jaya , in the rivers mouth . 
 The 12 in the morning we road still in the rivers mouth . This day we sent the pinnace and the boat on land with the merchants , but they came not again until the next morning . The shallowest part of this river is towards the West , where there is but 4 fathom and a half , and it is very broad . The next morning came the boat aboard , and they also said it was Rio the Jaya . Rio de Jaya . Here the currant sets Westward , and the Eastermost land is higher then the Westermost . 
 Thursday the 13 we set sail , and lay South Southeast along the shore , where the trees are wonderful even , and the East shore is higher then the West shore , and when we had sailed 18 leagues we had sighed of a great river , 
 453 
 then we anchored in three fathom and a half , and the Rio Benin . currant went Westward . This river is the river of Benin , and two leagues from the main it is very shallow . 
 The 15 we sent the boat and pinnace into the river with the merchants , and after that we set sail , because we road in shallow water , and went Southsoutheast , and the starboard tack aboard until we came to five fathom A currant water , where we road with the currant to the Westward : Westward . then came our boat out of the harbour and went aboard the pinnace . The West part of the land was high browed much like the head of a Gurnard , and the Eastermost land was lower , and had on it three tufts of trees like stacks of wheat or corn , and the next day in the morning we saw but two of those trees , by reason that we went more to the Eastward . And here we road still from the 14 of Februarie until the 14 of Aprill , with the wind at Southwest . 
 The 16 of Februarie we road still in 5 fathom , and the currant ran still to the Westward , the wind at Southwest , and the boat and pinnace came to us again Tenfoote out of the river , and told us that there was but ten foot t^b^tof water uPon the bar . All that night was drowsy , and Rio de Benin . reasonable temperate . 
 The 17 a close day the wind at Southwest . Our merchants weighed their goods and put them aboard the pinnace to go into the river , and there came a great currant out of the river and set to the Westward . 
 The 18 the merchants went with the boat and pinnace into the river with their commodities . This day was close and drowsy , with thunder , rain and lightning . 
 The 24 a close morning and temperate , and in thee . afternoon the boat came to us out of the river from our merchants . 
 Tuesday the 4 of March , a close sultry hight morning , the currant went to the Westward , and much troubled water came out of the river . 
 The 16 our pinnace came a board and Anthonie Ingram in her , & she brought in her 94 bags of pepper , 454 
 and 28 Elephants teeth , and the Master of her and all his company were sick . This was a temperate day and the wind at Southwest . 
 The 17. 18. and 19 were fair temperate weather and the wind at Southwest . This day the pinnace went into the river again , and carried the Purser and the Surgeon . 
 The 25 of the said month 1589 we sent the boat into the river . 
 The 30 our pinnace came from Benin , and brought sorrowful news , that Thomas Hemsted was dead and our Captain also , and she brought with her 159 Cerons or sacks of pepper and Elephants teeth . 
 Note that in all the time of our abiding here , in the mouth of the river of Benin , and in all the coast hereabout it is fair temperate weather , when the wind is at Southwest . And when the wind is at Northeast and Northerly , then it rains , with lightning and thunder , and is very intemperate weather . 
 The 13 of Aprill 1589 we set sail homeward in the name of Jesus . In the morning we sailed with the wind at Southwest , and lay West and by North , but it proved calm all that night , and the currant Southeast . 
 The 14 the river of Benin was Northeast 7 leagues from the shore , and there was little wind and towards night calm . 
 The 17 a fair temperate day the wind variable , and we had of latitude foure degrees and 20 minutes . 
 The 25 a fair temperate day the wind variable , and here we had three degrees & 29 minutes of latitude . 
 The 8 of May we had sighed of the shore , which was part of Cavo de Monte , but we did not think we had been so far , but it came so to pass by reason of the currant . In this place M. Towrson was in like manner deceived with the currant . 
 The 9 we had sighed of Cavo de monte . 
 The 17 a dark drowsy day , this was the first night that I took the North star . 
 455 
 A.D. 1589. 
 [ II ii . 128. ] Sickness among our men . 
 The death of the Captain . Pepper & Elephants teeth . A good note . 
 A deceitpfull currant . 
 The 26 a temperate day with little wind , and we were in 12 degrees and 13 minutes of latitude . 
 The 30 we met a great sea out of thee Northwest . 
 The 6 of June we found it as temperate as if we had been in England , & yet we were within the height of the sun , for it was declined 23 degrees , and 26 minutes to the Northward , and we had 15 degrees of latitude . 
 The 8 fair and temperate as in England , here we met with a counter sea , out of the Southborde . 
 The 15a fair temperate day , the wind variable , here we had 18 degrees and fiftie nine minutes . 
 Rockweed or The 12 of July in 30 degrees of latitude we met with Sa^aSa^°al1 great store of rockweed , which did stick together like a ng tO e sea . cjusjers o£ grapeSj and this continued with us until the 17 of the said month , and then we saw no more , at which 17 day we were in two and thirtie degrees sixe and fortie minutes of latitude . 
 The 25 at sixe of the clock in the morning , we had sighed of the Isle of Pike , it bore North and by East from us , we being 15 leagues off . 
 The 27 we spoke with the post of London and she told us good news of England . 
 The nine and twentieth we had sighed of the Island of Cuervo , and the 30 we saw the Island of Flores . 
 The 27 of August in 41 degrees of latitude we saw 9 sail of Britons , and three of them followed us until noon , and then gave us over . 
 The 30 we had sighed of Cape Finisterre . 
 The eight of September at night we put into Plymouth found , and road in Causon bay all night . 
 The 9 we put into Catwater and there stayed until the 28 of September , by reason of want of men and sickness . 
 The nine and twentieth we set sail from Plimouth , and arrived at London the second of October 1589. 
 The commodities that we carried in this voyage were cloth both linen & woollen , iron work of sundry sorts , 456 
 ... 15891 Manillios or bracelets of copper , glass beads , and coral . 
 The commodities that we brought home were pepper and Elephants teeth , oil of palm , cloth made of Cotton wool very curiously woven , and cloth made of the bark of palm trees . Their money is pretty white [ II ii . 129. ] shells , for gold and silver we saw none . They have also great store of cotton growing : their bred is a kind of roots , they call it Inamia , and when it is well sodden Inamla , akind I would leave our bred to eat of it , it is pleasant in °fbrfa < lin eating , and light or digestion , the root thereof is as big as a men arm . Our men upon fish-days had rather eat the roots with oil and vinegar , then to eat good stockfish . There are great store of palm trees , out of the which they gather great store of wine , Wine °f which wine is white and very pleasant , & we should buy tiees ' two gallons of it for 20 shells . They have good store of soap , and it smelleth like beaten violets . Also many pretty fine mats and baskets that they make , and spoons of Elephants teeth very curiously wrought with diverse proportions of fowls and beasts made upon them . There is upon the coast wonderful great lightning and thunder , in so much as I never heard the like in no Country , for it would make the deck or hatches tremble under our feet , and before we were well acquainted with it , we were fearful , but God be thanked we had no harm . 
 The people are very gentle and loving , and they go naked both men and women until they be married , and then they go covered from the middle down to the Abundance of knees . They would bring our men earthen pots of honey . the quantity of two gallons , full of honey and honey Thispreser-combes for 100 shells . They would also bring great va11 ™ 6 ™ store of Oranges and Plantans which is a fruit that casting into and grows upon a tree , and is very like unto a Cucumber hogshead of but very pleasant in eating . It hath pleased God of water and his merceifull goodness to give me the knowledge how to preserve fresh water with little cost , which did serve the author told us sixe months at the sea , & when we came into Plim - me . 
 457 
 mouth it was much wondered at , of the principal men of the town , who said that there was not sweeter water in any spring in Plimouth . Thus does God provide for his creatures , unto whom be praise now and for evermore , Amen . 
 