En nombre de Dios el piadoso piadador . 
 Oration de Dios sober nuestro Sen nor y Propheta Mahumet , y los allegados a el . 
 L siervo de Dios , y muy ensalsado por la gratia de Momanyn , hijo de Myra nieto de Myra Momanyn , 
 guerrero , y Dios , Myra Momanyn , el Jarif , el 
 A letter of Mully Hamet to the Earl of Leicester . 
 sus reyn os , 
 Hazeny , que Dios sustenga sus reynos , y enhalse sus mandados , para el Sennor muy affamado y muy illustre , muy esti - 
 [ II ii . 119. ] 
 mado , el Conde de Leycester , despues the dar las loores 
 devidas a Dios , y las orationes , y saludes devidas a le Propheta Mahumet . Serviri esta por os hazer saber que llegd a qui a nuestra real Corte vuestra carta , y enten-dimos lo que en ella se contiene . Y vuestro Ambaxador , que aqui esta en nuestra corte me dio a entender la causa de la tardanda de los rehenes hasta agora : el qual 
 430 
 descuento re^ebimos , y nos damos por satisfechos . Y quantam a lo que a nos escriveys por causa de Juan Herman , y lo mesmo que nos would dicho el Ambaxador sober el , ants que llegasse vuestra carta por la quexa deal ambaxador , que se avia quexado del , ya aviamos mandado prender lo , y assi que da aora preso , y quedera , hasta que se le haga la j usticia que mass se le would de hazer . Y con tanto nuestro Sennor os tenga en sum guardia . Hecha en nuestra corte real en Marruecos , que Dios sostenga , el 28. dias del mes de Remodan anno 996. 
 In the Name of the merciful and pitiful God . 
 The blessing of God light upon our lord and prophet Mahumet , and those that are obedient unto him . 
 He servant of God both mighty in war and mightily exalted by the grace of God Myra Momanyn , the son of Myra Momanyn , the Jariff , the Hazeni , whose kingdoms God maintain and advance his authority : Unto the right famous , right noble , & right highly esteemed 
 Erle of Leicester , after due praises given unto God , & due blessings and salutations rendered unto the prophet Mahumet . These are to give you to understand , that your letters arrived here in our royal Court , and we well perceive the contents thereof . And your Ambassador which remains here in our Court told me the cause of the slowness of the gages or pledges until this time : which reckoning we accept of , and hold our selves as satisfied . And as touching the matter whereof you write unto us concerning John Herman , and the self same complaint which your Ambassador hath made of him , before the coming of your letter , we had already commanded him to be taken upon the complaint which your Ambassador had made of him , whereupon he still remains in hold , and shall so continue until further justice be done upon him accord - 
 431 
 ing to his desert . And so our Lord keep you in his safeguard . Written at our royal court in Marocco , which God maintain , the 20. day of the month Remodan , Anno | | 996. 
 ^ / / 2^1587 . 77 
 