The second voyage to Benin , set forth by Master John Newton , and Master John Bird Merchants of London in the year 1590 with a ship called the Richard of Arundell of the burden of one hundreth tons , and a small pinnace , in which voyage Master James Welsh was chief Master . 
 He third of September 1590 we set sail from Ratcliffe , and the 18 of the said month we came into Plimouth found , and the two and twentieth we put to sea again , and at midnight we were off the Lisart , and so passed on our voyage until the 14 of October , on 
 which day we had sighed of Forteventura one of the Canary Islands , which appeared very ragged as we sailed 
 by it . 
 The 16 of October , in the latitude of 24 degrees and nine minutes we met with a great hollow sea , the like whereof I never saw on this coast , and this day there came to the ships side a monstrous great fish ( I think it was a Gobarto ) which put up his head to the steep tubs where you cook was in shifting the victuals , whom I thought the fish would have carried away . 
 The 21 in this latitude of 18 degrees we met with a countersea out of the North board , and the last 
 461 
 voyage in this very place we had the countersea out of the South , being very calm weather as now it is also . 
 The 24 we had sighed of Cavo Verde , and the 25 we met with a great hollow sea out of the North , which A taken of a is a common sign that the wind will be Northerly , Northerly and so proved . 
 Wtnde ' The 15 of November we met with three currants 
 out of the West and Northwest , one after another , with and hours time between each currant . This was in the latitude of 6 degrees and 42 minutes . 
 Great cur - The jg jay we met with two other great currants rants ' out of the Southwest , and the 20 we saw another current out of the Northeast , and the 24 we had a great current out of the Southsouthwest , and at 6 of the clock towards night we had 3 currents more . 
 The 27 we thought that we had gone at the least 2 leagues and a half every watch , and it fell out that we sailed but one league every watch for the space of 24 hours , by means of a great billow and current that came still out of the South . 
 [ II ii . 131. ] The 5 of December in setting the watch we cast about and lay East Northeast , and Northeast , and here in 5 degrees and a half our pinnace lost us wilfully . 
 The 7 at the going down of the Sun we saw a great black spot in the Sun , and the 8. day both at rising and setting we saw the like , which spot to our seeming was about the bigness of a shilling , being in 5 degrees of latitude , and still there came a great billow out of the southerboord . 
 The 14 we sounded and had 15 fathom water and gross read sand , and 2 leagues from the shore the currant set Southeast along the shore with a billow still out of the southerboord . 
 The 15 we were thwart a rock somewhat like the Mewstone in England , it was 2 leagues from us , here we sounded and had 27 fathom , but the rock is not Two rocks . above a mile from the shore , and a mile farther we saw another rock , and between them both broken 
 462 
 1590. ground ; here we sounded and had but 20 fathom and black sand , and we might see plain that the rocks went not along the shore , but from the land to the seaward , and about 5 leagues to the Southward we saw a great bay , here we had 4 degrees and 27 minutes . 
 The 16 we met with a French ship of Hunfleur , A French ship who robbed our pin ness , we sent a letter by him , and Hunfleur . this night we saw another spot in the Sun at his going down . And towards evening we were thwart of a river , and right over the river was a high tuft of trees . 
 The 17 we anchored in the rivers mouth , and then we found the land to be Cavo de las Palmas , and Gave between us & the cape was a great ledge of rocks , Palmas-one league and a half into the sea , and they bore to the West of the Cape , we saw also and Island off the point of the foreland , thus it waxed night that we could perceive no more of the land , but only that it trended in like a bay , where there runneth a stream as if it were in the river of Thames , and this was the change day of the Moon . 
 The 19 a fair temperate day , and the wind South , we went East , and the land a stern of us West , and it showed low by the water side like Islands , this was the east of Cavo de las Palmas , and it trended in with a great found , and we went East all night , and in the morning we were but 3 or 4 leagues from the shore . 
 The 20 we were thwart of a river called Rio de los Barbos . Barbos - 
 The 21 we went along the shore East , & 3 or 4 leagues to the West of Cavos de tres puntas , I find the bay to be set deeper then it is by 4 leagues , and at 4 of the clock the land begun to show high , and the first part of it full of Palm trees . 
 The 24 still going by the shore , the land was very low and full of trees by the water side , and at 12 of the clock we anchored thwart of the river called , Rio de Rio de Boila Boilas . Here we sent our boat a shore with the mar - 
 463 
 Januarie . 
 Villa longam . 
 Rio de Lagoa . 
 chants , but they durst not put into the river because of a great billow that continually brake at the entrance upon the bar . 
 The 28 we sailed alongst the shore , and anchored at night in seven fathom because a great current would have put us back , which came from the East Southeast from Papuas . 
 The 29 at noon we were thwart of Arda , and there we took a Caravel but the men were fled on land , then we went aboard her , but she had nothing in her but only a little oil of Palm trees , and a few roots . The next morning our Captain and merchants went to meet Portugals , that came in a boat to speak with us , where they communed about the buying of the Caravel of our men again , and the Portugals promised that we should have for the Caravel , certain bullocks and Elephants teeth , and they gave us one tooth and one bullock presently , and said they would bring us the rest the next day . 
 The first of Januarie our Captain went on land to speak with the Portugales , but when he saw they did dissemble , he came aboard again , and presently we unrigged the Caravel , and set her on fire before the town . Then we set sail and went along the coast , where we saw a Date tree , the like whereof is not in all that coast upon the water side , also we fell on ground a little in one place : Thus we went to Villam longam , and there anchored . 
 The third we were as far shot as Rio de Lagoa , where our merchants went a shore and upon the bar they found 3 fathom flat , but they went not in because it was late . There is also to the Eastward of this river a Date tree higher then all the rest of the other trees thereabouts . Thus we went along the coast , and every night anchored , & all the shore as we went was full of trees and thick woods . 
 The 6 day in the morning it was very foggy , so that we could not see the land , and at three of the clock in the afternoon it cleared up , & then we found our 464 
 1591. selves thwart of the river of Jaya , and when we found The river of the shallow water , we bore into the sea South , as we did the voyage before , and came to and anchor in five fathom water . The next day we set sail again , and towards noon we were thwart of the river of Benin in The river of foure fathom water . Benin . 
 The 10 day our Captain went on land with the shall - [ II ii . 132. ] lop at 2 a clock in the afternoon . All this week it was very foggy every day until ten a clock , and all this time hitherto hath been as temperate as our summer in England . This day we went into the road and anchored , & the west point of the road bore East northeast ofF us , we riding in foure fathom water . 
 The 21 a fair temperate day , this day M. Hassald went to the town of Goto , to hear news of the Goto . Captain . 
 The 23 came the Caravel , and Samuell in her , and The Caravel she brought 63 Elephants teeth , and three bullocks . aboord^ 
 The 28 a fair temperate day , and towards night there ' fell much rain , lightning , and thunder , this day our boat came aboard from Goto . 
 The 24 of Februarie , we took in 298 Cerons or z98 - SMhs of sacks of pepper , and 4 Elephants teeth , and the wind was at Southeast . And the 26 we put the rest of our goods into the Caravel , and M. Hassald went with her to Goto . 
 The 5 of March you Caravel came again & brought 21 Cerons of pepper , & 4 Elephants teeth . 
 The 9 of Aprill our Caravel came aboard with water for our provision for the sea , and this day also we lost our shallope . 
 The 17a drowsy rainy day , and in the afternoon Three spouts . we saw 3 great spouts of rain , two on our larboard side , and one right with the ships head , but God be thanked , they came not at us , and this day we took in the last of our water for the sea , and the 26 we victualed our Caravel to go with us to the sea . They returned 
 The 27 we set sail to go homeward with the wind homeward . vi 465 2 g 
 We departed In company of a prize . 
 Corvo . 
 at Southwest , and at two a clock in the afternoon , the river of Benin was Northeast 8 leagues from us . 
 The 3 of May we had such a terrible gust with rain , lightning & thunder , that it tore and split our before sail , and also the Caravels foresail and maine-sail , with the wind at Southeast . 
 The 12 a fair temperate day , much like our summer morning's in England , being but one degree & a half from the line , but at midnight we had a cruel gust of rain , & the wind at northeast . 
 The 24 we were South from Cavo de las Palmas 37 leagues . 
 The first of July we had sighed of the Island of Brava , and it bore East 7 leagues off , and this Island is one of the Islands of Cavo Verde . 
 The 13 of August we spoke with the Queens ships , the Lord Thomas Howard being Admiral , and sir Richard Greenevill Viceadmiral . They kept us in their company until the 15 day at night , themselves lying a hull , in weight for purchase 30 leagues to the Southwest of the Island of Flores . 
 The 15 we had leave to depart with a flyboat laden with sugar that came from Sant Thome , which was taken by the Queens ships , whereof my Lord Admiral gave me great charge , not to leave her until she were harboured in England . 
 The three and twentieth the Northeast part of the Island of Corvo bore off us East and by South sixe leagues off . 
 The 17 of September we met with a ship of Plimouth that came out of the West Indies , but she could tell us no news . The next day we had sighed of another sail , this day also one of our company nam M. Wood died . 
 The 23 we spoke with the Dragon of my Lord of Cumberland , whereof Master Ivy was Master . 
 The second of October we met with a ship of Newcastle which came from Newfoundland , and out of her we had 300 couple of Newland fish . 
 The 6 we had sighed of Silly , and with rain and wind 466 
 .. I591-we were forced to put into S. Maries found , where we stayed all night , and 4 days after . 
 The 11 we set sail again , and coming out had three fathom upon the bar at a high water , then we lay out Southeast , through Crow-sand , and shortly after we had sighed of the lands end , and at ten of the clock we were thwart of the Lysart . 
 The 13 we were put into Dartmouth , and there we stayed until the 12 of December . From thence We put out with the wind at West , and the 18 of December , God be praised , we anchored at Limehouse in the Thames , where we discharged 589 sacks of Pepper , 150 Elephants teeth , and 32 barrels of oil of Palm trees . 
 The commodities that we carried out this second voyage were Broad cloth , Kersies , Baize , Linen cloth , Iron unwrought , Bracelets of Copper , Coral , Hawks bells , Horsetailes , Hats , and such like . 
 This voyage was more comfortable unto us then the first , because we had good store of fresh water , and that very sweet : for as yet we have very good water in the ship which we brought out of the river of Benin the [ II ii . 133. ] first day of Aprill 1591. and it is at this day ( being the 7 of June 1592. ) to be seen aboard the ship as clear and as sweet as any fountain can yield . 
 In this voyage we sailed 350 leagues within half a It is more degree of the equinoctial line , and there we found it « « ' more temperate , then where we road . And under the line we did kill great store of small Delphines , and on the ’coast of many other good fish , and so did we all the way , Guinie & which was a very great refreshing unto us , and the fish Benin-never forsook us , until we were to the Northwards of the Hands of Azores , and then we could see no more fish , but God be thanked we met with good company of our country ships which were great comfort unto us , being five months before at Sea without any company . 
 By me James Welsh master of the Richard of Arundell , in both these voyages to the river of Benin . 
 