A brief relation concerning the estate of the cities and provinces of Tombuto and Gago written in Marocco the first of August 1594 , and sent to M. Anthony Dassel merchant of London . 
 Y hearty commendations premised : your letter of late I received , and found that you would have me discover unto you the estate & quality of the countries of Tombuto and Gago . And that you may not think me to slumber in this actium , wherein you would be truly and 
 perfectly resolved , you shall understand , that not ten days passed here came a Cahaia of the Andoluzes home from Gago , and another principali Moore , whom the king sent thither at the first with Alcaide Hamode , and they brought with them thirty mules laden with gold . I saw the same come into the Alcasava with mine own eyes : and these men themselves came not poor , but with such wealth , that they came away without the kings commandment : and for that cause the king will pay them no wages for the time they have been there . On the other side they dare not ask the king for any wages . And when Alcaide Hamode saw that the Cahaia of the Andoluzes would not stay in Gago with him , he thought 99 
 good to send these thirty mules laden with gold by him , with letters of commendations , by which the king smelled their riches that they brought with them : and this was the cause of the kings displeasure towards them . So now there remains in Gago Alcaide Hamode , and Alcaide Jawdara , and Alcaide Bucthare . And here are in a readiness to depart in the end of this next September Alcaide Monsor , Ben Abdrahaman Allies , Monsor Rico with five thousand men , most of the fettilase , that is to say , of fier-mach , & muskets . There is gone good store of reds & yellows : and this year here was want of the same commodity ; but I trust the next year will be no want . But in fine the king does prosper well in those parts , and here are many pledges come hither , and namely three of the kings sons of Gago and the Justice ; I saw them come in with the treasure . Now when Alcaide Monsor comes to Gago , the which will be in January next , then returns hither Alcaide Hamode with all the treasure , and Alcaide Monsor is to keep Gago until the king take further order . And thus much for Gago . Thus not having any other thing to write at this present , I commend you to the merciful tuition of the almighty . From Marocco the first of August 1594. 
 Your assured friend Laurence Madoc . 
 Another brief relation concerning the late conquest and the exceeding great riches of the cities and provinces of Tombuto and Gago , written from Marocco the 30 August 1594 , to M. Anthony Dassel merchant of London aforesaid . 
 Oving friend M. Dassel , two of your letters I have received , one by the ship called The Amity , the other by The Concord : the chiefest 
 matter therein was to be satisfied of the king of Marocco his proceedings in Guinea . Therefore these 
 IOO 
 are to let you understand that there went with Alcaide Hamode for those parts seventeene hundred men : who passing over the sands , for want of water perished one third part of them : and at their coming to the city of Tombuto , the Negroes made some Tombuto resistance ; but to small purpose , for that they had no iaken‘ defence but with their asagaies or javelins poisoned . 
 So they took it , and proceeded to the city of Gago , Gago taken . where the Negroes were in number infinite , and meant to stand to the uttermost for their country : but the Moors slew them so fast , that they were feign to yield , and do pay tribute by the year . The rend of [ II ii . 193. ] Tombuto is 60 quintals of gold by the year ; the goodness whereof you know . What rend Gago will yield , you shall know at the Spring , for then Alcaide Hamode comes home . The rend of Tombuto is come by the cafelow or carovan , which is , as above is mentioned , 60 quintals . The report is , that Mahomed brings with him such and infinite treasure as I never herd of : it does appear that they have more gold then any other part of the world beside . The Alcaide wins all the country where he goes without fighting , and is going down towards the sea coast . This king of Marocco is like to be the greatest prince in the world for money , if he keep this country . But I make account assoon as the king of Spaine hath quietness in Christendome , he will thrust him out : for that the kings force is not great as yet ; but he means to be stronger . There is a camp ready to go now with a viceroy : the speech is with 3000 men : but I think they will be hardly 2000 ; for by report , 3000 men are enough to conquer all the country : for they have no defence of importance against and enemy . I think Hamode will be returned home in January or thereabouts : for he stays but for the coming of the viceroy . Mulley Balasen the kings son of Marocco was slain in Guinea by his own men , and they were presently killed , because they should tell no tales . And thus leaving to trouble you , I commit you 
 IOI 
 to God , who prosper you in all your proceedings . From Marocco the first of August 1594. 
 Yours to command for ever Laurence Madoc . 
 Of these two rich cities and kingdoms of Tombuto and Gago Leo Africanus writeth at large in the beginning of his seventh book of the description of Africa , which worthy work is to be annexed into the end of this second volume . 
 