The letters of the Queens most excellent Majestic sent by one Laurence Aldersey unto the Emperor of Aethiopia , 1597. 
 Invictissimo potentissimoque Abassenorum regi , magnoque utriusque Aethiopia ? imperatori etc. 
 Lizabetha dei gratia Angliae , Franciae , & Hiberniae regina , fidei defensor etc. summo ac potentissimo TEthiopiae imperatori salutem . Quod ab omnibus qui ubivis terrarum ac gentium sunt regibus principibusque praestari par & aequum est , ut quanquam maximo locorum intervallo 
 dissiti , & moribus ac legibus discrepantes , communem tamen generis humani societatem tueri & conservare , mutuaque ut occasio ferret , charitatis & benevolentiae officia velint exercere : in eo nos de vestra fide atque humanitate spem certissimam concipientes , huic subito vn 129 1 
 A.D. 
 nostro Laurentio Alderseio in regnum vestrum proficiscenti , hasce literas nostras , quibus & nostra erga vos benevolentia testata sit , & illum hinc profectum esse constet , potissimiim vobis indicandas dedimus . Qui ciim orbis terrarum perscrutandi cognoscendique study permotus , multis antehac regionibus peragratis , jam tandem in eas regiones , quae vestrae ditionis sunt , longum , periculosiimque iter instituat : ciim ipse existimavit , tum nos etiam sumus in eadem opinion , ad incolumitatem suam , atque etiam ad gratiam apud vos , plurimum illi profuturum , si diplomat nostro munitus , benevolentiae nostrae & profectionis hinc suae testimonium ad vos deferret . Nam cum summus ille mundi conditor rect6r-que praepotens deus , regibus principibiisque qui suam vicem gerunt , orbem terrarum , suis cuique finibus pro rata portion designatis , regendum atque administrandum dederit ; e6que munere jus quoddam inter eos fraternae necessitudinis , aetermimque foedus ab illis colendum sanxerit : non erit ( ut arbitramur ) ingratum vobis , ciim benevolentiae nostrae significationem , tam immensa maris ac terrarum spatia transgressam , ab ultima Britannia ad vos in Aethiopiam perferri intellexeritis . Nobisque rursus erit jucundum , ciim subditorum nostrorum predication , ab ipsis Nili fontibus , & ab iis regionibus quae solis cursum definiunt , fama vestri nominis ad nos recurret . Erit igitur humanitatis vestrae huic subdito nostro eam largiri gratiam , ut in ditionem vestram sub praesidio ac tutela vestri nominis intrare , ibique salvus & incolumis manner possit : quod ipsum etiam ab aliis principibus , per quorum regiones illi transeundum erit , magnopere petimus , nobisque ipsis illud honoris causa tributum existimabimus : neque tamen majorem hac in re gratiam postulamus , quam vicissim omnium principum subditis , omnidmque gentium hominibus ad nos commeantibus liberrimi concedimus . Datum Londini quinto die Novembris : anno regni nostri tricesimo nono : ann6que Dom. 1597. 
 130 
 To the most invincible and puissant king of the Abassens , the mighty Emperor of Aethiopia the higher and the lower . 
 ELizabeth by the grace of God Queen of England , France and Ireland , defender of the faith , etc. To the most high and mighty Emperor of Aethiopia greeting . Whereas it is a matter requisite and well beseeming all kings and princes of what lands or nations soever , be they never so much dissevered in place or differing in customs and laws , to maintain and preserve the common society of mankind , and , as occasion shall be offered , to perform mutual duties of charity and benevolence : we for that cause conceiving most undoubted hope of your princely fidelity and courtesy , have given unto this our subject Laurence Aldersey intending to travel into your dominions , these our letters to be delivered without fail unto your Highness , to the end they may be a testimony of our good will towards you and of our said subject his departure from England . Who , after his travels in many foreign countries' , being as yet inflamed with a desire more thoroughly to survey and contemplate the world , and now at length to undertake a long and dangerous journey into your territories and regions : both the said Laurence thought , and our selves also deemed , that it would very much avail him , as well for his own safety as for the attaining of your favour , if , being protected with our broad seal , he might transport unto your Highness a testimony of our loving affection & of his departure from hence . For since almighty God the highest creator and governor of the world hath allotted unto kings and princes his vicegerents over the face of the whole earth , their designed portions and limits to be ruled and administered by them ; and by this his gift hath established among them a certain law of 
 I3I 
 A.D. 
 ’597 - 
 brotherly kindness , and and eternal league by them to be observed : it will not ( we hope ) seem unpleasant unto your highness , when you shall have intelligence of our loving letters sent so huge a distance over sea and land , even from the farthest realm of England unto you in Aethiopia . On the other side our selves shall take great solace and delight , when as by the relation of our own subject's , the renown of your name shall be brought unto us from the fountains of Nilus , and from those regions which are situate under the Southern Tropike . May it please you therefore of your princely clemency to vouchsafe so much favour on this our subject , that he may , under the safeguard and protection of your name , enter into your highness dominions , and there remain safe and free from danger . Which favour and courtesy we do likewise most earnestly request at the hands of other princes , through whose Signory our said subject is to pass ; and we shall esteem it as done unto our self and for our honours sake . 
 Neither do we require any greater favour in this behalf , then we are upon the like occasion most ready to grant unto the subject's of all princes and the people of all Nations , traveling into our dominions . 
 Given at London the fift day of November , in the thirtie and ninth year of our reign : and in the year of our Lord 
 I597 - 
 