Another testimony taken out of the 60 chapter of the foresaid history of Ferdinando Columbus , concerning the offer that Bartholomew Colombus made to king Henry the seventh on the behalf of his brother Christopher . 
 Ornato adunque 1 ’ Ammiraglio dallo scoprimento di Cuba & di Giamaica , trond nella Spagnuola Bartolomeo Colon suo fratello , quello , che era gia andato a trattare accordo col Re d ’ Inghilterra sopra lo scoprimento delle Indie , come di sopra habiam detto . Questo poi , 
 ritornando seen verso Castiglia con capitoli conceduti , haveva inteso a Parigi dal re Carlo di Francia 1 ’ Ammiraglio suo fratello haver gia scoperte 1 ’ Indie : per che gli sovenne per poter far il Viaggio di cento scudi . Et , Avenga che per cotal nuova egli si fosse molto affrettato , per arrivar 1 ’ Ammiraglio in Spagna , quando non dimeno giunse a Siviglia , egli era gia tornato all Indie counterfeit ’ 17 navigii . Perche , per asseguir quanto ei gli havea lasciato , di subito all principio dell ’ anno del 1494 sen ’ ando a i Re Catholici , menando seco DONE Diego Colon , mio fratello , & me ancora , accioche servissimo di paggi all serenissimo principe DONE Giovanni , il qual viva in gloria , si come havea commandato la Catholica Reina donna Isabella , che alhora era in Vagliadolid . Tosto adunque i noi giungemmo , i Re chiamarono DONE Bartolomeo , & mandaronlo alia Spagnuola contre navi , etc. 
 The same in English . 
 CHristopher Columbus the Admiral being returned from the discovery of Cuba and Jamayca , found in Hispaniola his brother Bartholomew Columbus , who before had been sent to entreat of and agreement with the king of England for the discovery of the Indies , as we 139 
 [ III . 4. } have said before . This Bartholomew therefore returning unto Castile , with the capitulations granted by the king of England to his brother , understood at Paris by Charles the king of France , that the Admiral his brother had already performed that discovery : whereupon the French king gave unto the said Bartholomew and hundred French crowns to bear his charges into Spaine . And albeit he made great haste upon this good news to meet with the Admiral in Spaine , yet at his coming to Sivil his brother was already returned to the Indies with seventeene sail of ships . Wherefore to fulfil that which he had left him in charge in the beginning of the year 1494 he repaired to the Catholic princes , taking with him Diego Colon my brother and me also , which were to be preferred as Pages to the most excellent Prince DONE John , who now is with God , according to the commandment of the Catholic Queen Lady Isabell , which was then in Validolid . Assoon therefore as we came to the Court , the princes called for DONE Bartholomew , and sent him to Hispaniola with three ships , etc. 
 