The first Voyage of M. Martine Frobisher , to the Northwest , for the search of the straight or passage to China , written by Christopher Hall , Master in the Gabriel , and made in the year of our Lord 1576. 
 He 7. of June being Thursday , the two Barks , viz. the Gabriel , and the II Michael & our Pinnace set sail at Ratcliffe , and bore down to Detford , and there we anchored : the cause was , that our Pinnace burst her boultsprit , and foremast aboard of a ship that road at Detford , else we 
 meant to have passed that day by the Court then at Grenewich . 
 The 8. day being Friday , about 12 of the clock we weighed at Detford , and set sail all three of us , and bore down by the Court , where we shot ofF our ordinance and made the best show we could : Her Majesty beholding the same , commended it , and bade us farewell , with shaking her hand at us out of the window . Afterwards she sent a Gentleman aboard of us , who declared that her Majesty had good liking of our doings , and thanked us for it , and also willed our Captain to come the next day to the Court to take his leave of her . 
 The same day towards night M. Secretary Woolly came aboard of us , and declared to the company , that her Majesty had appointed him to give them charge to be obedient , and diligent to their Captain , and governors in all things , and wished us happy success . 
 The 12. day being over against Gravesend , by the castle or blockhouse , we observed the latitude , which was 51. degrees 33. min. And in that place the variation of the Compass is 11. degrees and a half . 
 Fair Island . The 24. day at 2. of the clock after noon , I had 
 sighed of Fair isle , being from us 6. leagues North and by East , and when I brought it Northwest and by North , 204 
 it did rise at the Southermost end with a little hom - 
 mock , and swampe in the mids . 
 The 25. day from 4. to 8. a clock in the forenoon , the wind at Northwest and by North a fresh gale , I cast about to the Westward , the Southermost head of Shot - Shotland . land called Swinborne head Northnorthwest from me , and the land of Fair isle , West Southwest from me . I sailed directly to the North head of that said land , sounding as I ran in , having 60. 50. and 40. fathoms , and grey red shells : and within half a mile of that Island , there are 36. fathoms , for I sailed to that Island to see whither there were any roadesteede for a Northwest wind , and I found by my sounding hard rocks , and foul ground , and deep water , within two cables length of the shore , 28. fathom , and so did not anchor but plied to and from with my foresail , and mizzen till it was a high water under the Island . The tide sets there Northwest and Southeast : the flood sets Southeast , and the ebb Northwest . 
 The 26. day having the wind at South a fair gale , sailing from Fair isle to Swinborne head , I did observe the latitude , the Island of Fowlay being West Northwest from me 6. leagues , and Swinborne head East southeast from me , I found my * elevation to be 37. degr . and my declination 22. degr . 46. min. So that my latitude was 59. degr . 46. min. At that present being near to Swinborne head , having a leak which did trouble us , as also to take in fresh water , I plied room with a found , which is called S. Tronions , and there did anchor in seven fathoms water , and fair sand . You have coming in the sounds mouth in the entering 17. 15. 12. 10. 9. 8. and 7. fathoms , and the found lies in North northwest , and there we road to a West sun , & stopped our leak , and having refreshed our selves with water , at a North northwest sun , I set sail from S. Tronions the wind at South Southest , and turned out till we were clear of the found , and so sailed West to go clear of the Island of Fowlay . And running olF towards Fowlay , 
 205 
 * By elevation he means the distance of the sun from the •zenith . 
 S. Tronions . 
 Fowlaylstand . 
 I sounded , having fiftie fathom , and streamy ground , and also I sounded Fowlay being North from me one league off that Island , having fiftie fathom at the South head , and streamy ground , like broken otmell , and one shell being red and white like mackerel . 
 Latitude 59. The 27. day at a South sun I did observe the erelhe^be latitude5 the Island of Fowlay being from me two leagues to sail * East Northeast : I found my self to be in latitude 59. West and by degrees , 59. min. truly observed , the wind at South North . Southwest : I sailed West and by North . 
 From 12. to foure a clock afternoon , the wind at South , a fair gale the ship sailed West and by North 6. leagues , and at the end of this watch , I sounded having 60. fathom , with little stones and shells , the Island from us 8. leagues East . 
 July the first . The first of July , from 4. to 8. a clock , we sailed West 4. glasses 4. leagues , and at that present we had so much wind that we spooned afore the sea Southwest 2. leagues . 
 3 - The 3. day we found our Compass to be varied one point to the Westwards : this day from 4. to 8. a clock we sailed West and by North 6. leagues . 
 The Compass From 8. to 12. a clock at noon West and by North ards^one111 ' 4 ’ leagues - At that present I found our Compass to point . be varied ill . deg . and one 4. part to the Westwards , which is one point . 
 11. The 11 day at a Southeast sun we had sighed of the ne Island open janj of FriSeland bearing from us West northwest 16. s and ' leagues , and rising like pinnacles of steeples , and all covered with snow . I found my self in 61. degr . of latitude . we sailed to the shore and could find no 
 ground at 150. fathoms , we hoist out our boat , and the Captain with 4. men rowed to the shore to get on land , but the land lying full of ice , they could not get on land , and so they came aboard again : We had much ado to get clear of the ice by reason of the fog . Yet from Thursday 8. a clock in the morning to Friday at noon we sailed Southwest 20. leagues . 
 206 
 The 18. day at a Southwest sun I found the sun 18. to be elevated 33. deg . And at a Southsoutheast sun 40. deg . So I observed it till I found it at the highest , and then it was elevated 52. deg . I judged the variation The variation of the Compass to be 2. points and a half to the t^o points and Westward . , a half to the 
 The 21. day we had sighed of a great drift of ice , West . seeming a firm land , and we cast Westward to be A great clear of it . of ice . 
 The 26. we had sighed of a land of ice : the latitude The latitude of was 62. degrees , and two minutes . 62. degrees z . 
 The 28. day in the morning was very foggy : but at * the clearing up of the fog , we had sighed of land , Sighed of land which I supposed to be Labrador , with great store of t0 ice about the land : I ran in towards it , and sounded , i^nr . but could get no ground at 100. fathom , and the ice being so thick , I could not get to the shore , and so lay ofF , and came clear of the ice . Upon Munday 30. we came within a mile of the shore , and sought a harborowe : all the sound was full of ice , and our boat rowing a shore , could get no ground at 100. fathom , within a Cables length of the shore : then we sailed Eastnortheast along the shore , for so the land lies , and the currant is there great , setting Northeast , and Southwest : and if we could have got anchor ground , we would have seen with what force it had run , but I judge a ship may drive a league and a half , in one hour , with that tide . 
 This day at 4. of the cloak in the morning , being 31. fair and clear , we had sighed of a head land , as we judged , bearing from us north , and by East , and we sailed Northeast , and by North to that land , and when we came thither , we could not get to the land for ice : for the ice stretched along the coast , so that we could not come to the land , by five leagues . 
 Wednesday the first of August it calmed , and in the Augiist . after noon I caused my boat to be hoised out , being K hard by a great Island of ice , and I and foure men rowed 2 ' 
 207 
 They enter the Strait in the latitude of fit , . deg . andS.min . 
 12. 
 ' 3 - [ HIM - 3i J 
 14. 
 ’S - 
 16. 
 to that ice , and sounded within two Cables length of it , and had sixteene fathom , and little stones , and after that sounded again within a Minion shot , and had ground at and hundreth fathom , and fair sand : we sounded the next day a quarter of a mile from it , and had sixtie fathom rough ground , and at that present being aboard , that great Island of ice fell one part from another , making a noise as if a great cliff had fallen into the Sea. And at foure of the clock I sounded again , and had 90. fathom , and small black stones , and little white stones , like pearls . The tide here did set to the shore . 
 The tenth I took foure men , and my self , and rowed to shore to and Island one league from the main , and there the flood sets Southwest alongst the shore , and it flows as near as I could judge so too , I could not tarry to prove it , because the ship was a great way from me , and I feared a fog : but when I came a shore , it was a low water . I went to you top of the Island , and before I came back , it was hied a foot water , and so without tarrying I came aboard . 
 The 11. we found our latitude to be 63. degr . and eight minutes , and this day we entered the straight . 
 The 12. we set sail towards and Island , called the Gabriels Island , which was 10. leagues then from us . 
 We espied a found , and bore with it , and came to a sandy Bay , where we came to and anchor , the land bearing East southeast off " us , and there we road all night in 8. fathom water . It flows there at a Southeast Moon . We called it Priors sound , being from the Gabriels Island , tenne leagues . 
 The 14. we weighed , and ran into another sound , where we anchored in 8. fathom water , fair sand , and black oaze , and there calked our ship , being weak from the wales upward , and took in fresh water . 
 The 15. day we weighed , and sailed to Priors Bay , being a mile from thence . 
 The 16. day was calm , and we road still , without ice , 208 
 1576-but presently within two hours it was frozen round about the ship , a quarter of and ynch thick , and that day very fair , and calm . 
 The 17. day we weighed , and came to Thomas Williams 17. Island . 
 The 18. day we sailed North northwest , and anchored « 8. again in 23. fathom , and tough oaze , under Burchers Island , which is from the former Island , ten leagues . 
 The 19. day in the morning , being calm , and no 19. wind , the Captain and I took our boat , with eight men in her , to row us a shore , to see if there were there any people , or no , and going to the top of the Island , we had sighed of seven boats , which came rowing °ftke 
 from the East side , towards that Island : whereupon we returned aboard again : at length we sent our boat p with five men in her , to see whither they rowed , and so with a white cloth brought one of their boats with their men along the shore , rowing after our boat , till such time as they saw our ship , and then they rowed a shore : then I went on shore my self , and gave every of them a threadden point , and brought one of them aboard of me , where he did eat and drink , and then carried him on shore again . Whereupon all the rest came aboard with their boats , being nineteene persons , and they spoke , but we understood them not . They ducrip-bee like to Tartars , with long black hair , broad faces , °£the and flat noses , and tawny in colour , wearing Seal P P ’ skins , and so do the women , not differing in the fashion , but the women are marked in the face with blew streekes down the cheeks , and round about the eyes . Their boats are made all of Seals skins , with a keel of wood within the skin : the proportion of them is like a Spanish shallop , save only they be flat in the bottom , and sharp at both ends . , 
 The twentieth day we weighed , and went to the East - 20. side of this Island , and I and the Captain , with foure men more went on shore , and there we saw their houses , and the people espying us , came rowing towards 
 vii 209 oh 
 our boat : whereupon we plied towards our boat : and we being in our boat and they ashore , they called to us , and we rowed to them , and one of their company came into our boat , and we carried him a board , and gave him a Bell , and a knife : so the Captain and I c . of our men willed five of our men to set him a shore at a rock , taken by thee and 
 not among the company , which they came from , f ' but their wilfulness was such , that they would go to them , and so were taken themselves , and our boat lost . 
 21. The next day in the morning , we stood in near the shore , and shot off a fauconet , and sounded our trumpet , but we could hear nothing of our men : this found we called the five men's found , and plied out of it , but anchored again in thirtie fathom , and oaze : and riding there all night , in the morning , the snow lay a foot thick upon our hatches . 
 22. The 22. day in the morning we weighed , and went again to the place where we lost our men , and our boat . We had sighed of foureteene boats , and some came near to us , but we could learn nothing of our men : among the rest , we enticed one boat to our ships side , with a Bell , and in giving him the Bell , we took him , and his boat , and so kept him , and so rowed down to Thomas Williams Island , and there anchored all night . 
 They retume . The 26. day we weighed , to come homeward , and by 
 2 • 12. of the clock at noon , we were thwart of Trumpets Island . 
 27. The next day we came thwart of Gabriels Island , and at 8. of the clock at night we had the Cape Labrador as we supposed West from us , ten leagues . 
 28. The 28. day we went our course Southeast . 
 29. We sailed Southeast , and by East , 22. leagues . 
 September . The first day of September in the morning we had K sighed of the land of Friseland , being eight leagues from us , but we could not come nearer it , for the monstrous ice that lay about it . From this day , till the sixth of this Month , we ran along Island , and had the South part of it at eight of the clock , East from us ten leagues . 
 210 
 The seventh day of this month we had a very terrible 7 « storm , by force whereof , one of our men was blown into the sea out of our waste , but he caught hold of the foresail sheate , and there held till the Captain plucked him again into the ship . 
 The 25. day of this month we had sighed of the Island of Orkney , which was then East from us . 
 The first day of October we had sighed of the Shield , 2% SAM and so sailed about the coast , and anchored at Yarmouth , and the next day we came into Harwich . 
 The language of the people of Meta incognita . 
 Argoteyt , a hand . Cangnawe , a nose . Arered , and eye . Keiotot , a tooth . Mutchatet , the head . Chewat , and ear . Comagaye , a leg . Atoniagay , a foot . Callagay , a pair of breeches . 
 ' Attegay , a coat . Pollevetagay , a knife . Accaskay , a ship . Coblone , a thumb . Teckkere , the foremost finger . 
 Ketteckle , the middle finger . Mekellacane , the fourth finger . 
 Yacketrone , the little finger . 
 