The second voyage attempted by M. John Davis with others , for the discovery of thee Northwest passage , in Anno 1586. 
 He 7. day of May , I departed from the port of Dartmouth for the discovery of thee Northwest passage , with a ship of and hundred and twentie tons nam the Mermaid , a bark of 60. tons nam the Sunshine , a bark of 35. tons nam the Moonshine , and a pinnace 
 of tenne tons nam the North star . 
 393 
 And the 15. of June I discovered land in the latitude of 60. degrees , and in longitude from the Meridian of London Westward 47. degrees , mightily pestered with ice and snow , so that there was no hope of landing : the ice lay in some places tenne leagues , in some 20. and in some 50. leagues off the shore , so that we were constrained to bear into 57. degrees to double the same , and to recover a free Sea , which through Gods favourable mercy we at length obtained . 
 The 29. of June after many tempestuous storms we again discovered land , in longitude from the Meridian of London 58. degr . 30. min. and in latitude 64. being East from us : into which course sith it please God by contrary winds to force us , I thought it very necessary to bear in with it , & there to set up our pinnace , provided in the Mermaid to be our scout for this discovery , and so much the rather because the year before I had be in the same place , and found it very convenient for such a purpose , well stored with float wood , & possessed by a people of tractable conversation : so that the 29. of this month we arrived within the Isles which lay before this land , lying North northwest , and South southeast , we know not how far . This land is very high & mountainous , having before it on the West side a mighty company of Isles full of fair sounds , and harboroughs . This land was very little troubled with snow , and the sea altogether void of ice . 
 The ships being within the sounds we sent our boats to search for shoal water , where we might anchor , which in this place is very hard to find : and as the boat went sounding and searching , the people of the country having espied them , came in their Canoas towards them with many shouts and cries : but after they had espied in the boat , some of our company that were , the year before here with us , they presently rowed to the boat , and took hold on the oar , and hung about the boat with such comfortable joy , as would require a long discourse to be uttered : they came with the boats to our 
 394 
 ships , making signs that they knew all those that the year before had be with them . After I perceived their Gentle and joy and small fear of us , my self with the Merchant's & : others of the company went a shore , bearing with ' me twentie knives : I had no sooner landed , but they leapt out of their Canoas and came running to me and the rest , and embraced us with many signs of hearty welcome : at this present there were eighteene of them , and to eke of them I gave a knife : they oflred skins to me for reward , but I made signs that they were not sold , but given them of courtesy : and so dismissed them for that time , with signs that they should return again after certain hours . 
 The next day with all possible speed the pinnace was ^ » 100 landed upon and Isle there to be finished to serve our purpose for the discovery , which Isle was so convenient mo^et for that purpose , as that we were very well able to defend our selves against many enemies . During the time that the pinnace , was there setting up , the people came continually unto us sometime and hundred Canoas at a time , sometime fourtie , fiftie , more and less , as occasion served . They brought with them seal skins , stag skins , white hares , Seal fish , salmon peal , small cod , dry caplin , with other fish , and birds such as the country did yield . 
 My self still desirous to have a further search of this place , sent one of the shipboats to one part of the land , and my self went to another part to search for the habitation of this people , with straight commandment that there should be no injury offered to any of the people , neither any gun shot . 
 The boats that went from me found the tents of the Images , trane people made with seal skins set up upon timber , where - c > isle > an‘i Seal in they found great store of dried Caplin , being a little st^ m tan fish no bigger then a pilchard : they found bags of Trane oil , many little images cut in wood , Seal skins in tan-tubs , with many other such trifles , whereof they diminished nothing . 
 395 
 A grave with a cross laid over . 
 They also found tenne miles within the snowy mountains a plain champion country , with earth and grass , such as our moory and waste grounds of England are : they went up into a ri^er ( which in the narrowest place is two leagues broad ) about ten leagues , finding it still to continue they knew not how far : but I with my company took another river , which although at the first it offered a large inlet , yet it proved but a deep bay , the end whereof in foure hours I attained , and there leaving the boat well manned , went with the rest of my company three or foure miles into the country , but found nothing , nor saw any thing , save only gripes , ravens , and small birds , as larks and linnets . 
 The third of July I manned my boat , and went with fifty Canoas attending upon me up into another found where the people by signs willed me to go , hoping to find their habitation : at length they made signs that I should go into a warm place to sleep , at which place I went on shore , and ascended the top of and high hill to see into the country , but perceiving my labour vain , I returned again to my boat , the people still following me , and my company very diligent to attend us , and to help us up the rocks , and likewise down : at length I was desirous to have our . men leap with them , which was done , but our men did overleap them : from leaping they went to wrestling , we found them strong and nimble , and to have skill in wrestling , for they cast some of our men that were good wrestlers . 
 The fourth of July we launched out pinnace , and had fortie of the people to help us , which they did very willingly : at this time our men again wrestled with them , and found them as before , strong and skilful . This fourth of July the Master of the Mermaid went to certain Hands to store himself with wood , where he found a grave with diverse buried in it , only covered with seal skins , having a cross laid over them . The people are of good stature , well in body proportioned , with small slender hands and feet , with broad visages , 396 
 1586. and small eyes , wide mouths , the most part unbearded , Tartars great lips , and close toothed . Their custom is as often “ jf^arealso as they go from us , still at their return to make a new Jialeyed S truce , in this sort , holding his hand up to the Sun with a loud voice he cries Ylyaoute , and striketh his breast with like signs , being promised safety , he gives credit . 
 These people are much given to bleed , and therefore stop their noses with deeres hair , or the hair of and elan . They are idolaters and have images great store , which they wear about them , and in their boats , which we suppose they worship . They are witches , and have many kinds of enchantments , which they often used , but to small purpose , thanks be to God . 
 Being among them at shore the fourth of July , one of them making a long oration , began to kindle a fire in this manner : he took a piece of a board wherein was a hold half thorough : into that hold he puts the end of a round stick like unto a bedstaff , wetting the end thereof in Trane , and in fashion of a turner with a piece Their manner of leather , by his violent motion doth very speedily ofkindlingfire produce fire : which done , with turfs he made a fire , into which with many words and strange gestures , he a£re made y put diverse things , which we supposed to be a sacrifice : turfs . my self and diverse of my company standing by , they were desirous to have me go into the smoke , I willed them likewise to stand in the smoke , which they by no means would do . I then took one of them , and thrust him into the smoke , and willed one of my company to tread out the fire , & to spurn it into the sea , which was done to show them that we did contemn their sorcery . 
 These people are very simple in all their conversation , Great thieves . but marvelous thievish , especially for iron , which they have in great account . They began through our lenity to show their vile nature : they began to cut our cables : they cut away the Moonelights boat from her stern , they cut our cloth where it lay to air , though we did carefully look unto it , they stole our oars , a caliver , a boar spear , a sword , with diverse other things , whereat 
 397 
 Their weapons . 
 Strange nets . 
 These Islanders war with the people of the main . 
 Copper oar . 
 Their language . 
 the company and Master's being grieved , for our better security , desired me to dissolve this new friendship , and to leave the company of these thievish miscreants : whereupon there was a caliver shot among them , and immediately upon the same a falcon , which strange noise did soar amaze them , so that with speed they departed : notwithstanding their simplicity is such , that within ten hours after they came again to us to entreat peace ; which being promised , we again fell into a great league . They brought us Seal skins , and sammon peal , but seeing iron , they could in no wise forbear stealing : which when I perceived , it did but minister unto me and occasion of laughter , to see their simplicity , and I willed that in no case they should be any more hardly used , but that our own company should be the more vigilant to keep their things , supposing it to be very hard in so short time to make them know their evils . They eat all their meat raw , they live most upon fish , they drink salt water , and eat grass and ice with delight : they are never out of the water , but live in the nature of fish , save only when dead sleep takes them , and then under a warm rock laying his boat upon the land , he lies down to sleep . Their weapons are all darts , but some of them have bow and arrows and slings . They make nets to take their fish of the fin of a whale : they do all their things very artificially : and it should seem that these simple thievish Islanders have war with those of the main , for many of them are soar wounded , which wounds they received upon the main land , as by signs they gave us to understand . We had 
 Kesinyoh , Eat some . 
 among them copper oar , black copper , and read copper : they pronounce their language very hollow , and deep in the throat : these words following we learned from them . Paaotyck , And oar . 
 Madlycoyte , Music . Aginyoh , go fetch . Yliaoute , ! meanenoharme . Ponameg , A boat . 
 Asanock , A dart . 
 ► < Sawygmeg , A knife . Uderah , A nose . Aoh , Iron . 
 398 
 Panygmah , A needle . 
 Aob , The Sea. 
 Mysacoah , Wash it . 
 Lethicksaneg , A seal 
 skin . 
 Canyglow , Kiss me . 
 Ugnera , My son . 
 Acu , Shot . 
 Conah , Leap . 
 Maatuke , Fish . 
 Sambah , Below . 
 Maconmeg , Will you have this . 
 ' Cocah , Go to him . Aba , Fallen down . Icune , Come hither . Awennye , Yonder . Nugo , No. 
 Tucktodo , A fog . Lechiksah , A skin . 
 , Maccoah , A dart . 
 ’ Sugnacoon , A coat . Gounah , Come down . Sasobneg , A bracelet . Ugnake , A tongue . Ataneg , A seal . Macuah , A beard . Pignagogah , A thread . Quoysah , Give it to me . 
 The 7. of July being very desirous to search the habitation of this country , I went myself with our new pinnace into the body of the land , thinking it to be a firm continent , and passing up a very large river , a great flaw of wind took me , whereby we were constrained to seek succour for that night , which being had , I landed with the most part of my company , and went to the top of a high mountain , hoping from thence to see 
 into the country : but the mountains were so many and so mighty as that my purpose prevailed not : whereupon I again returned to my pinnace , and willing diverse of my company to gather muscles for my supper , whereof in this place there was great store , my self having espied a very strange sighed , especially to me that never before saw the like , which was a mighty whirlwind taking up the water in very great quantity , furiously mounting it into the air , which whirlwind , was not for a puff or blast , but continual , for the space of three hours , with very little intermission , which sith it was in the course that I should pass , we were constrained that night to take up our lodging under the rocks . 
 The next morning the storm being broken up , we 
 A.D. 
 1586. 
 Muscles . 
 A strange whirlwind . 
 399 
 went forward in our attempt , and sailed into a mighty great river directly into the body of the land , and in brief , found it to be no firm land , but huge , waste , and desert Isles with mighty sounds , and inlets passing between Sea and Sea. Whereupon we returned towards our ships , and landing to stop a flood , we found the burial of these miscreants ; we found of their fish in bags , plaices , and caplin dried , of which we took only one bag and departed . The ninth of this month we came to our ships , where we found the people desirous in their fashion , of friendship and barter : our Mariners complained heavily against the people , and said that my lenity and friendly using of them gave them stomach to mischief : for they have stolen and anchor from us , they have cut our cable very dangerously , they have cut our boats from our stern , and now since your departure , with slings they spare us not with stones of half a pound weight : and will you still endure these injuries ? It is a shame to bear them . I desired them to be content , and said , I doubted not but all should be well . The 10. of this month I went to the shore , the people following me in their Canoas : I tolled them on shore , and used them with much courtesy , and then departed aboard , they following me , and my company . I gave some of them bracelets , & caused seven or eight of them to come aboard , which they did willingly , and some of them went into the top of the ship : and thus courteously using them , I let them depart : the Sun was no sooner down , but they began to practise their devilish nature , and with slings threw stones very fiercely into the Moonlight , and strake one of her men then boatswain , that he overthrew withal : whereat being moved , I changed my courtesy , and grew to hatred , my self in my own boat well manned with shot , and the barks boat likewise pursued them , and gave them diverse shot , but to small purpose , by reason of their swift rowing : so smally content we returned . 
 400 
 The 11. of this month there came five of them to make a new truce : the master of the Admiral came to me to show me of their coming , and desired to have them taken and kept as prisoners until we had his anchor again : but when he saw that the chief ringleader and master of mischief was one of the five , he then was vehement to execute his purpose , so it was determined to take him : he came crying Iliaout , and striking his breast offered a pair of gloves to fell , the master offered him a knife for them : so two of them came to us , the one was not touched , but the other was soon captive among us : then we pointed to him and his fellows for our anchor , which being had , we made signs that he should be set at liberty : within one hour after he came aboard the wind came fair , whereupon we weighed and set sail , and so brought the Oneofthepeo-fellow with us : one of his fellows still following our ship close aboard , talked with him and made a kind a ™ r you ' of lamentation , we still using him well with Yliaout , which was the common course of courtesy . At length this fellow aboard us spoke foure or five words unto the other and clapped his two hands upon his face , whereupon the other doing the like , departed as we suppose with heavy cheer . We judged the covering of his face with his hands and bowing of his body down , signified his death . At length he became a pleasant companion among us . I gave him a new suit of freeze after the English fashion , because I saw he could not endure the cold , of which he was very joyful , he trimmed up his darts , and all his fishing tools , and would make okam , and set his hand to a ropes end upon occasion . He lived with the dry Caplin that I took when I was searching in the pinnis , and did eat dry Newland fish . 
 All this while , God be thanked , our people were in very good health , only one young man excepted , who died at sea the fourteenth of this month , and the fifteenth , according to the order of the sea , with praise given to God by service , was cast overboard . 
 vn 401 2 c 
 A huge quantity ofyce in 63. degrees of latitude . 
 The nature of fogs . 
 The 17 of this month being in the latitude of 63. degrees 8. minutes , we fell upon a most mighty and strange quantity of ice in one entire mass , so big as that we knew not the limits thereof , and being withal so very high in form of a land , with bays and capes and like high cliff land , as that we supposed it to be land , and therefore sent our pinnace off to discover it : but at her return we were certainly informed that it was only ice , which bred great admiration to us all considering the huge quantity thereof , incredible to be reported in truth as it was , and therefore I omit to speak any further thereof . This only I think , that the like before was never seen : and in this place we had very stickle and strong currents . 
 We coasted this mighty mass of ice until the 30 of July , finding it a mighty bar to our purpose : the air in this time was so contagious and the sea so pestered with ice , as that all hope was banished of proceeding : for the 24 of July all our shrowds , ropes and sails were so frozen , and compassed with ice , only by a gross fog , as seemed to me more then strange , sith the last year I found this sea free and navigable , without impediments . 
 Our men through this extremity began to grow sick and feeble , and withal hopeless of good success : whereupon very orderly , with good discretion they entreated me to regard the state of this business , and withal advised me , that in conscience I ought to regard the safety of mine own life with the preservation of theirs , and that I should not through my overboldness leave their widows and fatherless children to give me bitter curses . This matter in conscience did greatly move me to regard their estates : yet considering the excellency of the business if it might be attained , the great hope of certainty by the last years discovery , and that there was yet a third way not put in practice , I thought it would grow to my great 
 402 
 disgrace , if this actium by my negligence should grow into discredit : whereupon seeking help from God , the fountain of all mercies , it pleased his divine majesty to move my heart to prosecute that which I hope shall be to his glory , and to the contentation of every Christian mind . Whereupon falling into consideration that the Mermaid , albeit a very strong & sufficient ship , yet by reason of her burden was not so convenient and nimble as a smaller bark , especially in such desperate hazards : further having in account her great charge to the adventurers being at xoo . li . the month , and that in doubtful service : all the premises considered with diverse other things , I determined to furnish the Moonlight with revictualing and sufficient men , and to proceed in this actium as God should direct me . Whereupon I altered our course from the ice , and bore Eastsoutheast to recover the next shore where this thing might be performed : so with favourable wind it pleased God that the first of August we discovered the land in Latitude 66. degrees , 33. min. and in longitude from the Meridian of London 70. 
 degrees void of trouble without snow or ice . 
 The second of August we harboured our selves in a very excellent good road , where with all speed we graved the Moonlight , and revictualed her : we searched this country with our pinnace while the bark was trimming , which William Eston did : he found all this land to be only Hands , with a Sea on the East , a Sea on the West , and a Sea on the North . In this place we found it very hight , and we were very much troubled Great heat . with a fly which is called Muskyto , for they did sting grievously . The people of this place at our first coming in caught a Seal , and with bladders fast tied to him sent him unto us with the flood , so as he came . 
 right with our ships , which we took as a friendly present from them . 
 The fift of August I went with the two Master's and others to the top of a hill , and by the way William 
 403 
 Eston espied three Canoas lying under a rock , and went unto them : there were in them skins , darts , with diverse superstitious toys , whereof we diminished nothing , but left upon every boat a silk point , a bullet of led , and a pin . The next day being the sixt of August , the people came unto us without fear , and did barter with us for skins , as the other people did : they differ not from the other , neither in their Canoas nor apparel , yet is their pronunciation more plain then the others , and nothing hollow in the throat . Our Savage aboard us kept himself close , and made show that he would feign have another companion . Thus being provided , I departed from this land the twelft of August at sixe of the clock in the morning , where I left the Mermaid at and anchor : the foureteenth sailing West about fiftie leagues , we discovered land , being in latitude 66. degrees 66. degrees igminuts : this land is 70. leagues from the 19. minutes . other from whence we came . This fourteenth day from nine a clock at night till three a clock in the morning , we anchored by and Hand of ice , twelve leagues ofF the shore , being mored to the ice . 
 The fifteenth day at three a clock in the morning we departed from this land to the South , and the eighteenth of August we discovered land Northwest from us in the morning , being a very fair promontory , in latitude 65. degrees , having no land on the South . Great hope of Here we had great hope of a through passage . a passage . This day at three a clock in the afternoon we 
 again discovered land Southwest and by South from us , where at night we were becalmed . The nineteenth of this month at noon , by observation , we were in 64. . degr . 20. 64. degrees 20. minutes . From the eighteenth day at mn ' noon unto the nineteenth at noon , by precise ordinary 
 care , we had sailed 15. leagues South and by West , yet by art and more exact observation , we found our . course to be Southwest , so that we plainly perceived 
 rend to the a great current striking to the West . 
 West . This land is nothing in sighed but Isles , which in - 
 404 
 creaseth our hope . This nineteenth of August at sixe a clock in the afternoon , it began to snow , and so continued all night with foul weather , and much wind , so that we were constrained to lie at hull all night five leagues ofF the shore : In the morning being the twentieth of August , the fog and storm breaking up , we bore in with the land , and at nine a clock in the morning we anchored in a very fair and safe road and locked for all weathers . At tenne of the clock I went on shore to the top of a very high hill , where I perceived that this land was Islands : at foure Hands , of the clock in the afternoon we weighed anchor , having a fair North northeast wind , with very fair weather ; at six of the clock we were clear without the land , and so shaped our course to the South , to discover the coast , whereby the passage may be through Gods mercy found . 
 We coasted this land till the eight and twentieth of They runnel . August , finding it still to continue towards the South , ^9 " Souths from the latitude of 67. to 57. degrees : we found 7^^ / marvelous great store of birds , gulls and mews , incredible upon the coast . to be reported , whereupon being calm weather , we lay one glass upon the lee , to prove for fish , in which space we caught 100. of cod , although we were but badly provided for fishing , not being our purpose . This eight and twentieth having great distrust of the weather , we arrived in a very fair harbour in the latitude of 56. A harbonugh degrees , and sailed 10. leagues into the same , being two ™ degrees . leagues broad , with very raire woods on both sides : in this place we continued until the first of September , in which time we had two very great storms . I landed , & went sixe miles by guess into the country , and found that the woods were fir , pineapple , alder , yew , withy , Fair woods . and birch : here we saw a black bear : this place yields great store of birds , as fezant , partridge , Barbary hens or the like , wild geese , ducks , black birds , jeyes , thrush's , with other kinds of small birds . Of the partridge and fezant we killed great store with bow and 
 405 
 A perfect hope of the passage about 54. degrees and and half . 
 Two of our men slain by the Savages . 
 arrows : in this place at the harbour mouth we found great store of cod . 
 The first of September at tenne a clock we set sail , and coasted the shore with very fair weather . The thirde day being calm , at noon we struck sail , and let fallen a cadge anchor , to prove whither we could take any fish , being in latitude 54. degrees 30. minutes , in which place we found great abundance of cod , so that the hook was no sooner overboard , but presently a fish was taken . It was the largest and the best fed fish that ever I saw , and diverse fisher men that were with me said that they never saw a more suavle or better skull of fish in their lives : yet had they seen great abundance . 
 The fourth of September at five a clock in the afternoon we anchored in a very good road among great store of Isles , the country low land , pleasant and very full of fair woods . To the North of this place eight leagues , we had a perfect hope of the passage , finding a mighty great sea passing between two lands West . The South land to our judgement being nothing but Isles : we greatly desired to go into this sea , but the wind was directly against us . We anchored in foure fathom fine sand . In this place is foul and fish mighty store . 
 The sixt of September having a fair Northnorthwest wind , having trimmed our Bark we purposed to depart , and sent five of our sailors young men a shore to and Island , to fetch certain fish which we purposed to weather , and therefore left it all night covered upon the Isle : the brutish people of this country lay secretly lurking in the wood , and upon the sudden assaulted our men : which when we perceived , we presently let slip our cables upon the halse , and under our foresail bore into the shore , and with all expedition discharged a double musket upon them twice , at the noise whereof they fled : notwithstanding to our very great grief , two of our men were slain with their arrows , and two grievously wounded , of whom at this present we stand in very great doubt , only one escaped by swimming , with and arrow 406 
 1586. shot thorough his arm . These wicked miscreants never offered parley or speech , but presently executed their cursed fury . 
 This present evening it pleased God further to increase our sorrows with a mighty tempestuous storm , the wind being North northeast , which lasted unto the tenth of this month very extreme . We unrigged our ship , and purposed to cut down our masts , the cable of our shutanker brake , so that we only expected to be driven on shore among these Canibals for their prey . Yet in this deep distress the mighty mercy of God , when hope was passed , gave us succour , and sent us a fair lee , so as we recovered our anchor again , and new mored our ship : where we saw that God manifestly delivered us : for the strains of one of our cables were broken , and we only road by and old junke . Thus being freshly mored a new storm arose , the wind being Westnorthwest , very forcible , which lasted unto the tenth day at night . 
 The eleventh day with a fair Westnorthwest wind we departed with trust in Gods mercy , shaping our course for England , and arrived in the West country in the beginning of October . 
 