The third voyage Northwestward , made by M. John Davis Gentleman , as chief captain & Pilot generail , for the discovery of a passage to the Isles of the Moluccas , or the coast of China , in the year 1587. Written by M. John Janes . 
 May . 
 He 19. of this present month about midnight we weighed our anchors , set sail , and departed from Dartmouth with two Barks and a Clincher , the one nam the Elizabeth of Dartmouth , the other the Sunshine of London , and the Clincher called the Helene of London : 
 thus in Gods name we set forward with the wind at Northeast a good fresh gale . About 3. hours after our departure , the night being somewhat thick with darkness , we had lost the pinnace : the Captain imagining that the men had run away with her , willed the Master of the Sunshine to stand to Seawards , and see if we could descry them , we bearing in with the shore for Plimmouth . At length we descried her , bore with her , and demanded what the cause was : they answered that the tiller of their helm was burst . So shaping our course Westsouthwest , we went forward , hoping that a hard beginning would make a good ending , yet some of us were doubtful of it , falling in reckoning that she was a Clincher ; nevertheless we put our trust in God . 
 The 21. we met with the Read Lion of London , which came from the coast of Spaine , which was afraid that we had be men of war , but we hailed them , and after a little conference , we desired the Master to carry our letters for London directed to my uncle Sanderson , who promised us a safe delivery . And after we had heaved them a led and a line , whereunto we had made fast our 
 414 
 1587-letters , before they could get them into the ship , they fell into the Sea , and so all our labour and theirs also was lost ; notwithstanding they promised to certify our departure at London , and so we departed , and the same day we had sighed of Silley . The 22. the wind was at Northeast by East with fair weather , and so the 23. and 24. the like . The 25. we laid our ships on the Lee for the Sunshine , who was a rummaging for a leak , they had 500. strokes at the pump in a watch , the wind at Northwest . 
 The 26. and 27. we had fair weather , but this 27. the pinnaces foremast was blown overboard . The 28. the Elizabeth towed the pinnace , which was so much bragged off by the owners report before we came out of England , but at Sea she was like a cart drawn with oxen . Sometime we towed her because she could not sail for scant wind . 
 The 31. day our Captai ne asked if the pinnace were staunch , Peerson answered that she was as found and staunch as a cup . This made us something glad , when we saw she would brook the Sea , and was not leak . 
 June . 
 THe first 6. days we had fair weather : after that for 5. days we had fog and rain , the wind being South . The 12. we had clear weather . The Mariners in the Sunshine and the Master could not agree : the Mariners would go on their voyage a fishing , because the year began to waste : the Master would not depart till he had the company of the Elizabeth , whereupon the Master told our Captain that he was afraid his men would shape some contrary course while he was asleep , and so he should loose us . At length after much talk and many threatenings , they were content to bring us to the land which we looked for daily . 
 The 14. day we discovered land at five of the clock Land descried . in the morning , being very great and high mountains , the tops of the hills being covered with snow . Here the 
 415 
 wind was variable , sometime Northeast , Eastnortheast , and East by North : but we imagined ourselves to be 16. or 17. leagues off from the shore . 
 The 16. we came to and anchor about 4. or 5. of the clock after nonne , the people came presently to us after the old manner , with crying Ilyaoute , and showing us Seals skins . The 17. we began to set up the pinnace that Peerson framed at Dartmouth , with the boards which he brought from London . 
 The 18. Peerson and the Carpenters of the ships began to set on the planks . The 19. as we went about and Island , were found black Pumise stones , and salt kerned on the rocks , very white and glistering . This day also the Master of the Sunshine took of the people a very strong lusty young fellow . 
 The 20. about two of the clock in the morning , the Savages came to the Island where our pinnace wks built ready to be launched , and tore the two upper strikes , and carried them away only for the love of the iron in the boards . While they were about this practice , we manned the Elizabeths boat to go a shore to them : our men being either afraid or amazed , were so long before they came to shore , that our Captain willed them to stay , and made the Gunner give fire to a Saker , and laid the piece level with the boat which the Savages had turned on the one side because we should not hurt them with our arrows , and made the boat their bulwark against the arrows which we shot at them . Our Gunner having made all things ready , gave fire to the piece , and fearing to hurt any of the people , and regarding the owners profit , thought belike he would save a Sakers shot , doubting we should have occasion to fight with men of war , and so shot off the Saker without a bullet : we looking still when the Savages that were hurt should run away without legs , at length we could perceive never a man hurt , but all having their legs could carry away their bodies : we had not sooner shot off the piece , but the Master of the Sun - 
 416 
 shine manned his boat , and came rowing towards the Island , the very sighed of whom made each of them take that he had got , and flee away as fast as they could to another Island about two miles off , where they took the nails out of the timber , and left the wood on the Isle , when we came on shore , and saw how they had spoiled the boat , after much debating of the matter , we agreed that the Elizabeth should have her to fish withal : whereupon she was presently carried aboard , and stowed . 
 Now after this trouble , being resolved to depart with the first wind , there fell out another matter worse then all the rest , and that was in this manner . John Churchyard one whom our Captain had appointed as Pilot in the pinnace , came to our Captain , and master Bruton , and told them that the good ship which we must all hazard our lives in , had three hundred strokes at one time as she road in the harbour : This disquieted us all greatly , and many doubted to go in her . At length our Captain by whom we were all to be governed , determined rather ' to end his life with credit , then to return with infamy and disgrace , and so being all agreed , we purposed to live and die together , and committed our selves to the ship . Now the 21. having brought all our things aboard , about 11. or 12. of the clock at night , we set sail and departed from those Isles , which lie in 64. degrees of latitude , our ships being all now at Sea , and we shaping our course to go , coasting the land to the Northwards upon the Eastern shore , which we called the shore of our Merchants , because there we met with people which trafficked with us , but here we were not without doubt of our ship . 
 The 24. being in 67. degrees , and 40. minutes , we had great store of Whale's , and a kind of sea birds which the Mariners call Cortinous . This day about sixe of the clock at night , we espied two of the country people at Sea , thinking at the first they had be two great Seals , until we saw their oars 
 VII 417 2D 
 A.D. 
 I587 . 
 Isles in 64. degrees . 
 Store of Whale's in 67 degrees . 
 The great variation of the compass . London coast . Between Gronland y the North . of Americaabovt 40. leagues . 
 glistering with the Sun : they came rowing towards us , as fast as they could , and when they came within hearing , they held up their oars , and cried Ilyaoute , making many signs : and at last they came to us , giving us birds for bracelets , and of them I had a dart with a bone in it , or a piece of Unicorns horn , as I did judge . This dart he made store of , but when he saw a knife , he let it go , being more desirous of the knife then of his dart : these people continued rowing after our ship the space of 3. hours . 
 The 25. in the morning at 7. of the clock we descried 30. Savages rowing after us , being by judgement 10 , leagues off from the shore : they brought us Salmon Peals , Birds , and Caplin , and we gave them pins , needles , bracelets , nails , knives , bells , looking glasses , and other small trifles , and for a knife , a nail or a bracelet , which they call Ponigmah , they would fell their boat , coats , or any thing they had , although they were far from the shore . we had but few skins of them , about 20. but they made signs to us that if we would go to the shore , we should have more store of Chichsanege : they stayed with us till 11. of the clock , at which time we went to prayer , and they departed from us . ' 
 The 28. and 29. were foggy with clouds , the 30. day we took the heighth , and found our selves in 72. degrees and 12 minutes of latitude both at noon and at night , the Sun being 5. degrees above the Horizon . At midnight the compass set to the variation of 28. degrees to the Westward . Now having coasted the land , which we called London coast , from the 21. of this present , till the 30. the Sea open all to the Westwards and Northwards , the land on starboard side East from us , the wind shifted to the North , whereupon we left that shore , naming the same Hope Sanderson , and shaped our course West , and ran 40. leagues and better without the sighed of any land . 
 418 
 THe second of July we fell with a mighty bank of A mighty ice West from us , lying North and South , which bank we would gladly have doubled out to the North - an soUtht wards , but the wind would not suffer us , so that we were feign to coast it to the Southwards , hoping to double it out , that we might have run so far West till we had found land , or else to have been thoroughly resolved of our pretended purpose . 
 The 3. we fell with the ice again , and putting ofF from it , we sought to the Northwards , but the wind crossed us . 
 The 4. was foggy : so was the 5. also with much wind at the North . 
 The 6. being very clear , we put our bark with oars through a gap in the ice , seeing the Sea free on the West side , as we thought , which falling out otherwise , caused us to return after we had stayed there between the ice . The 7. and the 8. about midnight , by Gods help we recovered the open Sea , the weather being fair and calm , and so was the 9. The 10. we coasted the ice . The 11. was foggy , but calm . 
 The 12. we coasted again the ice , having the wind at Northnorthwest . The 13. bearing off from the ice , we determined to go with the shore and come to and anchor , and to stay 5. or 6. days for the dissolving of the ice , hoping that the Sea continually beating it , and the Sun with the extreme force of heat which it had always shin - Extreme heat king upon it , would make a quick dispatch , that we might Sun . have a further search upon the Western shore . Now when we were come to the Eastern coast , the water something deep , and some of our company fearful withal , we durst not come to and anchor , but bore ofF into the Sea again . The poor people seeing us go away again , came rowing after us into the Sea , the waves being somewhat lofty . We trucked with them for a few skins and darts , and gave them beads , nails , pins , 
 419 
 They were driven West sixe points out of their course in 67. degrees , 45. minutes . Mount Raleigh . 
 The Earl of Cumberlands Isles . 
 The variation of the compass the . deg . Westward . 
 The land trendeth fi-om this place Southwest and by South . 
 My lord Lumleys Inlet . 
 needles and cards , they pointing to the shore , as though they would show us some great friendship : but we little regarding their courtesy , gave them the gentle farewell , and so departed . 
 The 14. we had the wind at South . The r 5. there was some fault either in the bark , or the set of some current , for we were driven sixe points beyond our course West . The 16. we fell with the bank of ice West from us . The 17. and 18. were foggy . The 19. at one a clock after noon , we had sighed of the land which we called Mount Raleigh , and at 12. of the clock at night , we were thwart the straights which we discovered the first year . The 20. we traversed in the mouth of the straight , the wind being at West , with fair and clear weather . The 21. and 22. we coasted the Northern coast of the straights . The 23. having sailed threescore leagues Northwest into the straights , at two a clock after noon we anchored among many Isles in the bottom of the gulf , naming the same The Earl of Cumberlands Isles , where riding at anchor , a Whale passed by our ship and went West in among the Isles . Here the compass set at thirtie degrees Westward variation . The 23. we departed , shaping our course Southeast to recover the Sea. The 25. we were becalmed in the bottom of the gulf , the air being extreme hight . Master Bruton and some of the Mariners went on shore to course dogs , where they found many Graves and Trane spilled on the ground , the dogs being so fat that they were scant able to run . 
 The 26. we had a pretty storm , the wind being at Southeast . The,27 . and 28. were fair . The 29. we were clear out of the straights , having coasted the South shore , and this day at noon we were in 62. degrees of latitude . The 30. in the afternoon we coasted a bank of ice , which lay on the shore , and passed by a great bank or Inlet , which lay between 63. and 62. degrees of latitude , which we called Lumlies Inlet . We had oftentimes , as we sailed alongst the coast , great ruttes , the 420 
 water as it were whirling and overfalling , as if it were the fallen of some great water through a bridge . 
 The 31. as we sailed by a Headland , which we nam Warwicks Foreland , we fell into one of those overfals Warwicks with a fresh gale of wind , and bearing all our sails , we For^nd . looking upon and Island of ice between us and the shore , had thought that our bark did make no way , which caused us to take marks on the shore : at length we perceived our selves to go very fast , and the Island of ice which we saw before , was carried very forcibly with the set of the current faster then our ship went . A very forcible This day and night we passed by a very great gulf , the c^^twest water whirling and roaring as it were the meetings of ' tides . 
 August . 
 THe first of August having coasted a bank of ice which was driven out at the mouth of this gulf , we fell with the Southermost cape of the gulf , which we nam Chidleis cape , which lay in 61 degrees and 10 minutes of Chldleys cape . latitude . The 2 and 3 were calm and foggy , so were the 4 , 5 , and 6. The 7 was fair and calm : so was the 8 , with a little gale in the morning . The 9 was fair , and we had a little gale at night . The 10 we had a frisking gale at Westnorthwest . The 11 fair . The 12 we saw five deer on the top of and Island , called by us Darcies The lord Dar-Island . And we hoist out our boat , and went ashore to cies them , thinking to have killed some of them . But when we came on shore , and had coursed them twice about the Island , they took the sea and swam towards Islands distant from that three leagues . When we perceived that they had taken the sea we gave them over because our boat was so small that it could not carry us , and row after them , they swam so fast : but one of them was as big as a good pretty Cow , and very fat , their feet as big as Ox feet . Here upon this Island I killed with my piece a grey hare . 
 The 13 in the morning we saw three or foure white 421 
 bears , but durst not go on shore to them for lack of a good boat . This day we stroke a rock seeking for and harbour , and received a leak : and this day we were in 54 degrees of latitude . 
 The 14 we stopped our leak in a storm not very outrageous , at noon . 
 The 15 being almost in 52 degrees of latitude , and not finding our ships , nor ( according to their promise ) any kind of mark , token , or beacon , which we willed them to set up , and they protested to do so upon every head land , Island or cape , within twenty leagues every way off The fishing from their fishing place , which our captain appointed to place between between 54 and 55 degrees : This 15 I say we shaped ^ ■ ees of lati - our course homeward for England , having in our ship tude . but little wood , and half a hogshead of fresh water . Our men were very willing to depart , and no man more forward then Peerson , for he feared to be put out of his office of stewardship : but because every man was so willing to depart , we consented to return for our own country : and so we had the 16 fair weather , with the wind at Southwest . 
 The 17 we met a ship at sea , and as far as we could judge it was a Biskaine : we thought she went a fishing Abundance of for whale's ; for in 52 degrees or thereabouts we saw very whale's in m d€ET£€S . < # e 
 ’ The 18 was fair , with a good gale at West . 
 The 19 fair also , with much wind at West and by South . 
 They arrive at Dartmouth the 15 of September . 
 And thus after much variable weather and change of winds we arrived the 15 of September in Dartmouth anno 1587 , giving thanks to God for our safe arrival . 
 