The voyage of M. Hoar and diverse other gentlemen , to Newfoundland , and Cape Briton , in the year 1536 and in the 28 year of king Henry the 8. 
 Ne master Hoar of London , a man of goodly stature and of great courage , and given to the study of Cosmography , in the 28 year of king Henry the 8 and in the year of our Lord 1536 encouraged diverse Gentlemen and others , being assisted by the kings favour and 
 countenance , to accompany him in a voyage of discovery upon the Northwest parts of America : wherein his persuasions took such effect , that within short space many gentlemen of the Inns of court , and of the Chancery , and diverse others of good worship , desirous to see the strange things of the world , very willingly entered into the actium with him , some of whose names were as follows : M. Weeks a gentleman of the West country of five hundred marks by the year living . M. Tucke a gentleman of Kent . M. Tuckfield . M. Thomas Buts the son of Sir William Buts knight , of Norfolke , which was lately living , and from whose mouth I wrote most of this relation . M. Hardy , M. Biron , M. Carter , M. Wright , M. Rastall Sergeant Rastals brother , M. Ridley , and diverse other , which all were in the Admiral called the Trinitie , a ship of seven score tons , wherein M. Hore himself was embarked . In the other ship whose name was the Minion , went a very learned and virtuous gentleman one M. Armigil Wade , Afterwards Clerk of the M. Jrmi^l Counsels of king Henry the 8 and king Edward the Wadesixth , father to the worshipful M. William Wade now Clerk of the privy Counsel , M. Oliver Dawbeney merchant of London , M. Joy afterwards gentleman of the Kings Chapel , with diverse other of good account . 
 The Island of Penguinstand-eth about the latitude of 30. degrees . 
 M. Dawbenys report to M. Richard Hakluyt of the Temple . 
 They beheld the Savages of Newfoundland . 
 The whole number that went in the two tall ships aforesaid , to wit , the Trinitie and the Minion , were about sixe score persons , whereof thirty were gentlemen , which all we mustered in warlike manner at Gravesend , and after the receiving of the Sacrament , they embarked themselves in the end of Aprill . 1536. 
 From the time of their setting out from Gravesend , they were very long at sea , to wit , above two months , and never touched any land until they came to part of the West Indies about Cape Briton , shaping their course thence Northeastwardes , until they came to the Island of Penguin , which is very full of rocks and stones , whereon they went and found it full of great fowls white and grey , as big as geese , and they saw infinite numbers of their eggs . They drave a great number of the fowls into their boats upon their sails , and took up many of their eggs , the fowls they flayed and their skins were very like honey combes full of holes being flayed off : they dressed and eat them and found them to be very good and nourishing meat . They saw also store of bears both black and white , of whom they killed some , and took them for no bad food . 
 M. Oliver Dawbeny , which ( as it is before mentioned ) was in this voyage , and in the Minion , told M. Richard Hakluyt of the middle Temple these things following : to wit , That after their arrival ! in Newfoundland , and having be there certain days at anchor , and not having yet seen any of the natural people of the country , the same Dawbeney walking one day on the hatches , spied a boat with Savages of those parts , rowing down the Bay towards them , to gaze upon the ship and our people , and taking view of their coming aloof , he called to such as were under the hatches , and willed them to come up if they would see the natural people of the country , that they had so long and so much desired to see : whereupon they came up , and took view of the Savages rowing towards them 
 and their ship , and upon the view they manned out a ship-boat to meet them and to take them . But they spying our ship-boat making towards them , returned with main force and fled into and Island that lay up in the Bay or river there , and our men pursued them into the Island , and the Savages fled and escaped : but our men found a fire , and the side of a bear on 
 A.D. 
 1536. 
 a wooden spit left at the same by the Savages that were fled . 
 There in the same place they found a boot of leather garnished on the outward side of the calf with certain brave trades , as it were of raw silk , and also found a certain great warm mitten : And these carried with them , they returned to their ship , not finding the Savages , nor seeing any thing else beside the soil , and the things growing in the same , which chiefly were store of fir and pine trees . 
 And further , the said M. Dawbeny told him , that lying there they grew into great want of victuals , and that there they found small relief , more then that they had from the nest of and Osprey , that brought hourly to her young great plenty of diverse sorts of fish . But such was the famine that increased among them from Extreme day to day , that they were forced to seek to relieve famine-themselves of raw herbs and roots that they sought on the main : but the famine increasing , and the relief of herbs being to little purpose to satisfy their insatiable hunger , in the fields and deserts here and there , the fellow killed his mate while he stooped to take up a root for his relief , and cutting out pieces of his body whom he had murdered , broiled the same on the coals and greedily devoured them . 
 By this mean the company decreased , and the officers knew not what was become of them ; And it fortuned that one of the company driven with hunger to seek abroad for relief found out in the fields the savour of Oh « r men eat broiled flesh , and fell out with one for that he would suffer him and his fellows to starve , enjoying plenty as Jor a tn ’ 
 he thought : and this matter growing to cruel speeches , he that had the broiled meat , burst out into these words : If thou wouldst needs know , the broiled meat that I had was a piece of such a men buttock . The report of this brought to the ship , the Captai ne found what became of those that were missing , & was persuaded that some of them were neither devoured with wild beasts , nor yet destroyed with Savages : And TheCaptaines hereupon he stood up and made a notable Oration , Qrati < m . containing , How much these dealings offended the Almighty , and vouched the Scriptures from first to last , what God had in cases of distress done for them that called upon him , and told them that the power of the Almighty was then no less , then in all former time it had be . And added , that if it had not pleased God to have helped them in that distress , that it had be better to have perished in body , and to have lived everlastingly , then to have relieved for a poor time their mortal bodies , and to be condemned everlastingly both body and soul to the unquenchable fire of hell . And thus having ended to that effect , he began to exhort to repentance , and besought all the company to pray , that it might please God to look upon their miserable present state , and for his own mercy to relieve the same . The famine increasing , and the inconvenience of the men that were missing being found , they agreed among themselves rather then all should perish , to cast lots who The English should be killed : And such was the mercy of God , that ’French shit t^e same arrived a French ship in that port , 
 wherein they we^ furnished with vittaile , and such was the policy of retumedhome . the English , that they became master's of the same , and changing ships and vittailing them , they set sail to come into England . 
 In their journey they were so far Northwards , that they saw mighty Islands of ice in the summer season , on Hawks and which were hawks and other fowls to rest themselves otherfoules . be ; ng weary of flying over far from the main . They 
 saw also certain great white fowls with read bills and read 6 
 legs , somewhat bigger then Herons , which they supposed Fowls sup-to be Storks . They arrived at St. Ives in Cornewall be about the end of October . From thence they departed sores‘ unto a certain castle belonging to sir John Luttrell , where M. Thomas Buts , and M. Rastall and other Gentlemen of the voyage were very friendly entertained : after that they came to the Earl of bath at bath , and thence to Bristoll , so to London . M. Buts was so changed in the voyage with hunger and misery , that sir William his father and my Lady his mother knew him not to be their son , until they found a secret mark which was a wart upon one of his knees , as he told me Richard Hakluyt of Oxford himself , to whom I road 200. miles only to learn the whole truth of this voyage from his own mouth , as being the only man now alive that was in this discovery . 
 Certain months after , those Frenchmen came into England , and made complaint to king Henry the 8 : the king causing the matter to be examined , and finding the great distress of his subject's , and the causes of the dealing so with the French , was so moved with pity , that he punished not his subject's , but of his own purse made full and royal recompense unto the French . 
 In this distress of famine , the English did somewhat relieve their vital spirits , by drinking at the springs the fresh water out of certain wooden cups , out of which they had drunk their Aqua composita before . 
 The French royally recommenced by king Henry the 8. 
 