The manner how our Admiral was lost . 
 UPon Tewsday the 27 of August , towards the evening , August 27. our general caused them in his frigate to found , who found white sand at 35 fathom , being then in latitude about 44 degrees . 
 Wednesday towards night the wind came South , and we bore with the land all that night , Westnorthwest , contrary to the mind of master Cox : nevertheless we followed the Admiral , deprived of power to prevent a mischief , which by no contradiction could be brought to hold other course , alleging they could not make the ship to work better , nor to lie otherways . 
 The evening was fair and pleasant , yet not without Predictions token of storm to ensue , and most part of this t1 , e 
 Wednesday night , like the Swan that sings before ' 
 her death , they in the Admiral , or Delight , continued in sounding of Trumpets , with Drums , and Fifes : also winding the Cornets , Haughtboyes : and in the end of their jollity , left with the battle and ringing of doleful kneels . 
 Towards the evening also we caught in the Golden Hind a very mighty Porpose , with a harping iron , having first stricken diverse of them , and brought away part of their flesh , sticking upon the iron , but could recover only that one . These also passing through the Ocean , in herds , did portend storm . I omit to recite frivolous reports by them in the Frigate , of strange voices , the same night , which scarred some from the helm . 
 Thursday the 29 of August , the wind rose , and blew vehemently at South and by East , bringing withal rain , and thick missed , so that we could not see a cable length before us . And betimes in the morning we were all - Loss of our together run and folded in among flats and sands , AdmirdU . among which we found shoal and deep in every three 
 vin 65 E 
 or foure ships length , after we began to found : but first we were upon them unawares , until master Cox looking out , discerned ( in his judgement ) white cliffs , crying ( land ) withal , though we could not afterwards descry any land , it being very likely the breaking of the sea white , which seemed to be white cliffs , through the haze and thick weather . 
 Immediately tokens were given unto the Delight , to cast about to seaward , which , being the greater ship , and of burden 120 tons , was yet foremost upon the breach , keeping so ill watch , that they knew not the danger , before they felt the same , too late to recover it : for presently the Admiral struck a ground , and had soon after her stern and hinder parts beaten in pieces : whereupon the rest ( that is to say , the Frigate in which was the general and the Golden Hind ) cast about Eastsoutheast , bearing to the South , even for our lives into the winds eye , because that way carried us to the seaward . Making out from this danger , we sounded one while seven fathom , then five fathom , then foure fathom and less , again deeper , immediately foure fathom , then but three fathom , the sea going mightily and high . At last we recovered ( God be thanked ) in some despair , to sea room enough . 
 In this distress , we had vigilant eye unto the Admiral , whom we saw cast away , without power to give the men succour , neither could we espy any of the men that leapt overboard to save themselves , either in the same Pinnace or Cock , or upon rafters , and such like means , presenting themselves to men in those extremities : for we desired to save the men by every possible means . But all in vain , sith God had determined their ruin : yet all that day , and part of the next , we beatrice up and down as near unto the wrack as was possible for us , looking out , if by good hap we might espy any of them . 
 This was a heavy and grievous event , to loose at one blow our chief ship freighted with great provision , 66 
 1583 gathered together with much travel , care , long time , and difficulty . But more was the loss of our men , which perished to the number almost of a hundreth souls . among whom was drowned a learned man , and Hun - Stephanus garian , born in the city of Buda , called thereof Budaeus , Parmeni ™ a who of piety and zeal to good attempts , adventured in sar-tan . this actium , minding to record in the Latin tongue , the gests and things worthy of remembrance , happening in this discovery , to the honour of our nation , the same being adorned with the eloquent style of this Orator , and rare Poet of our time . 
 Here also perished our Saxon Refiner and Discoverer Daniel a of inestimable riches , as it was left among some of us nfiwof • j i j 1 ° metals . 
 in undoubted hope . 
 No less heavy was the loss of the Captain Maurice brown , a virtuous , honest , and discreet Gentleman , overseen only in liberty given late before to men , that ought to have be restrained , who showed himself a man resolved , and never unprepared for death , as by his last act of this tragedy appeared , by report of them that escaped this wrack miraculously , as shall be hereafter declared . For when all hope was passed of recovering the ship , and that men began to give over , and to save themselves , the Captain was advised before to shift also for his life , by the Pinnace at the stern of the ship : but refusing that counsel , he would not give example with the first to leave the ship , but used all means to exhort his people not to despair , nor so to leave off their labour , choosing rather to die , then to incur infamy , by forsaking his charge , which then might be thought to have perished through his default , showing and ill president unto his men , by leaving the ship first himself . With this mind he mounted upon the highest deck , where he attended imminent death , and unavoidable : how long , I leave it to God , who withdraweth not his comfort from his servants at such times . 
 In the mean season , certain , to the number of foureteene persons , leapt into a small Pinnace ( the 
 A wmderfull escape and deliverance . A great distress . 
 A desperate resolution . 
 Two men famished . 
 bigness of a Thames barge , which was made in the New found land ) cut off the rope wherewith it was towed , and committed themselves to Gods mercy , amidst the storm , and rage of sea and winds , destitute of food , not so much as a drop of fresh water . The boat seeming overcharged in foul weather with company , Edward Headly a valiant soldier , and well reputed of his company , preferring the greater to the lesser , thought better that some of them perished then all , made this motion to cast lots , and them to be thrown overboard upon whom the lots fell , thereby to lighten the boat , which otherways seemed impossible to live , offered himself with the first , content to take his adventure gladly : which nevertheless Richard Clarke , that was Master of the Admiral , and one of this number , refused , advising to abide Gods pleasure , who was able to save all , as well as a few . 
 The boat was carried before the wind , continuing sixe days and nights in the Ocean , and arrived at last with the men ( alive , but weak ) upon the New found land , saving that the foresaid Headly , ( who had be late sick ) and another called of us Brasile , of his travel into those Countries' , died by the way , famished , and less able to hold out , then those of better health . For such was these poor men's extremity , in cold and wet , to have no better sustenance then their own urine , for sixe days together . 
 Thus whom God delivered from drowning , he appointed to be famished , who does give limits to men times , and ordaineth the manner and circumstance of dying : whom again he will preserve , neither Sea , nor famine can confound . For those that arrived upon the New found land , were brought into France by certain French men , then being upon that coast . 
 After this heavy chance , we continued in beating the sea up and down , expecting when the weather would clear up , that we might yet bear in with the land , which we judged not far off , either the continent or some 68 
 Island . For we many times , and in sundry places found ground at 50 , 45 , 40 fathoms , and less . The ground coming upon our led , being sometime oazy sand , and otherwhile a broad shell , with a little sand about it . 
 Our people lost courage daily after this ill success , the weather continuing thick and blustering , with increase of cold , Winter drawing on , which took from them all hope of amendment , selling and assurance of worse weather to grow upon us every day . The Leeside of us lay full of flats and dangers inevitable , if the wind blew hard at South . Some again doubted we were ingulfed in the Bay of S. Laurence , the coast full of dangers , and unto us unknown . But above all , provision waxed scant , and hope of supply was gone , with loss of our Admiral . 
 Cautes enforcing us to return home again . 
 Those in the Frigate were already pinched with spare allowance , and want of clothes chiefly : Whereupon they besought the general to return for England , before they all perished . And to them of the Golden Hind , they made signs of their distress , pointing to their mouths , and to their clothes thin and ragged : then immediately they also of the Golden Hind , grew to be of the same opinion and desire to return home . 
 The former reasons having also moved the general to have compassion of his poor men , in whom he saw no want of good will , but of means fit to perform the actium they came for , resolved upon retire : and calling the Captain and Master of the Hind , he yielded them many reasons , enforcing this unexpected return , withal protesting himself , greatly satisfied with that he had seen , and knew already . 
 Reiterating these words , Be content , we have seen enough , and take no care of expense past : I will set you forth royally the next Spring , if God send us safe home . Therefore I pray you let us no longer strive here , where we fight against the elements . 
 Omitting circumstance , how unwillingly the Captain 
 & Master of the Hind condescended to this motion , his 
 A monster of the sea . 
 September 2. 
 own company can testify : yet comforted with the Generals promises of a speedy return at Spring , and induced by other apparent reasons , proving and impossibility , to accomplish the actium at that time , it was concluded on all hands to retire . 
 So upon Saturday in the afternoon the 31 of August , we changed our course , and returned back for England , at which very instant , even in winding about , there passed along between us and towards the land which we now forsook a very lion to our seeming , in shape , hair and colour , not swimming after the manner of a beast by moving of his feet , but rather sliding upon the water with his whole body ( excepting the legs ) in sighed , neither yet diving under , and again rising above the water , as the manner is , of Whale's , Dolphins , Tunise , Porposes , and all other fish : but confidently showing himself above water without hiding : Notwithstanding , we presented our selves in open view and gesture to amaze him , as all creatures will be commonly at a sudden gaze and sighed of men . Thus he passed along turning his head to and from , yawning and gaping wide , with ugly demonstration of long teeth , and glaring eyes , and to bid us a farewell ( coming right against the Hind ) he sent forth a horrible voice , roaring or bellowing as doth a lion , which spectacle we all beheld so far as we were able to discern the same , as men prove to wonder at every strange thing , as this doubtless was , to see a lion in the Ocean sea , or fish in shape of a lion . What opinion others had thereof , and chiefly the general himself , I forbear to deliver : But he took it for Bonum Omen , rejoicing that he was to war against such and enemy , if it were the devil . 
 The wind was large for England at our return , but very high , and the sea rough , insomuch as the Frigate wherein the general went was almost swallowed up . 
 Munday in the afternoon we passed in the sighed of Cape Raze , having made as much way in little more then two days and nights back again , as before we had 
 done in eight days from Cape Raze , unto the place where our ship perished . Which hindrance thitherward , and speed back again , is to be imputed unto the swift current , as well as to the winds , which we had more large in our return . 
 This munday the general came aboard the Hind to have the Surgeon of the Hind to dress his foot , which he hurt by treading upon a nail : At what time we comforted each other with hope of hard success to be all past , and of the good to come . So agreeing to carry out lights always by night , that we might keep together , he departed into his Frigate , being by no means to be entreated to tarry in the Hind , which had be more for his security . Immediately after followed a sharp storm , which we overpassed for that time . Praised be God . 
 The weather fair , the general came aboard the Hind Our last con - 
 again , to make merry together with the Captain , ference mth Master , and company , which was the last meeting , and om Generatt‘ continued there from morning until night . During which time there passed sundry discourses , touching affairs past , and to come , lamenting greatly the loss of his great ship , more of the men , but most of all of his books and notes , and what else I know not , for which he was out of measure grieved , the same doubtless being some matter of more importance then his books , which I could not draw from him : yet by circumstance I gathered , the same to be the Over which Daniel the Saxon had brought unto him in the New found land . Whatsoever it was , the remembrance touched him so deep , as not able to contain himself , he beatrice his boy in great rage , even at the same time , so long after the miscarrying of the great ship , because upon a fair day , when we were becalmed upon the coast of the New found land , near unto Cape Raze , he sent his boy aboard the Admiral , to fetch certain things : among which , this being chief , was yet forgotten and left behind . After which time he could never conveniently send again 
 7i 
 Circumstances to be well observed in our general , importing the Over to be of a silver Mine . 
 aboard the great ship , much less he doubted her ruin so near at hand . 
 Herein my opinion was better confirmed diversely , and by sundry conjectures , which makes me have the greater hope of this rich Mine . For where as the general had never before good conceit of these North parts of the world : now his mind was wholly fixed upon the New found land . And as before he refused not to grant assignments liberally to them that required the same into these North parts , now he became contrarily affected , refusing to make any so large grants , especially of S. Johns , which certain English merchant's made suit for , offering to employ their money and travel upon the same : yet neither by their own suit , nor of others of his own company , whom he seemed willing to pleasure , it could be obtained . 
 Also laying down his determination in the Spring following , for disposing of his voyage then to be reattempted : he assigned the Captain & Master of the Golden Hind , unto the South discovery , and reserved unto himself the North , affirming that this voyage had won his heart from the South , and that he was now become a Northern man altogether . 
 Last , being demanded what means he had at his arrival in England , to compass the charges of so great preparation as he intended to make the next Spring : having determined upon two fleets , one for the South , another for the North : Leave that to me ( he replied ) I will ask a penny of no man . I will bring good tidings unto her Majesty , who will be so gracious , to lend me 10000 pounds , willing us therefore to be of good cheer : for he did thank God ( he said ) with all his heart , for that he had seen , the same being enough for us all , and that we needed not to seek any further . And these last words he would often repeat , with demonstration of great fervency of mind , being himself very confident , and settled in belief of inestimable good by this voyage : which the greater number of his followers 
 nevertheless mistrusted altogether , not being made partakers of those secrets , which the general kept unto himself . Yet all of them that are living , may be witnesses of his words and protestations , which sparingly I have delivered . 
 Leaving the issue of this good hope unto God , who knoweth the truth only , 8c can at his good pleasure bring the same to light : I will hasten to the end of this Wilfalnes in tragedy , which must be knit up in the person of our the GeneraU-general . And as it was Gods ordinance upon him , even so the vehement persuasion and intreaty of his friends could nothing avail , to divert him from a wilful resolution of going through in his Frigate , which was overcharged upon their decks , with fights , nettings , and small artillery , too cumbersome for so small a boat , that was to pass through the Ocean sea at that season of the year , when by course we might expect much storm of foul weather , whereof indeed we had enough . 
 But when he was entreated by the Captain , Master , A °fa and other his well willers of the Hind , not to venture in the Frigate , this was his answer : I will not forsake my little company going homeward , with whom I have passed so many storms and perils . And in very truth , he was urged to be so over hard , by hard reports given of him , that he was afraid of the sea , albeit this was rather rashness , then advised resolution , to prefer the wind of a vain report to the weight of his own life . 
 Seeing he would not bend to reason , he had provision out of the Hind , such as was wanting aboard his Frigate . And so we committed him to Gods protection , 8c set him aboard his Pinnace , we being more then 300 leagues onward of our way home . 
 By that time we had brought the Islands of Azores South of us , yet we then keeping much to the North , until we had god into the height and elevation of England : we met with very foul weather , and terrible seas , breaking short and high Pyramid wise . The reason whereof seemed to proceed either of hilly grounds high 
 A resolute and Christianlike saying in a distress 
 Sir Humfrey Gilbert drowned . 
 Arrival in England of the Golden Hind . 
 and low within the sea , ( as we see hills and dales upon the land ) upon which the seas do mount and fallen : or else the cause proceedeth of diversity of winds , shifting often in sundry points : all which having power to move the great Ocean , which again is not presently settled , so many seas do encounter together , as there had be diversity of winds . Howsoever it comes to pass , men which all their life time had occupied the Sea , never saw more outrageous Seas . We had also upon our main yard , and apparition of a litde fire by night , which seamen do call Castor and Pollux . But we had only one , which they take and evil sign of more tempest : the same is usual in storms . 
 Munday the ninth of September , in the afternoon , the Frigate was near cast away , oppressed by waves , yet at that time recovered : and giving forth signs of joy , the general sitting abaft with a book in his hand , cried out unto us in the Hind ( so oft as we did approach within hearing ) We are as near to heaven by sea as by land . Reiterating the same speech , well beseeming a soldier , resolute in Jesus Christ , as I can testify he was . 
 The same Monday night , about twelve of the clock , or not long after , the Frigate being ahead of us in the Golden Hind , suddenly her lights were out , whereof as it were in a moment , we lost the sighed , and withal our watch cried , the general was cast away , which was too true . For in that moment , the Frigate was devoured and swallowed up of the Sea. Yet still we looked out all that night , and ever after , until we arrived upon the coast of England : Omitting no small sail at sea , unto which we gave not the tokens between us , agreed upon , to have perfect knowledge of each other , if we should at any time be separated . 
 In great torment of weather , and peril of drowning , it pleased God to send safe home the Golden Hind , which arrived in Falmouth , the 22 day of September , being Sonday , not without as great danger escaped in a flaw , coming from the Southeast , with such thick missed , that 
 we could not discern land , to put in right with the Haven . 
 From Falmouth we went to Dartmouth , & lay there at anchor before the Range , while the captain went aland , to inquire if there had be any news of the Frigate , which sailing well , might happily have be before us . Also to certify Sir John Gilbert , brother unto the 
 general of our hard success , whom the Captain desired ( while his men were yet aboard him , and were witnesses of all occurrents in that voyage , ) It might please him to take the examination of every person particularly , in fi-ey Gilbert . discharge of his and their faithful endeavour . Sir John 
 A fit motion of the Captain unto sir Hum - 
 Gilbert refused so to do , holding himself satisfied with report made by the Captain : and not altogether despairing of his brother's safety , offered friendship and courtesy to the Captain and his company , requiring to have his Bark brought into the harbour : in furtherance whereof , a boat was sent to help to tow her in . 
 Nevertheless , when the Captain returned aboard his ship , he found his men bent to depart , every man to his home : and then the wind serving to proceed higher upon the coast : they demanded money to carry them home , some to London , others to Harwich , and elsewhere , ( if the bark should be carried into Dartmouth , and they discharged , so far from home ) or else to take benefit of the wind , then serving to draw nearer home , which should be a less charge unto the Captain , and great ease unto the men , having else far to go . 
 Reason accompanied with necessity persuaded the Captain , who sent his lawful excuse and cause of his sudden departure unto sir John Gilbert , by the boat of Dartmouth , and from thence the Golden Hind departed , and took harbour at Waimouth . All the men tired with the tediousness of so unprofitable a voyage to their seeming : in which their long expense of time , much toil and Anillrecom-labour , hard diet and continual hazard of life was un - Pense-recompensed : their Captain nevertheless by his great charges , impaired greatly thereby , yet comforted in the 
 goodness of God , and his undoubted providence following him in all that voyage , as it does always those at other times , whosoever have confidence in him alone . Yet have we more near feeling and perseverance of his powerful hand and protection , when God does bring us together with others into one same peril / in which he leaveth them , and delivereth us , making us thereby the beholders , but not partakers of their ruin . 
 Even so , among very many difficulties , discontentments , mutinies , conspiracies , sicknesses , mortality , spoilings , and wracks by sea , which were afflictions , more then in so small a Fleet , or so short a time may be supposed , albeit true in every particularity , as partly by the former relation may be collected , and some I suppressed with silence for their sakes living , it pleased God to support this company , ( of which only one man died of a malady inveterate , and long infested ) : the rest kept together in reasonable contentment and concord , beginning , continuing , and ending the voyage , which none else did accomplish , either not pleased with the actium , or impatient of wants , or prevented by death . 
 Thus have I delivered the contents of the enterprise and last actium of sir Humfrey Gilbert knight , faithfully , for so much as I thought meet to be published : wherein may always appear , ( though he be extinguished ) some sparks of his virtues , he remaining firm and resolute in a purpose by all pretence honest and godly , as was this , to discover , possess , and to reduce unto the service of God , and Christian piety , those remote and heathen Countries' of America , not actually possessed by Christians , and most rightly appertaining unto the Crown of England : unto the which , as his zeal deserveth high commendation : even so , he may justly be taxed of temerity and presumption ( rather ) in two respects . 
 First , when yet there was only probability , not a certain & determinate place of habitation selected , neither any demonstration of commodity there in esse , to induce his followers : nevertheless , he both was too prodigal of 76 
 his own patrimony , and too careless of other men's expenses , to employ both his and their substance upon a ground imagined good . The which falling , very like his associates were promised , and made it their best reckoning to be salved some other way , which pleased not God to prosper in his first and great preparation . 
 Secondly , when by his former preparation he was enfeebled of ability and credit , to perform his designments , as it were impatient to abide in expectation better opportunity and means , which God might raise , he thrust himself again into the actium , for which he was not fit , presuming the cause pretended on Gods behalf , would carry him to the desired end . Into which , having thus made reentry , he could not yield again to withdraw , though he saw no encouragement to proceed , lest his credit foiled in his first attempt , in a second should utterly be disgraced . Between extremities , he made a right adventure , putting all to God and good fortune , and which was worst , refused not to entertain every person and means whatsoever , to furnish out this expedition , the success whereof hath be declared . 
 But such is the infinite bounty of God , who from ■ Affllctimis every evil deriveth good . For beside that fruit may grow in time of our traveling into those . Northwest lands , the crosses , turmoils , and afflictions , both in the preparation and execution of this voyage , did correct the intemperate humours , which before we noted to be in this Gentleman , and made unsavoury , and less delightful his other manifold virtues . 
 Then as he was refined , and made nearer drawing unto the image of God : so it pleased the divine will to resume him unto himself , whither both his , and every other high and noble mind , have always aspired . 
 