Certain observations touching the countries' and places where we traveled . 
 He Newfoundland we found very subject to fogs and mists . The ground of it is very rocky : and upon it there is great store of fir trees , 
 and in some places read ; and about the shore it hath great abundance of codfish . We were on land in it in 180 
 1597-foure several places : 1 At Caplin bay and Farrillon : 
 2 At Cape Raze : 3 At the harbour of Lano , which lies foure leagues to the West beyond Cape Laurence : 4 At S. Marry port . 
 The Island of Menego for the soil is much like Newfoundland , but the fish about it , as also throwout the Grande Bay within Cape Briton , is much larger and better then that of the Newfoundland . This Island is scant two leagues long , and very narrow . In the midst of it , a great way within the wood is a great pool . Here we were thrice on shore : once at the East side , and twice at the West . 
 The three Islands of birds are sandy read , but with the multitude of birds upon them they look white . The birds fit there as thick as stones lie in a paved street . The greatest of the Islands is about a mile in compass . The second is little less . The third is a very little one , like a small rock . At the second of these three lay on the shore in the Sunshine about thirty or forty seaoxen or morses : which when our boat came never them , presently made into the sea , and swam after the boat . 
 Brions Island we found to be very good , and sandy ground . It hath in it store of fir trees . It is somewhat more then a league long , and about three leagues in compass . Here we were on land once , and went from the one side of it to the other . 
 The Island of Ramea we took to be like ground as Brions Island , having also abundance of fir trees . It seems to be in length about twelve or thirteene leagues at least . We were there in harbour , but not on shore , which we much desired , and hoped to have be : but the conflict which we had there with the Basks and Britons , mentioned before , prevented us . 
 The Isle Blanche likewise seems in quality of the ground and bigness of it to be much like Brions Island aforesaid , but Somewhat less . We were not on shore upon it , but road before it at anchor . 
 The land of Cape Briton we found to be somewhat like 
 181 
 the Newfoundland , but rather better . Here towards the West end of it we saw the clouds lie lower then the hills : as we did also at Cape Laurence in Newfoundland . The Easterly end of the land of Cape Briton is nothing so high land , as the West . We went on shore upon it in five places : i At the bay where the Chancewell was cast away : 2 At Cibo : 3 At a little Island between Cibo and the New port : 4 At the New port : And 5 at Port Ingles , or the English port . 
 Concerning the nature and fruitfulness of Brions Island , Isle Blanche , and of Ramea , they do by nature yield exceeding plenty of wood , great store of wild corn like barley , strawberries , gooseberries , mulberries , white roses , and store of wild peason . Also about the said Islands the sea yields great abundance of fish of diverse sorts . And the said Islands also seem to proffer , through the labour of man , plenty of all kind of our grain , of roots , of hemp , and other necessary commodities . 
 Charles Leigh . 
 