A relation of the first voyage and discovery of the Isle Ramea , made by for Monsieur de La court Pre Ravillon , and Grand Pre , with the ship called the Bonaventure , to kill and make Train oil of the beasts called the Morses with great teeth , which we have performed by Gods help this year 1591. 
 Or the performance of our said voyage , we departed from S. Malo with the fleet that went for Canada , and kept company with the ships called The Soudil and the Charles half the way , and then lost them ; a violent wind arising at Northwest , which separated us . 
 After which we had fair weather , and came to the coast of Cape Raze , & had no further knowledge thereof , because the wind was at the Southwest but a scarce gale : and we came to the sounding Southwest of the Isles of S. Peter about 10. leagues , where we found 20. fathoms water , and we sailed Northwest one quarter of the North , and came within 12. leagues of Cape de Rey. 
 The next day being the 6. of May 1591 , we were come to Cape de Rey , & saw a ship Southwest off us , and stayed there that night . 
 The next day being the seventh of the said month , we came to the Isles of Aponas , where we put forth our boat , because we had not passed 8. leagues to our haven , which we kenned very clearly , although the coasts lay very low : and because the night approached , and the wind grew very high , we sought not to seek our port , because it is very hard to find it when the wind is lofty , because of the shoalds that are about it . 
 And we thought to keep our course until the next 
 morning between the Isle of Brion & the Isle of The high of 
 Aponas . But there arose so great a tempest at the Bmn ' 
 Southwest , that without the help of God we had be 
 in great danger among these Isles . And we traversed up and down eleven days , making our prayers unto God to end the tempest and to send us fair weather , that we might obtain our haven : which of his goodness he gave us . The last of May we ranged the Isle high °f Ramea on the Northnorthwest side , unto the contrary Bamea-part of the land , where it trendeth to the Southsoutheast : and seeing no land on the West side , we ranged the said land to the East one quarter to the North at the least 15. leagues , and being from the shore some eight leagues , we found 15 fathoms water , and passed between the Isle of Duoron and the Isle of Ramea , where goes high * f a channel of 3. leagues breadth ; in the midst whereof Uuoron-you shall have 7. 8. and 9. fathoms water . And the low point of the Isle Ramea , and the Isle Duoron lie Northnortheast , and Southsouthwest . And take heed you come not near the low point of the Isle Ramea by a great league , for I have sounded it at 3. fathoms water . The Isle is marked . And the harbour of the Isle Ramea lies Northeast and Southwest , one quarter to the East and West . And if you would enter the said harbour , keep you a league ofF the shore : for often times there is great danger . 
 And that you may know the said haven , to the The market of Eastnortheast of the said Isle there are high lands appearing to them that are without on all sides like a * number of Islands , but in very deed they are all firm land : and if you come on the South and Southwest side , you shall see a hill divided into 3. parts , which I called The three hillocks , which is right within the haven . And for another better mark of the said harbour , you shall see and Isle like unto a Flower de lice , - And Isle like a distant from the said haven 6. leagues at the least : and F °ure de llce-this Isle and the said haven lie Northeast and Southwest , 
 I51 
 Cape du Chapt. 
 The main a should coast . 
 Lisle Blanche . The place where they killed 1500. Morses . 
 The Isle Hupp . 
 a quarter to the North and South . And on the said Isle there is good pebble stone to dry fish upon : But to the west thereof there is a very fair country : and there is a bank of sand , which runneth the length of a cable , having not passed one fathom water upon it . From the said Isle along the firm land the coast lies East and West , and you shall see as it were a great forest running eastward : and the Eastern Cape is called Cape du Chapt , and is great and read towards the Sea. And between the said lands you shall see as it were a small Island , but it joineth to the firm land on the Southwest part : and there is good shingle to dry fish on . And you must coast the shore with boats and not with ships , by reason of the shallows of the said coast . For I have seen without Cape du Chapt in fair weather the ground in two fathoms water , near a league and and half from shore , and I judged by reason of the highness of the land , that there had be above thirtie fathoms water , which was nothing so : and I have sounded coming near the shore , in more or less depth . The coast stretcheth three leagues to the West from Lisle Blanch , or the white Isle , unto the entrance of a river , where we slew and killed to the number of fifteene hundred Morses or Sea oxen , accounting small and great , where at full sea you may come on shore with boats , and within are two or three fathoms water . From thence the coast trendeth foure leagues to the West J to the Northwest unto the Isle Hupp , which is twentie leagues in circuit , and is like the edge of a knife : upon it there is neither wood nor grass : there are Morses upon it , but they be hard to be taken . From thence the coast trendeth to the Northwest and Northnorthwest ; which is all that 1 have seen , to wit , the two sides and one end of the Isle . And if I had had as good luck as my Master's , when I was on the Northwest side with my ship , I would have adventured to have sailed Southsoutheast , to have discovered the Eastern shore of the said Isle . 
 * 52 
 In your return to the East , as you come from the Sands and haven of Cape du Chapt unto the said haven , are sh°ltis-sandes and sholds . And three good leagues from Cape - ^s^ } san^ du Chapt there is a small Island conteimng about a ig^ gf league of ground : where there is and haven towards ground . the Southeast : and as you enter into the said haven on the starreboord side , a dented Cape all of red land . And you cannot enter into the said haven but A hard haven . with the flood , because of a bar which lies half a league without the points of the said haven . The tides are there at Southeast and Northwest ; but when the wind is very great , it blows much into the haven at half flood . But ordinarily it flows five foot and and half . The marks to enter into the said haven Market to are to leave the Isle Blanche or White Island at your c^ne^lt0 the coming in on the starreboord ; and the point of the ’ haven toward the West hath a thick Island , which you shall see on the other side , and it hath a little round Buttress , which lies on the East side of the Island . There are also two other buttresses more easy to be seen then hidden : these are not to the East but to the West , and they have marks on them . Here you shall not have above two fathom and and half at a full sea upon this bar . And the sounding is stone and rough ground . At your entering in , when you shall find white sand which lies next the Southeast of the Cape , then you are upon the bar : and be not afraid The Bar . to pass up the channel . And for marks toward the West athwart the bar , when you have brought and Island even , which lies to the westward without , with the thick part of the high land which lies most to the West , you shall be passed the bar : and the channel runneth due North . And for your anchoring The best anin the said haven , see that you carefully seek the midst of the said Thick land , which lies in the bottom of the said haven : for you must anchor between two banks of sand , where the passage is but narrow . And you must anchor surely : for there goes 
 T53 
 a great tIED : for the Sea runneth there as swiftly and more then in . There is good ground and ankorage here : and you shall ride in three fathom water . And within the said haven there is nothing to hurt you , for you are free from all winds . And if by chance you should be driven Westward of the said haven , you may seek and entrance , which is right over against the small Island nam before , which is called The Isle of Cormorants ; and you may enter in there as at the other haven at a full sea : And you must pass upon the West side , and you shall find on the Bar at a full sea fourteene foot water , and great depth when you are entered in : for the Sea runneth very swiftly in that place : and the entry thereof lies Southeast and Northwest . 
 Right over against you on the other side , you may pass with boats at a full sea . And all these entrances make all but one haven , which is good within . I say this , because I have passed into the main Sea by the one and the other passage . And the said Isle is not passed two leagues over in the midst . It is but two banks of sand , whereof one is like to that of S. Malo , which let the Sea from passing through the midst of all the Isle : But the two ends are high mountains with Islands altogether cut and separated with streams and rivers . 
 To anchor in the said harbour , you must not ride farther then five or sixe cables length from the said haven . 
 