How after the departure of the two ships which were sent back into Britaine , and that the Fort was begun to be built , the Captain prepared two boats to go up the great River to discover the passage of the three Saults or falls of the River . 
 THE said Captain having dispatched two ships to return to carry news , according as he had in charge from the king , and that the Fort was begun to be built , for preservation of their victuals and other things , determined with the Viscount of Beaupre , and other Gentlemen , Master's , and Pilots chosen for counsel , to make a voyage with two boats furnished with men and victuals to go as far as Hochelaga , of purpose to view and understand the fashion of the Saults of water , which are to be passed to go to Saguenay , that he might be the readier in the spring to pass farther , and in the Winter time to make all things needful in a readiness for their business . The foresaid boats being made ready , the Captain and Martine de Painpont , with other Gentlemen and the remnant of the Mariners departed from the said place of Charlesburg Royal the seventh day of September in the year aforesaid 1540. And the Viscount of Beaupre stayed behind for the guarding and government of all things in the Fort. And as they went up the river , the Captain went to see the Lord of Hochelay , which dwells between Canada and Hochelaga : which in the former voyage had given unto the said Captain a little girl , and had oftentimes informed him of the treasons which Taignoagny and Domagaya ( whom the Captain in his former voyage had carried into France ) would have wrought against him . In regard of which his courtesy the said Captain would not pass by without visiting of him , and to let him understand that the Captain thought himself beholding unto him , he gave unto him two young boys , 269 
 The Viscount of Beaupre and the rest of their council . 
 The rich country of Saguenay situated beyond the Saults which are in 44. deg . They depart from Charlesburg Royal the 7. of Septem . 
 The Town ofTutonaguy . 
 bade ground and a great current . 
 A Town of friendly people . 
 Another village of good people which dwell over against the second Salt . 
 and left them with him to learn their language , and bestowed upon him a cloak of Paris read , which cloak was set with yellow and white buttons of Tin , and small bells . And withal he gave him two Basins of Laton , and certain hachets and knives : whereat the said Lord seemed highly to rejoice , and thanked the Captain . This done , the Captain and his company departed from that place : And we sailed with so prosperous a wind , that we arrived the eleventh day of the month at the first Salt of water , which is two leagues distant from the Town of Tutonaguy . And after we were arrived there , we determined to go and pass as far up as it was possible with one of the boats , and that the other should stay there till it returned : and we double manned her to row up against the course or stream of the said Salt . And after we had passed some part of the way from our other boat , we found bad ground and great rocks , and so great a current , that we could not possibly pass any further with our Boat . And the Captain resolved to go by land to see the nature and fashion of the Salt . And after that we were come on shore , we found hard by the water side a way and beaten path going towards the said Saults , by which we took our way . And on the said way , and soon after we found and habitation of people which made us great cheer , and entertained us very friendly . And after that he had signified unto them , that we were going towards the Saults , and that we desired to go to Saguenay , foure young men went along with us to show us the way , and they brought us so far that we came to another village or habitation of good people , which dwell over against the second Salt , which came and brought us of their victuals , as Pottage and Fish , and offered us of the same . After that the Captain had inquired of them as well by signs as words , how many more Saults we had to pass to go to Saguenay , and what distance and way it was thither , this people showed us and gave us to understand , that we were at the 
 270 
 1540. second Salt , and that there was but one more to pass , They were at that the River was not navigable to go to Saguenay , and that the said Salt was but a third part farther then ' r-wgr vtz had travailed , showing us the same with certain little navigable to sticks , which they laid upon the ground in a certain pass to Sague-distance , and afterwards laid other small branches be - na9 ' tween both , representing the Saults . And by the said mark , if their saying be true , it can be but sixe leagues by land to pass the said Saults . 
 Here after follows the figure of the three Saults . 
 AFter that we had be advertised by the said people , of the things abovementioned , both because the day was far spent , and we had neither drunk nor eaten the same day , we concluded to return unto our boats , and we came thither , where we found great store of people to the number of 400. persons or thereabouts , which 400 persons seemed to give us very good entertainment and to rejoice of our coming : And therefore our Captain gave ‘ eke of them certain small trifles , as combs , brooches of tin and copper , and other small toys , and unto the chief men every one his little hatchet & hook , Tike °f whereat they made certain cries and ceremonies of joy . new ^Ibim . But a man must not trust them for all their fair ceremonies and signs of joy , for if they had thought they had be too strong for us , then would they have done their best to have killed us , as we understood afterwards . The Savages This being done , we returned with our boats , and passed by the dwelling of the Lord of Hochelay , with whom the ’ Captain had left the two youths as he came up the river , thinking to have found him : But he could find no body save one of his sons , who told the Captain that he was gone to Maisouna , as our boys also told us , saying , that it was two days since he departed . But The §avages in truth he was gone to Canada to conclude with Agona , conspire towhat they should do against us . And when we were gether against arrived at our Fort , we understood by our people , that the Trench . 
 271 
 A very great number of Savages assembled together . 
 The Saults are in 44. deg . and worser easy to pass . 
 But 5. leagues journey to pass the 3 Saults . 
 the Savages of the Country came not any more about our Fort as they were accustomed , to bring us fish , and that they were in a wondered doubt and fear of us . Wherefore our Captain , having be advertised by some of our men which had be at Stadacona to visit them , that there were a wonderful number of the Country people assembled together , caused all things in our fortress to be set in good order : etc. 
 The rest is wanting . 
 