The voyage of Monsieur Roberval from his Fort in Canada unto Saguenay , the fifth of June , I543 - 
 The 5. of June . 
 The 6. of June . 
 Monsieur de Royeze . 
 The 14 of June . 
 Onsieur Roberval the kings Lieutenant general in the Countries of Canada , Saguenay , and Hochelaga , departed towards the said province of Saguenay on the Tuesday the 5. day of June 1543. after supper : and he with all his furniture was embarked to make the said voyage . 
 But upon a certain occasion they lay in the Road over against the place before mentioned : but on the Wednesday about sixe of the clock in the morning they set sail , and sailed against the stream : in which voyage their whole furniture was of eight barks , aswell great as small , and to the number of threescore and ten persons , with the aforesaid general . 
 The general left behind him in the aforesaid place and Fort thirtie persons to remain there until his return from Saguenay , which he appointed to be the first of July , or else they should return into France . And he left there behind him but two Barks to carry the said thirtie persons , and the furniture which was there , while he stayed still in the Country . 
 And for effectuating hereof , he left as his Lieutenant a gentleman nam Monsieur de Royeze , to whom he gave commission , and charged all men to obey him , and to be at the commandment of the said lieutenant . 
 The victuals which were left for their maintenance until the said first day of July , were received by the said Lieutenant Royeze . 
 On Thursday the 14. of June Monsieur de 1’Espiney , la Brosse , Monsieur Frete , Monsieur Longeval , and others , returned from the general , from the voyage of Saguenay . 
 And note that eight men and one Bark were drowned 288 
 SIR WALTER RALEGH’S PATENT and lost , among whom was Monsieur de Noire Fontaine , and one nam la Vasseur of Constance . 
 On Tuesday the 19. of June aforesaid , there came from the general , Monsieur de Villeneufue , Talebot , and three others , which brought sixescore pounds weight of their corn , and letters to stay yet until Magdalen-tyde , which is the 22. day of July . 
 The rest of this Voyage is wanting . 
 A.D. 
 1584. 
 The 19 of June . 
 Maiz. 
 The 22. of July 1543. 
 The Voyages and Navigations of the English t111 - 2+3-l nation to Virginia , and the several discoveries thereof chiefly at the charges of the honourable Sir Walter Ralegh knight , from 33 to 40 degrees of latitude : together with the success of the English colonies there planted : as likewise a de - 
 scription of the Country , with the Inhabitants , and the manifold commodities . Whereunto are annexed the patents , letters , discourses , etc. to this part belonging . 
 