And extract of Master Ralph Lanes letter to M. Richard Hakluyt Esquire , and another Gentleman of the middle Temple , from Virginia . 
 N the mean while you shall understand , that since Sir Richard Greenvils departure from us , as also before , we have discovered the main to be the goodliest oil under the cope of heaven , so abounding with sweet trees , that bring such sundry rich and pleasant gums , 
 grapes of such greatness , yet wild , as France , Spaine nor Italie have no greater , so many sorts of Apothecary drugs , such several kinds of flax , & one kind like silk , the same gathered of a grass , as common there , as grass is here . And now within these few days we have found here Maiz or Guinie wheat , whose ear yields corn for bred 400. upon one ear , and the Cane makes very good and perfect sugar , also Terra Samia , otherwise Terra sigillata . Beside that , it is the goodliest and most pleasing Territory of the world : for the continent is of and huge and unknown greatness , and very well peopled and towned , though savagely , and the climate so wholesome , that we had not one sick since we touched the land here . To conclude , if Virginia had but horses and kine in some reasonable proportion , I dare assure my self being inhabited with English , no realm in Christendome were comparable to it . For this already we find , that what commodities soever Spaine , France , Italy , or the East parts do yield unto us , in wines of all sorts , in oils , in flax , in rosens , pitch , frankincense , corrans , sugars , and such like , these parts do abound with the growth of them all , but being Savages that possess the land , they know no use of the same . And sundry other rich commodities , that no parts of the world , be they West or East Indies , have , here we find great abundance of . The people naturally are most 
 The rich and manifold commodities of Virginia . 
 Commodities courteous , and very desirous to have clothes , but especially Virgula * course does rather then silk , course canvas they also ' like well of , but copper carrieth the price of all , so it be made read . Thus good M. Hakluyt and M. H. I have joined you both in one letter of remembrance , as two that I love dearly well , and commending me most heartily to you both , I commit you to the tuition of the Almighty . From the new Fort in Virginia , this third of September , 1585. 
 Your most assured friend Ralph Lane . 
 