MY Lord Admiral of Chastillon , a noble man more desirous of the public then of his private benefit , understanding the pleasure of the King his prince , which was to discover new and strange Countries' , caused vessels fit for this purpose to be made ready with all diligence , and men to be levied meet for such and enterprise : Among whom he chosen Captain John Ribault , a man in truth expert in sea causes : which having received his charge , set himself to Sea the year 1562. the eighteenth of Februarie , accompanied only with two of the kings ships , but so well furnished with Gentlemen , ( of whose number I my self was one ) and with old Soldiers , that he had means to achieve some notable thing and worthy of eternal memory . Having therefore sailed two months , never holding the usual course of the Spaniards , he arrived in Florida , landing near a Cape or Promontory , which is no high land , because the coast is all flat , but only rising by reason of the high woods , which at his arrival he called Cape Francois in honour of our France . This Cape is distant from the Equator about thirtie degrees . Coasting from this place towards the North , he discovered a very fair and great River , which gave him occasion to cast anchor that he might search the same the next day very early in the morning : which being done by the break of day , accompanied with Captain Fiquinville and diverse other soldiers of his ship , he was no sooner arrived on the brink of the shore , but straight he perceived many Indians men and women , which came of purpose to that place to receive the Frenchmen with all gentleness and amity , as they well declared by the Oration which their king made , and the presents of Chamois skins wherewith he honoured our Captain , which the day following caused a pillar of hard stone to be planted within the said River , and not far from the mouth of the same upon a little sandy knap , in which pillar the 
 457 
 A.D. 
 1587. 
 The first voyage of John Ri-baulttoFlorida 1562. 
 The course of the Spaniards not altogether necessary . 
 Cape Francois in 30. degrees . 
 Apillar setup . 
 Arms of France were carved and engraved . This being done he embarked himself again , to the end always to discover the coast towards the North which was his chief desire . After he had sailed a certain time he crossed over to the other side of the river , and then in the presence of certain Indians , which of purpose did attend him , he commanded his men Prayer and to make their prayers , to give thanks to GOD , for thankestoGod . tjjat of grace he had conducted the French nation unto these strange places without any danger at all . The prayers being ended , the Indians which were very attentive to harken unto them , thinking in my judgement , that we worshipped tbe Sun , because we always had our eyes lifted up towards heaven , rose all up and came to salute the Captain John Ribault , promising to show him their King , which rose not up as they did , but remained still sitting upon green leaves of Baize and Palmetrees : towards whom the Captain went and sat down by him , and herd him make a long discourse , but with no great pleasure , because he could not understand his language , and Presents given much less his meaning . The King gave our Captain to Ribault . at h-s departure a plume or fan of Hernshawes feathers died in read , and a basket made of Pa { me-boughes after the Indian fashion , and wrought very artificially , and a great skin painted and drawn throughout with the pictures of diverse wild beasts so lively drawn and portrayed , that nothing lacked but life . The Captain to show himself not unthankful , gave him pretty tin bracelets , a cutting hook , a looking glass , and certain knives : whereupon the King showed himself to be very glad and fully contented . Having spent the most part of the day with these Indians , the Captain embarked himself to pass over to the north side of the River , whereat the king seemed to be very sorry . Nevertheless being not able to stay us , he commanded that with all diligence they should take fish for us : which they did 458 
 with all speed . For being entered into their Wears Their fish-or enclosures made of redes and framed in the fashion of a Labirynth or Maze , they loaded us with Trouts , great Mullets , Plaise , Turbuts , and marvelous store of other sorts of fish altogether different from ours . 
 This done , we entered into our Boats and went They pass towards the other shore . But before we came to the shore , we were saluted with a number of other Indians , which entering into the water to their armpits , brought us many little baskets full of Maiz , and goodly Mui - Goodly mulberries both read and white : Others offered themselves to bear us on shore , where being landed we per - ’ ceived their King sitting upon a place dressed with boughs , and under a little Arbour of Cedars and Bay trees somewhat distant from the waters side . He was accompanied with two of his sons which were exceeding fair and strong , and with a troop of Indians who had all their bows and arrows in marvelous good order . His two sons received our Captain very graciously : but the king their father , representing I wot not what kind of gravity , did nothing but shake his head a little : then the Captain went forward to salute him , and without any other moving of himself he retained so constant a kind of gravity , that he made it seem unto us that by good and lawful right he bore the title of a King . Our Captain knowing not what to judge of this men behaviour , though he was jealous because we went first unto the other king , or else that he was not well pleased with the Pillar or Column which he had planted . While thus he knew not what hereof to think , our Captain showed him by signs , that he was come from a far Country to seek him , to let him understand the amity which he was desirous to have with him : for the better confirmation whereof , he drew out of a budget certain trifles , as certain bracelets covered as it were with silver and guilt , which he presented him withal , and gave his sons certain 
 459 
 other trifles . Whereupon the King began very lovingly to entreat both our Captain and us . And after these gentle entertainments , we went our selves into the woods , hoping there to discover some singularities : where were great store of Mulberry trees white and read , Great store of on the tops whereof there was and infinite number of silkworms . sjlkewormes . Following our way we discovered a fair and great meadow , divided notwithstanding with diverse Marishes , which constrained us by reason of the water , which environed it about , to return back again toward the Rivers side . Finding not the King there , which by this time was gone home to his house , we entered into our Boats and sailed toward our ships : The river of where after we arrived , we called this River The River of 
 May , because we discovered it the first day of the said month . 
 Soon after we returned to our ships , we weighed our anchors and hoised our sails to discover the coast farther forward , along the which we discovered another fair River , which the Captain himself was minded to search out , and having searched it out with the king and The river of inhabitants thereof , he nam it Seine , because it is very ke unto the River of Seine in France . From this River we retired towards our ships , where being arrived , we trimmed our sails to sail further towards the North , and to descry the singularities of the coast . But we had not sailed any great way before we discovered another very fair River , which caused us to cast anchor over against it , and to trim out two Boats to go to search it out . we found there and He The River of anJ a king no less affable then the rest , afterward we r nam this River Somme . From thence we sailed about sixe leagues , after we discovered another River , The Rivers of which after we had viewed was nam by us by the Cherente , name of Loyre . And consequently we there discovered Grande $ve ot^ers : whereof the first was nam Cherente , the Belle ’ second Garonne , the third Gironde , the fourth Belle , the 
 Grande . fift Grande : which being very well discovered with such 
 460 
 things as were in them , by this time in less then the space of threescore leagues we had found out many singularities along nine Rivers . Nevertheless not fully satisfied we say led yet further to ward the North , following the course that might bring us to the River of Jordan one of the fairest Rivers of the North , and holding our wonted course , great fogs and tempests came upon us , which constrained us to leave the coast to bear towards the main Sea , which was the cause that we lost the sighed of our Pinnaces a whole day and a night until the next day in the morning , what time the weather waxing fair and the Sea calm , we discovered a River which we called Bellei a veoir . After we had . 
 sailed three or foure leagues , we began to espy our a veoir . Pinnaces which came straight towards us , and at their arrival they reported to the Captain , that while the foul weather and fogs endured , they harboured themselves in a mighty River which in bigness and beauty exceeded the former : wherewithal ! the Captain was exceeding joyful , for his chief desire was to find out and Haven to harbour his ships , and there to refresh our selves for a while . Thus making thitherward we arrived athwart the said River , ( which because of the fairness and largeness thereof we nam Port Royal ) River °f we struck our sails and cast anchor at ten fathom of water : for the depth is such , namely when the Sea ° 
 begins to flow , that the greatest ships of France , yea , the Arguzes of Venice may enter in there . Having cast anchor , the Captain with his Soldiers went on shore , and he himself went first on land : where we found the place as pleasant as was possible , for it was all covered over with mighty high Oaks and infinite store of Cedars , and with Lentisks growing underneath them , smelling so sweetly , that the very fragrant odour only made the place to seem exceeding pleasant . As we passed thorough these woods we saw nothing but , , 
 Turkeycocks flying in the Forests , Partridges grey and porridges* ' read , little different from ours , but chiefly in bigness . grey and read . 
 461 
 we herd also within the woods the voices of Stags , of Bears , of Lusernes , of Leopards , & diverse other sorts of Beasts unknown unto us . Being delighted with this place , we set our selves to fishing with nets , & Fish in abun - we caught such a number of fish , that it was wondered ! . dance . And among other we took a certain kind of fish which we call Sallicoques , which were no less then Crevices , so that two draughts of the net were sufficient to feed all the company of our two ships for a whole The River 3. day . The River at the mouth thereof from Cape to leaguesat Cape is no less then 3. French leagues broad ; it is 
 m°u ’ divided into two great arms , whereof the one runneth 
 towards the West , the other towards the North : And I believe in my judgement that the arm which stretcheth . toward the North runneth up into the Country as 
 A passage by far as the River Jordan , the other arm runneth into a river into g as was known anj understood by those of our company , which were left behind to dwell in this place . These two arms are two great leagues broad : and in the midst of them there is and He , which is pointed towards the opening of the great River , in which Hand there are infinite numbers of all sorts of Store of rare strange beasts . There are Simples growing there of so simples . rare prOpertieS ) anJ in so great quantity , that it is and 
 excellent thing to behold them . On every side there is nothing to be seen but Palmetrees , and other sorts of trees bearing blossoms and fruit of very rare shape and very good smell . But seeing the evening approach , and that the Captain determined to return unto the ships , we prayed him to suffer us to pass the night in this place . In our absence the Pilots and chief Mariners advertised the Captain that it was needful to bring the ships further up within the River , to avoid the dangers of the winds which might annoy us , by reason of our being so near to the mouth of the River : and for this cause the Captain sent for us . Being come to our ships , we sailed three leagues further up within the River , and there we cast anchor . A little while 462 
 after , John Ribault accompanied with a good number Gibault salleth of soldiers embarked himself , desirous to sail further 
 • * J th a RtVfgf 
 up into the arm that runneth towards the West , and to ' search the commodities of the place . Having sailed twelve leagues at the least , we perceived a troop of Indians , which assoon as ever they espied the Pinnaces , were so afraid that they fled into the woods leaving behind them a young Lucerne which they were a turning upon a spit : for which cause the place was called Cape Cape Lucerne . Lucerne : proceeding forth on our way , we found another arm of the River , which ran towards the East , up which the Captain determined to sail and to leave the great current . A little while after they began to espy diverse other Indians both men and women half hidden within the woods : who knowing not that we were such as desired their friendship , were dismayed at the first , but soon after were emboldened , for the Captain caused store of merchandise to be showed them openly whereby they knew that we meant nothing but well unto them : and then they made a sign that we should come on land , which we would not refuse . At our coming on shore diverse of them came to salute our general according to their barbarous fashion . Some of them gave him skins of Chamois , others little baskets made of Chamois . Palm leaves , some presented him with Pearls , but no Pearls . great number . Afterwards they went about to make and arbour to defend us in that place from the parching heat of the Sun . But we would not stay as then . Wherefore the Captain thanked them much for their good will , and gave presents to each of them : wherewith he pleased them so well before he went thence , that his sudden departure was nothing pleasant unto them . For knowing him to be so liberali , they would have wished him to have stayed a little longer , seeking by all means to give him occasion to stay , showing him by signs that he should stay but that day only , and that they desired to advertise a great Indian Lord which had toreofpearies Pearls in great abundance , and Silver also , all which and silver . 
 463 
 things should be given unto him at the Kings arrival : saying further that in the mean time while that this great Lord came thither , they would led him to their houses , and show him there a thousand pleasures in shooting , and seeing the Stag killed , therefore they prayed him not to deny them their request . Notwithstanding we returned to our ships , where after we had be but one night , the Captain in the morning commanded to put into the Pinnace a pillar of hard stone fashioned like a column , wherein the Arms of the king of France were graved , to plant the same in the fairest place that he could find . This done , we embarked our selves , and sailed three leagues towards the West : where we discovered a little river , up which we sailed so long , that in the end we found it returned into the great current , and in his return to make a little Hand separated from the firm land , where we went on shore : and by commandment of the Captain , because it was exceeding fair and pleasant , there we planted thee A Pillar of Pillar upon a hillock open round about to the view , and free stone environed with a lake half a fathom deep of very good Arms of and sweet water . In which Hand we saw two Stags France were of exceeding bigness , in respect of those which we had graved , set up seen before , which we might easily have killed with our he^lvertf11 harquebusses , if the Captain had not forbidden us , Port Royal. moved with the singular fairness and bigness of them . 
 But before our departure we nam the little river which The river of environed . this He , The River of Liborne . Afterwards 1 orne - embarked our selves to search another He not far 
 distant from the former : wherein after we had gone a land , we found nothing but tall Cedars , the fairest that The lie of were seen in this Country . For this cause we called Cedars . it jie of Ceciars : so we returned into our Pinnace to go towards our ships . 
 A few days afterwards John Ribault determined to return once again towards the Indians which inhabited that arm of the River which runneth towards the West , and to carry with him good store of soldiers . For 464 
 his meaning was to take two Indians of this place to bring them into France , as the Queen had commanded him . With this deliberation again we took our former course so far forth , that at the last we came to the self same place where at the first we found the Indians , from thence we took two Indians by the permission of the king , which thinking that they were more favoured then the rest , thought themselves very happy to stay with us . But these two Indians seeing we made no Two Indians show at all that we would go on land , but rather that taken awa^ we followed the midst of the current , began to be somewhat offended , and would by force have leapt into the water , for they are so good swimmers that immediately they would have got into the forests . Nevertheless being acquainted with their humour , we watched them narrowly and sought by all means to appease them : which we could not by any means do for that time , though we offered them things which they much esteemed , which things they disdained to take , and gave back again whatsoever was given them , thinking that such gifts should have altogether bound them , and that in restoring them they should be restored unto their liberty . In fine , perceiving that all that they did availed them nothing , they prayed us to give them those things which they had restored , which we did incontinent : 
 then they approached one towards the other and began to sing , The doleful agreeing so sweetly together , that in hearing their song it seemed that they lamented the absence of their friends . ' They continued their songs all night without ceasing : all which time we were constrained to lie at anchor by reason of the tIED that was against us , but we hoised sail the next day very early in the morning , and returned to our ships . Assoon as we were come to our ships , every one sought to gratify these 2 Indians , & to show them the best countenance that was possible : to the intent that by such courtesies they might perceive the good desire and affection which we had to remain their friends in time to come . Then we offered them meat to eat , but they 
 vin 465 2 g 
 The Indians eat not before the sun be set . 
 Laudonniers putting down in writing the words and phrases of the Indians speech . 
 The feast of Toya . 
 This seems to be La grand Gopal , 
 refused it , and made us understand that they were accustomed to wash their face and to stay until the Sun were set before they did eat , which is a ceremony common to all the Indians of New France . Nevertheless in the end they were constrained to forget their superstitions , and to apply themselves to our nature , which was somewhat strange unto them at the first . They became therefore more jocunde , every hour made us a 1000 discourses , being merveilous sorry that we could not understand them . A few days after they began to bear so good will towards me , that , as I think , they would rather have perished with hunger & thirst , then have taken their refection at any men hand but mine . Seeing this their good will , I sought to learn some Indian words , & began to ask them questions , showing them the thing whereof I desired to know the name , how they called it . They were very glad to tell it me , and knowing the desire that I had to learn their language , they encouraged me afterwards to ask them every thing . So that putting down in writing the words and phrases of the Indian speech , I was able to understand the greatest part of their discourses . Every day they did nothing but speak unto me of the desire that they had to use me well , if we returned unto their houses , and cause me to receive all the pleasures that they could devise , aswell in hunting as in seeing their very strange and superstitious ceremonies at a certain feast which they call Toya . Which feast they observe as straightly as we observe the Sunday . They gave me to understand , that they would bring me to see the greatest Lord of this country which they called Chiquola , which exceeds them in height ( as they told me ) a good foot and a half . They said unto me that he dwelled within the land in a very large place and enclosed exceeding high , but I could not learn wherewith . And as far as I can judge , this place whereof they spoke unto me , was a very fair city . For they said unto me that within the enclosure there was great store of houses which were built very high , wherein there was and infinite number of men like 
 466 
 unto themselves , which made none account of gold , of silver , nor of pearls , seeing they had thereof in abundance . I began then to show them all the parts of heaven , to the intent to learn in which quarter they dwelled . And straightway one of them stretching out his hand showed me y‘ they dwelled towards the North , which makes me think that it was the river of Jordan . And now I remember , that in the reign of the Emperor Charles the fift , certain Spaniards inhabitants of S. Domingo ( which made a voyage to get certain slaves to work in their mines ) stole away by subtlety the inhabitants of this river , to the number of 40 , thinking to carry them into their new Spaine . But they lost their labour : for in despite they died all for hunger , saving one that was brought to the Emperor , which a little while after he caused to be baptised , and gave him his own name & called him Charles of Chiquola , because he spoke so much of this Lord of Chiquola whose subject he was . Also , he reported continually , that Chiquola made his abided within a very great enclosed city . Beside this proof , those which were left in the first voyage have certified me , that the Indians showed them by evident signs , that farther within the land towards the North , there was a great enclosure or city , where Chiquola dwelled . After they had stayed a while in our ships , they began to be sorry , and still demanded of me when they should return . I made them understand that the Captains will was to send them home again , but that first he would bestow apparel of them , which few days after was delivered unto them . But seeing he would not give them licence to depart , they resolved with themselves to steal away by night , and to get a little boat which we had , and by die help of the tIED to sail home towards their dwellings , and by this means to save themselves . 
 Which thing they failed not to do , and put their enter - The 2 Indians prize in execution , yet leaving behind them the apparel escafe awa3-which the Captain had given them , and carrying away nothing but that which was their own , showing well 467 
 hereby that they were not void of reason . The Captain cared not greatly for their departure , considering they had not be used otherwise then well : and that therefore they would not estrange themselves from the Frenchmen . Captain Ribault therefore knowing the singular fairness of this river , desired by all means to encourage some of his men to dwell there , well foreseeing that this thing might be of great importance for the Kings service , and the relief of the Common wealth of France . Therefore proceeding on with his intent , he commanded the anchors to be weighed and to set things in order to return unto the opening of the river , to the end that if the wind came fair he might pass out to accomplish the rest of his meaning . When therefore we were come to the mouth of the river , he made them cast anchor , whereupon we stayed without discovering any thing all the rest of the day . The next day he commanded that all the men of his ship should come up upon the deck , saying that he had somewhat to say unto them . They all came up , and immediately the Captain began to speak unto them in this manner . 
 