The description of the West Indies in generail , but chiefly and particularly of Florida . 
 America unknown to all antiquity . 
 Hat part of the earth which at this day we call the fourth part of the world , or America , or rather the West India , was unknown unto our ancestors by reason of the great distance thereof . In like manner all the Western Islands and fortunate Isles were not discovered but 
 by those of our age . Howbeit there have been some which have said that they were discovered in the 448 
 time of Augustus Caesar , and that Virgil hath made mention thereof in the sixt book of his TEneidos , when he says , There is a land beyond the stars , and the course of the year and of the Sun , where Atlas the Porter of heaven sustaineth the pole upon his shoulders : nevertheless it is easy to judge that he means not to speak of this land , whereof no man is found to have written before his time , 
 Colon or Counterfeit - 
 lumbe . 
 neither yet above a thousand years after . Christopher Christopher Colon did first light upon this land in the year 1592. 
 And five years after Americus went thither by the Americus Ves-commandement of the king of Castile , and gave unto puciusofwhom it his own name , whereupon afterwards it was called ' ’ ' 
 America . This man was very well seen in the Art of Navigation and in Astronomic : whereby he discovered in his time many lands unknown unto the ancient Geographers . This Country is nam by some , the land of Bresill , and the land of Parots . It stretcheth it self , according unto Postell , from the 
 America took the name . 
 Thefirst generail part of America . 
 Cabota in the year 1597 had discovered 
 .. - . — .. .. all this tract 
 one Pole to the other , saving at the straight of Magelan , for the crown 
 whereunto it reaches 53. degrees beyond the Equator , of England . I will divide it for the better understanding into three 
 principali parts . That which is towards the Pole Arcticke on the North is called new France , because that in the 
 year 1524. John Verrazzano a Florentine was sent by King Francis the first , and by Madam the Regent his mother unto these new Regions , where he went on land , and discovered all the coast which is from the Tropicke of Cancer , to wit , from the eight and twentieth unto the fiftieth degree , and father unto the North . He planted in this Country the Ensigns and Arms of the king of France : so that the Spaniardes themselves which were there afterward , have nam this Country Terra Francesca . The same then extendeth itself in Latitude 
 from the 25. degree unto the 54. towards the North : and in Longitude from 210. unto 330. The Eastern part thereof is called by the late writers The land of Norumbega , which begins at the Bay of Gama , 
 viii 449 2 F 
 The second general part of America . 
 The third general part of America . 
 ViUegaignon . 
 Florida with and ample description thereof . 
 which separateth it from the Isle of Canada , whither Jaques Carthier sailed the year 1535 - About the which there are many Hands , among which is that which is nam Terra de Labrador stretching toward Greenland . In the Western part there are many known Countries' , as the Regions of Quivira , Civola , Astatlan , and Terlichichimici . The Southern part is called Florida , because it was discovered on Palme-sunday , which the Spaniardes call Pascha Florida . The Northern part is altogether unknown . 
 The second part of all America is called new Spaine . It extendeth from the Tropicke of Cancer in twentie three degrees and a half , unto the ninth degree . In the same is situated the City of Themistitan , and it hath many Regions , and many Islands adjoined unto it , which are called the Antilles , whereof the most famous and renowned are Hispaniola and Isabella , with and infinite number of others . All this land , together with the Bay of Mexico , and all the Hands aforesaid , have not in Longitude passed seventie degrees , to wit , from the two hundreth and fortie , unto three hundreth and ten : it is also long and narrow as Italie . The third part of America is called Peru , it is very great , and extendeth it self in Latitude from the tenth degree unto the three and fiftieth beyond the Equator , to wit , as I have said before , unto the straight of Magelan . It is made in fashion like to and egg , and is very well known upon all sides . The part where it is largest hath threescore degrees , and from thence it waxes narrower and narrower towards both the ends . In one part of this land Villegaignon planted right under the Tropicke of Capricorne , and he called it France Antarctic , because it draws towards the pole Antarctic , as our France doth towards the Arctic . 
 New France is almost as great as all our Europe . Howbeit the most known and inhabited part thereof is Florida , whither many Frenchmen have made diverse voyages at sundry times , insomuch that now it is the 45° 
 best known Country which is in all this part of new France . The Cape thereof is as it were a long head of land stretching out into the Sea and hundred leagues , and runneth directly toward the South : it hath right over against it five and twentie leagues distant the Isle of Cuba otherwise called Isabella , towards the East the Isles of Bahama and Lucaya , and towards the West the Bay of Mexico . The Country is flat , and divided with diverse rivers , and therefore moist , and is sandy towards the Sea shore . There grows in those parts great quantity of Pinetrees , which have no kernels in the The trees of apples which they bear . Their woods are full of Oaks , Florida , Walnuttrees , black Cherrietrees , Mulberry trees , Lentisks , and Chestnut trees , which are more wild then those in France . There is great store of Cedars , Cypresses , Baize , Palm trees , Hollies , and wild Vines , which climb up along the trees and bear good Grapes . There 
 is there a kind of Meddlers , the fruit whereof is better These are per-then that of France , and bigger . There are also Plumtrees , which bear very fair fruit , but such as is not gavages call very good . There are Raspasses , and a little berry which Tunas . we call among us Blues , which are very good to eat . 
 There grow in that Country a kind of Roots which they call in their language Hasez , whereof in necessity they make bred . There is also there the tree called Esquine , which is very good against the Pocks and other contagious diseases . The Beasts best known in this The beasts of Country are Stags , Hinds , Goats , Dear , Leopards , Tlonda . Ounces , Luserns , diverse sorts of Wolves , wild Dogs , Hares , Cunnies , and a certain kind of beast that diflrer-eth little from the Lion of Africa . The fowls are Thefouk oj Turkeycocks , Partridges , Parrots , Pigeons , Ringdoves , Florida . Turtles , Blackbirdes , Crows , Tarcels , Falcons , Lay nerds , Herons , Cranes , Storks , wild Geese , Malards , Cormorants , Hernshawes , white , read , black and grey , and and infinite sort of all wild foul . There is such abundance of Crocodiles , that oftentimes in swimming men Crocodiles . are assailed by them ; of Serpents there are many sorts . 
 451 
 The mountains of Appalatcy . Store of dies and colours . 
 The disposition and manors of the Floridians . 
 The wearing of their hair . 
 Their exercise and pastime . Running for games . 
 Shooting . Playing at the Ball . 
 There is found among the Savages good quantity of Gold and Silver , which is got out of the ships that are lost upon the coast , as I have understood by the Savages themselves . They use traffic thereof one with another . And that which makes me the rather believe it , is , that on the coast toward the Cape , where commonly the ships are cast away , there is more store of Silver then towards the North . Nevertheless they say , that in the Mountains of Appalatcy there are Mines of Copper , which I think to be Gold . There is also in this Country great store of grains and herbs , whereof might be made excellent good dies and paintings of all kind of colours . And in truth the Indians which take pleasure in painting of their skins , know very well how to use the same . The men are of and Olive colour , of great stature , fair , without any deformity , and well proportioned . They cover their privities with the skin of a Stag well dressed . The most part of them have their bodies , arms , and thighs painted with very fair devises : the painting whereof can never be taken away , because the same is pricked into their flesh . Their hair is very black and reaches even down to their hips , howbeit they truss it up after a fashion that becomes them very well . They are great dissemblers and traitors , valiant of their persons & fight very well . They have none other weapons but their bows and arrows . They make the string of their bow of a gut of a Stag , or of a Stags skin , which they know how to dress as well as any man in France , and with as different sorts of colours . They head their arrows with the teeth of fish and stone , which they work very finely and handsomely . They exercise their young men to run well , and they make a game among themselves , which he wins that hath the longest breath . They also exercise themselves much in shooting . They play at the ball in this manner : they set up a tree in the midst of a place which is eight or nine fathom high , in the top whereof there is set a square mat made of redes or Bulrushes , which whoso - 
 45 2 
 Hunting . Fishing . Their form of war . 
 Their triumphs after the victory . 
 They worship 
 RENE LAUDONNIERE 
 ever hitteth in playing thereat , wins the game . They take great pleasure in hunting and fishing . The kings of the Country make great war one against the other , which is not executed but by surprise , and they kill all the men they can take : afterwards they cut of their heads to have their hair , which returning home they carry away , to make thereof their triumph when they come to their houses . They save the women and children and nourish them and keep them always with them . Being returned home from the war , they assemble all their subject's , and for joy three days and three nights they make good cheer , they dance & sing , likewise they make the most ancient women of the Country to dance , holding the hairs of their enemies in their hands : and in dancing they sing praises to the Sun , ascribing 
 unto him the honour of the victory . They have no M knowledge of God , nor of any religion , saving of that ’ which they see , as the Sun and the Moon . They have their Priests to whom they give great credit , Their Priests because they are great magicians , great soothsayers , and are . e . 
 callers upon devils . These Priests serve them in stead physicians . of Physicians and Chirurgeons . They carry always about them a bag full of herbs and drugs to cure the sick diseased which for the most part are sick of the pocks , for they love women & maidens exceedingly , which they call the daughters of the Sun : and some of them are Sodomites . They marry , and every one Their marri-hath his wife , and it is lawful for the King to have two ases ' or three : yet none but the first is honoured and acknowledged for Queen : and none but the children of the first wife inherit the goods and authority of the father . 
 The women do all the business at home . They keep The painefal-not house with them after they know they be with child . ness the And they eat not of that which they touch as long as ’ they have their flowers . There are in all this Country ManyHerma-many Hermaphrodites , which take all the greatest pain , and bear the victuals when they go to war . They the naiJe paint their faces much , and stick their hair full of both sexes . 
 453 
 Their food and provision for war . 
 Their dressing their flesh and fish over the smoke . 
 Their order in marching to the war . 
 Their consultations . 
 feathers or down , that they may seem more terrible . The victuals which they carry with them , are of bred , of honey , and of meal made of Maiz parched in the fire , which they keep without being marred a long while . They carry also sometime fish , which they cause to be dressed in the smoke . In necessity they eat a thousand rifraffes , even to the swallowing down of coals , and putting sand into the pottage that they make with this meal . When they go to war , their King marches first , with a club in the one hand , and his bow in the other , with his quiver full of arrows . All his men follow him , which have likewise their bows and arrows . While they fight , they make great cries and exclamations . They take no enterprise in hand , but first they assemble oftentimes their Council together , and they take very good advisement before they grow to a resolution . They meet together every morning in a great common house , whither their King repaireth , and sets him down upon a seat which is higher then the seats of the other : where all of them one after another come and salute him : Their saluting and the most ancient begin their salutations , lifting up of their kings , their hands twice as high as their face , saying , would , 
 he , ya , and the rest answer would , would . Assoon as they have done their salutation , every man sitteth him down upon the seats which are round about in the house . If there be any thing to entreat of , the King calls the Jawas , that is to say , their Priests , and the most ancient men , and asks them their advice . Afterwards he commandeth Cassine to be brewed , which is a drink made of thee The drinking leaves of a certain tree : They drink this Cassine very °LfonfhL me otte : he rinketh first , then he causeth to be given to battle thereof to all of them one after another in the same 
 boul , which holds well a quart measure of Paris . The honour ex - They make so great account of this drink , that no man menofvdure taste thereof in this assembly , unless he hath made above other . Proote ot his valour in the war . Moreover this drink The excellent - hath such a virtue , that assoon as they have drunk it aeof Cassine . they become all in a sweat , which sweat being passed , it 454 
 takes away hunger and thirst for foure and twenty hours after . When a King dyeth , they bury him very Their manner solemnly , and upon his grave they set the cup oft^^all wherein he was wont to drink : and round about the said grave they stick many arrows , and weep and fast three days together without ceasing . All the kings which were his friends make the like mourning : 
 and in token of the love which they bore him , they Their cutting cut of more then the one half of their hair , as well men as women . During the space of sixe Moons ( so tr they reckon their months ) there are certain women appointed which bewail the death of this King , crying with a loud voice thrice a day , to wit , in the Morning , at Noon , and at Evening . All the goods of this King are put into his house , and afterwards they set it on fire , so that nothing is ever more after to be seen . The like is done with the goods of the 
 Priests , and beside they bury the bodies of the Priests The burial of their Priests . Soioing twice in 6 months . 
 Maiz from the time that it is sowed until the time that it be ready to be gathered , is but three months on the ground . The other 6. months they let the earth rest . They have also fair Pumpions , & very Fair pumpi-good Beans . They never dung their land , only ms-when they would sow , they set the weeds on fire , Goodh Beans . which grew up the 6. months , and burn them all . 
 They dig their ground with and instrument of wood Instruments which is fashioned like a broad mattock , wherewith . 
 they dig their Vines in France , they put two grains 1 etr of Maiz together . When the land is to be sowed , ’ the King commandeth one of his men to assemble his subject's every day to labour , during which labour the King causeth store of that drink to be made for them , whereof we have spoken . At the time when The bringing the Maiz is gathered , it is all carried into a int0 a common common house , where it is distributed to every man house . 
 455 
 in their houses , and then they set them on fire . They sow their Maiz twice a year , to wit , in March and in June , and all in one and the same soil . The said 
 Their provi - according to his quality . They sow no more but sum of corn that which they think will serve their turns for for 6 months sixe months > & that very scarcely . For during the ' r^ir manner Winter they retire themselves for three or foure months of living in in the year into the woods , where they make little 
 the Winter , cottages of Palm boughs for their retreat , and live 
 there of Maste , of Fish which they take , of Oysters , of Stags , of Turkeycockes , and other beasts which Thedressingoj - they take . They eat all their meat broiled on thee their meat in coals , and dressed in the smoke , which in their the smoke . janguage they call Boucaned . They eat willingly the flesh of the Crocodile : and in deed it is fair and white : and were it not that it savoureth too much like Their manner Musk we would oftentimes have eaten thereof . They of curing dis - have a custom among them , that when they find eases ' themselves sick , where they feel the pain , whereas we cause ourselves to be let blood , their Physicians suck them until they make the blood follow . 
 Their women's The women are likewise of good proportion and ndm^rs tal1 ’ and °f the same colour that the men be of , ' painted as the men be : Howbeit when they are born , they be not so much of and Olive colour , and are far Oil in whiter . For the chief cause that makes them to be 
 Florida . of cojour proceeds of anointings of oil which 
 they use among them : and they do it for a certain ceremony which I could not learn , and because of the Sun which shines hight upon their bodies . The Women great agility of the women is so great , that they can swimmers . swim over the great Rivers bearing their children upon one of their arms . They climb up also very nimbly upon the highest trees in the Country . 
 Behold in brief the description of the Country , with the nature and customs of the Inhabitants : which I was very willing to write , before I entered any further into the discourse of my historic , to the end that the Readers might be the better prepared to understand that , which I mean hereafter to entreat of . 
 