The third voyage of the Frenchmen made by Captain John Ribault unto Florida . 
 The arrival of Captain John Ribault at the Fort the 28 of August 1565. 
 S I was thus occupied in these conferences , the wind and the tide served well to set sail , which was the eight and twentieth of August , at which instant Captain Vasseur which commanded in one of my ships , and Captain Verdier which was chief in the other , now 
 ready to go forth , began to descry certain sails at sea , whereof they advertised me with diligence : whereupon I appointed to arm forth a boat in good order to go to descry and know what they were . 1 sent also to the Centinels , which I caused to be kept on a little knap , to cause certain men to climb up to the top of the highest trees the better to discover them . They descried the great boat of the ships , which as yet they could not perfectly discern , which as far as they could judge , seemed to chase my boat , which by this time was passed the bar of the river : so that we could not possibly judge whither they were enemies which would have carried her away with them : for it was too great a ken to judge the truth thereof . Upon this doubt I put my men in order and in such array as though they had been enemies : and indeed I had great occasion to mistrust the same : for my boat came unto their ship about two of the clock in the afternoon , and sent me no news all that day long to put me out of doubt who they should be . The next Bay in the morning about eight or nine of the clock 1 saw seven boats ( among which mine own was one ) full of soldiers enter into the river , having every man his 
 harquebus and morion on his head , which marched all in battle along the cliffs where my centinels were , to whom they would make no kind of answer , notwithstanding all the demands that were made unto them , insomuch as one of my soldiers was constrained to bestow a shot at them without doing hurt nevertheless to any of them , by reason of the distance between him and the boats . The report hereof being made unto me , I placed each of my men in his quarter , with full deliberation to defend our selves , if they had be enemies , as in truth we thought them to have be : likewise I caused the two small field-pieces which I had left me , to be trimmed in such sort , as if in approaching to the Fort they had not cried that it was Captain Ribault , I had not failed to have discharged the same upon them . Afterwards I understood that the cause why they entered in this manner , proceeded of the false reports False reports which had be made unto my Lord Admiral by those which were returned into France in the first ships . ofprmce _ For they had put in his head , that I played the Lord and the King , and that I would hardly suffer that any other save my self should enter in thither to govern there . Thus we see how the good name of the most honest is oftentimes assailed by such , as having no means to win themselves credit by virtuous and laudable endeavours , think by debasing of other men's virtues to augment the feeble force of their faint courage , which nevertheless is one of the most notable dangers which The danger of vasif happen in a commonwealth , and chiefly among men of fbiting . war which are placed in government . For it is very hard , yea utterly unpossible , that in governing of a company of men gathered out of diverse places and sundry Nations , and namely such as we know them to be in our wars , it is , I say , unpossible , but there will be always some of evil conditions and hard to be ruled , which easily conceive and hatred against him , which by admonitions and light corrections endeavoureth to reduce them to the discipline of war . For they seek nothing else , but 
 Alcibiades banished by backbiters . 
 Laudonnieres receiving of Captain Ribault . 
 for a small occasion grounded upon a light pretext to found into the ears of great Lords that which mischievously they have contrived against those , whose execution of justice is odious unto them . And albeit I will not place my self in the rank of great and renowned Captains , such as lived in times passed , yet we may judge by their examples , how hurtful backbiters have been unto commonwealths . I will only take Alcibiades for witness in the commonwealth of the Athenians , which by this mean was cast into banishment , whereupon his citizens felt the smart of and infinite number of mischiefs : insomuch as in the end they were constrained to call him home again , and acknowledge at length the fault they had committed in forgetting his good services , and rather believing a false report , then having had regard unto so many notable exploits which in former time he had achieved . But that I lose not my self in digressing so far in this my justification , I will return again to my first course . Being therefore advertised that it was Captain Ribault , I went forth of the Fort to go to meet him , and to do him all the honour I could by any means , I caused him to be welcomed with the artillery , and a gentle volley of my shot , whereunto he answered with his . Afterwards being come on shore and received honourably with joy , I brought him to my lodging , rejoicing not a little because that in this company I knew a good number of my friends , which I entreated in the best sort that I was able , with such victuals as I could get in the country , and that small store which I had left me , with that which I had of the English General . Howbeit I marveiled not a little when as all of them with one voice began to utter unto me these or the like speeches . My Captain , we praise God that we have found you alive , and chiefly because we know , that the reports which have be made of you , are false . These speeches moved me in such sort , that I would needs out of hand know more , mistrusting some evil . Wherefore having accosted Captain John 
 Ribault , & going both of us aside together out of the Fort , he signified unto me the charge which he had , praying me not to return into France , but to stay with him my self and my company , and assured me that he would make it well thought of at home . Whereupon I replied that out of this place I would do him all service : that for the present I could not nor ought not accept this offer , since he was come for no other intent then to occupy the place which I before possessed , that I could have no credit to be there commanded : that my friends would never like of it , and that he would hardly give me that counsel , if in good earnest I should demand his advice therein . He made me answer , that he would not command me , that we should be companions , & that he would built another fortress , & that he would leave mine own unto me . This notwithstanding I fully advertised him that I could not receive a greater comfort then the news which he brought me to return into France : and farther that though I should stay there , yet it must needs be that one of us both was to command with title of the Kings Lieutenant , that this could not well agree together : that I had rather have it cast in my teeth to be the poorest beggar in the world , then to be commanded in that place , where I had endured so much to inhabit and plant there , if it were not by some great Lord or Knight of the order : and that in these respects I prayed him very heartily to deliver me the letters which my Lord Admiral had written unto me , which he performed . 
 