The foresaid Francis Lopez de Gomara in his general historic or the West Indies , Chap. 215. writeth in manner following of certain great and strange beasts never seen nor herd of in our known world of Asia , Europe , and Africa : which somewhat resembling our oxen , having high bunches on their backs like those on the backs of Camels , are therefore called by him Vacas corcobados , that is to say , Crookbacked oxen , being very deformed & terrible in show , and fierce by nature : which notwithstanding for food , apparel , and other necessary uses , are most serviceable and beneficial to the inhabitants of those countries' . He reported also in the same chapter of certain strange sheep as big as horses , and of dogs which use to carry burdens of 50. pound weight upon their backs . 
 A LI the way between Cicuic and Quivira is a most plain soil , without trees and stones , and hath but few and small towns . The men cloth and shoe themselves with leather ; and the women which are esteemed Captain Fro-for their long locks , cover their heads and secrets with bisher brought the same . They have no bred of any kind of grain , int0 England as they say : which I account a very great matter . Mita Their chiefest food is flesh , and that oftentimes they 5 ' eat raw , either of custom or for lack of wood . 
 They eat the fat as they take it out of the Ox , and drink the blood hot , and die not therewithal ! , though the ancient writers say that it kills , as Empedocles and others affirmed , they drink it also cold dissolved in water . They sees not the flesh for lack of pots , but rost it , or to say more properly , warm it at a fire of Ox-dung : when they eat , they chew their meat but little , and raven up much , and holding the flesh with their teeth , they cut it with razors of stone , which seems to be great bestiality : but such is their manner of living and fashion . They go together in companies , and move from one place to 167 
 The description of the oxen ofQuivira . 
 Sheep as big as horses . 
 Mighty dogs carrying 50. pound weight . 
 another , as the wild Moors of Barbarie called Alarbes do , following the seasons and the pasture after their Oxen. 
 These Oxen are of the bigness and colour of our Bulls , but their homes are not so great . They have a great bunch upon their before shoulders , and more hair on their before part then on their hinder part : and it is like wool . They have as it were and horse-mane upon their back bone , and much hair and very long from the knees downward . They have great tuffes of hair hanging down their foreheads , and it seems that they have beards , because of the great store of hair hanging down at their chins and throats . The males have very long tails , and a great knob or flock at the end : so that in some respect they resemble the Lion , and in some other the Carnell . They push with their homes , they run , they overtake and kill and horse when they are in their rage and anger . Finally , it is a foul and fierce beast of countenance and form of body . The horses fled from them , either because of their deformed shape , or else because they had never seen them . Their master's have no other riches nor substance : of them they eat , they drink , they apparel , they shoe themselves : and of their hides they make many things , as houses , shoes , apparel and ropes : of their bones they make bodkins : of their sinews and hair , thread : of their homes , maws , and bladders , vessels : of their dung , fire : and of their calves-skinnes , budgets , wherein they draw and keep water . To be short , they make so many things of them as they have need of , or as many as suffice them in the use of this life . 
 There are also in this country other beasts as big as horses , which because they have homes and fine wool , they call them sheep , and they say that every home of theirs weigheth is fiftie pound weight . 
 There are also great dogs which will fight with a bull , and will carry fiftie pound weight in sacks when they 168 
 go on hunting , or when they remove from place to place with their flocks and heards . 
 