A Letter of Francis Vazquez de Coronado , Governor of Nueva Galicia , to the lord DONE Antonio de Mendosa , Viceroy of Nueva Espanna . Dated in Saint Michael of Culiacan the 8. of March , 1539. 
 Of the hard passage from Saint Michael of Culiacan to Topira . The description of that Province , and of another near unto the same , very rich in gold and precious stones . The number of the people which Vazquez carried with him in his journey thither ; and how greatly Friar Marcus of Ni^a is honoured by the Indians of Petatlan . 
 Y the help of God I mean to set forward from this City of S. Michael of Culiacan towards Topira the 10. of April : neither can I any sooner set forward , because the powder and match which your Lordship sends me , cannot be brought thither before that time , and I think it be now 
 in Compostella . Beside this , I am to pass many leagues over mighty high mountains , which reach up to the skies , and over a River , which at this present is so big and swollen , that it can in no place be waded over . 
 118 
 And if I depart at the time aforesaid , they say we may wade over it . They told me that from hence to Topira was not above 50. leagues ; and I have learned since that it is above foure score leagues . I do not remember that I have written to your Lordship the information which I have of Topira : and though I had written thereof unto Topira . you , yet because that since that time I have learned something more , I think it meet to signify the same unto your Lordship in these my letters . It may please your honour therefore to understand , that they tell me , that Topira is a very populous Province , lying between two rivers , and that there are above 50. inhabited towns therein . And that beyond the same there is another - Another Country greater then it , the name whereof the Indians Sreater could not tell me , wherein there is great store or victuals of Maiz , French peason , Axi or Pepper , Melons , and Gourds , and great store of Hens of the country . The people wear on their bodies gold , Emeralds , and other precious stones , and are served commonly in gold and silver , wherewith they cover their houses : and the chief men wear great chains of gold well wrought , about their necks , and are appareled with painted garments , and have store of wild kine ; and they say they enter not into their country , because themselves have no great store of people : those Indians being many in number , and very valiant . That which here I say , I learned by two other relations of Indians dwelling near unto them . I mean to set forward at the time before mentioned , and I carry with me 150. horsemen , and twelve spare horses , and 200. footmen , crossebowmen , and gunners . I take also with me live hogs , sheep , and all such things as I can get for money : assure your Lordship that I mean not to return to Mexico , until I be able to inform your honour more perfectly , what the state of that place is : and if I find ought that we may do good in , I will stay there , until I have advertised your Lordship , that you may command what you will have done : and if it fallen out so unluckily , 
 119 
 [ III . 364. J These may seem to be the Pintados mentioned by Frier Marco de Niza in his 2. Chap. 
 A.D. 
 J539 - 
 that there be nothing of importance , I will seek to discover too . leagues farther , wherein ( I hope in God ) there will be something found in which your Lordship may employ all these gentlemen , and those which shall come hither hereafter . I think I cannot choose but stay there : and the waters , the seasons , and disposition of the country , and other accidents will direct me what is best to be done . Frier Marco de Ni^a entered a good way into the country , accompanied with Stephan Dorantez , the 7. of February last passed : when I departed from them , I left them with above 100. Indians of Petatlan , and from the time of their coming thither they greatly honoured the father , showing him all the courtesies they could possibly . I cannot send you , nor describe unto you his entrance among them better then I have done in all my relations which I wrote in my letters from Compostella , and I signified unto you all things to the full from the city of S. Michael : and though there be but the tenth part of those things , it is a great matter . Herewithal I have sent your Lordship a Letter , which I received from the said father : the Indians tell me , that all the people of the country do greatly reverence him : and I believe he may travel many leagues farther in that sort . He says , that if he find any good country , he will write to me thereof : I will not go thither without informing your Lordship of my journey . I hope in God , that by one way or other we shall discover some good thing . 
 