A relation of the reverend father Friar Marco de Nifa , touching his discovery of the kingdom of Cevola or Cibola , situate about 30. degrees of latitude , to the North of Nueva Espanna . 
 Chap. 1. 
 Frier Marco de Ni ? a departeth from Saint Michael in the Province of Culiacan , standing in 24. degrees of Northerly latitude : and coming to the Town of Petatlan , receives many courtesies of the Indians there . Departing from thence , he had information of many Islands , and of a great country inhabited with civil people ; he comes to Vacupa : where during his abode , he herd news of Cevola , and of the state of the 7. Cities , and of other provinces , & of the rich Islands of pearls , which extent northward upon the coast . 
 Frier Marco de Ni ? a of the order of S. Francis , for the execution of the instruction of the right honourable lord DONE Antonio de Mendosa , Viceroy and captain general for the Emperor's Majesty in New Spaine , departed from the town of S. Michael in the province 
 of Culiacan on Friday the 7. of March , in the year 1539. having for my companion Frier Honoratus , and carrying with me Stephan a Negro , belonging to Andrew Dorantez , and certain of those Indians which the said lord Viceroy had made free , and bought for this purpose : whom Francis Vazquez de Coronado governor of Nueva Galicia delivered me , and with many other Indians of Petatlan , and of the town called Cuchillo , which is some 50. leagues from Petatlan , who came to the valley of Culiacan , showing themselves to bee exceeding glad , because they were certified by the 
 I2S 
 Indians which had been set free , whom the said governor had sent before to advertise them of their liberty , that none of them from thenceforth should be made slaves , and that no man should invade them , nor use them badly ; signifying unto them , that the Emperor's Majesty had willed and commanded that it should be so . With the foresaid company I went on my voyage until I came to the town of Petatlan , finding all the way great entertainment , and provision of victuals , with roses , flowers , and other such things , and bowers which they made for me of chalk and boughs plaited together in all places where there were no houses . In this town of Petatlan I rested 3. days , because my companion Honoratus fell so sick , that I was constrained to leave him there behind . 
 Then , according to my said instruction , I followed my journey as the holy Ghost did lead me , without any merit of mine , having in my company the said Stephan the Negro of Dorantez , and certain of the Indians which had been set at liberty , and many of the people of the country , which gave me great entertainment and welcome in all places where I came , and made me bowers of trees , giving me such victuals as they had , although they were but small : because ( as they said ) it had not reigned there in 3 years , and because the Indians of this country sought means rather to hide themselves , then to sow corn , for fear of the Christians of the Town of S. Michael , which were wont to make inroads even to that place , and to war upon them , and to carry them away captives . In all this way , which may be about 25. or 30. leagues from that part of Petatlan , I saw nothing worthy the noting , save that there came to seek me certain Indians from the Island , where Fernando Cortez the Marks of the valley had been , of whom I was informed , that it was and island , & not firm land , as some suppose it to be . They came to you firm land upon certain rafts of wood : and from the main to the island is but half a league by sea , little more or less . Likewise cer-126 
 taine Indians of another island greater then this came A greatisland , to visit me , which island is farther off , of whom I was informed that there were 30. other small islands , which 
 were inhabited , but had small store of victuals , saving 2. new islands of which have Maiz or corn of the country . These In - California dians had about their necks many great shells which were rtchmpearles . mother of Pearl . I showed them pearls which I carried with me for a show , and they told me that there were in the Islands great store of them , and those very great : howbeit I saw none of them . I followed my voyage through a desert of 4. days journey , having in my company both the Indians of the islands , & those of the mountains which I had passed , and at the end of this desert I found other Indians which marveled to see me , because they had no knowledge of any Christians , having no traffic nor conversation with those Indians which I 
 had passed , in regard of the great desert which was worser desert fiure between them . These Indians entertained me exceeding daiesj°urne^-courteously , & gave me great store of victuals , & sought to touch my garments , and called me Hayota , which in their language signifies A man come from heaven . 
 These Indians I advertised by my interpreter , according to my instructions , in the knowledge of our Lord God in heaven , & of the Emperor . In these countries & in all places else by all ways and means possible , I sought in - formation where any Countries' were of more Cities and people of civility and understanding , then those which I had found : and I could hear no news of any such : howbeit they told me , that foure or five days journey within the Country , at the foot of the mountains , there is a large and mighty plain , wherein they told me , ™ s was the that there were many great Towns , and people clad in 
 Cotton : and when I showed them certain Metals which I ' 
 carried with me , to learn what rich Metals were in the Land , they took the minerali of Gold and told me , that thereof were vessels among the people of that plain , and that they carried certain round green stones hanging at their nostrils , and at their ears , 127 
 Vacupa a town 40. leagues from the Bay of California . 
 and that they have certain thin plataeae of that Gold , wherewith they scrape off their sweat , and that the walls of their Temples are covered therewith , and that they use it in all their household vessels . And because this Valley is distant from the Seacoast , and my instruction was not to leave the Coast , I determined to leave the discovery thereof until my return ; at which time I might do it more commodiously . 
 Thus I traveled three days journey through Towns inhabited by the said people , of whom I was received as I was of those which I had passed , and came unto a Town of reasonable bigness , called Vacupa , where they showed me great courtesies , and gave me great store of good victuals , because the soil is very fruitful , and may be watered . This Town is fortie leagues distant from the Sea. And because I was so far from the Sea , it being two days before Passion Sunday , I determined to stay there until Easter , to inform my self of the Islands , whereof I said before that I had information . And so I sent certain Indians to the Sea by three several ways , whom I commanded to bring me some Indians of the Seacoast and of some of those Islands , that I might receive information of them : and I sent Stephan Dorantez the Negro another way , whom I commanded to go directly Northward fiftie or threescore leagues , to see if by that way he might learn any news of any notable thing which we sought to discover , and I agreed with him , that if he found any knowledge of any peopled and rich Country which were of great importance , that he should go no further , but should return in person , or should send me certain Indians with that token which we were agreed upon , to wit , that if it were but a mean thing , he should send me a white Cross of one handful long ; and if it were any great matter , one of two handfuls long ; and if it were a Country greater and better then Nueva Espanna , he should send me a great cross . So the 
 12S 
 said Stephan departed from me on Passion-sunday after dinner : and within foure days after the messengers of Stephan returned unto me with a great Cross as high as a man , and they brought me word from Stephan , that I should forthwith come away after him , for he had found people which gave him information of a very mighty Province , and that he had certain Indians in his company , which had be in the said Province , and that he had sent me one of the said Indians . This Indian told me , that it was thirtie days Fr°m Vacupa journey from the Town where Stephan was , unto the ayes^6 first City of the said Province , which is called Cevola . jOumey . He affirmed also that there are seven great Cities in this Province , all under one Lord , the houses whereof are made of Lime and Stone , and are very great , and the least of them with one loft above head , and some of two and of three lofts , and the house of the Lord of the Province of foure , and that all of them join one unto the other in good order , and that in the gates of the principali houses there are many Turques-stones cunningly wrought , whereof he say they have there great plenty : also that the people of this City go very well appareled : and that beyond this there are other Provinces , all which ( he say ) are much greater then these seven cities . I gave credit to his speech , because I found him to be a man of good understanding : but I deferred my departure to follow Stephan Dorantes , both because I thought he would stay for me , and also to attend the return of my messengers which I had sent unto the Sea , who returned unto me upon Easter day , bringing with them certain inhabitants of the Seacoast , and of two of the Islands . Of whom I understood , that the Islands above mentioned were scarce of victuals , as I had learned 
 before , and that they are inhabited by people , which wear Greatpearles shells of Pearls upon their foreheads , and they say that tmd much gold they have great Pearls , and much Gold . They in - Isks °f formed me of foure and thirtie Islands , lying one near ichare’^ unto another : they say that the people on the Seacoast in number . 
 ix 129 1 
 have small store of victuals , as also those of the Islands , and that they traffic one with the other upon rafts . This coast stretcheth Northward as is to be seen . These Indians of the Coast brought me certain Targets made of Cow-hydes very well dressed , which were so large , that they covered them from the head to the very foot , with a hold in the top of the same to look out before : they are so strong , that a Crossbow ( as I suppose ) will not pierce them . 
 Chap. 2. 
 He hath new information of the seven Cities by certain Indians called Pintados , and of three other kingdoms called Marata , Acus , and Totonteac , being Countries' very rich in Turqueses and Hides of cattle . Following his voyage through those countries , he takes possession thereof for the Emperor's Majesty , and of the Indians is much honoured and served with victuals . 
 THe same day came three Indians of those which I called Pintados , because I saw their faces , breasts and arms painted . These dwell farther up into the country towards the East , and some of them border upon the seven cities , which said they came to see me , because they had herd of me : and among other things , they gave me information of the seven cities , and of the other Provinces , which the Indian that Stephan sent me had told me of , almost in the very same manner that Stephan had sent me word ; and so I sent back the people of the seacoast : and two Indians of the Islands said they would go with me seven or eight days . 
 So with these and with the three Pintados above mentioned , I departed from Vacupa upon Easter tuesday , the same way that Stephan went , from whom I received new messengers with a Cross of the bigness of the first which he sent me : which hastened me forward , 13° 
 and assured me that the land which I sought for , was the greatest and best country in all those parts . The said messengers told me particularly without failing in any one point , all that which the first messenger had told me , and much more , and gave me more plain information thereof . So I traveled that day being Easter tuesday , and two days more , the very same way that Stephan had gone : at the end of which 3 days they told me , that from that place a man might travel in thirtie days to the city of Cevola , which is the first of the seven . Neither did one only tell me thus much , but very many ; who told me very particularly of the greatness of the houses , and of the fashion of them , as the first messengers had informed me . Also they told me , that beside these seven Cities , there are 3. other kingdoms which are called Marata , Acus , and Totonteac . I inquired of them wherefore they traveled so far from their houses ? They said that they went for Turqueses , and Hides of kine , and other things ; and that of all these there was great abundance in this Country . Likewise I inquired how , and by what means they obtained these things ? They told me , by their service , and by the sweat of their brows , and that they went unto the first city of the Province which is called Cevola , and that they served them in tilling their ground , and in other businesses , and that they give them Hides of oxen , which they have in those places , and turqueses for their service , and that the people of this city wear very fine and excellent turqueses hanging at their ears and at their nostrils . They say also , that of these turqueses they make fine works upon the principali gates of the houses of this city . They told me , that the apparel which the inhabitants of Cevola wear , is a gown of cotton down to the foot , with a button at the neck , and a long string hanging down at the same , and that the sleeves of these gowns are as broad beneath as above . They say , they gird themselves with girdles of turqueses , and that over these 
 131 
 coats some wear good apparel , others hides of kine very well dressed , which they take to be the best apparel of that country , whereof they have there great quantity . Likewise the women go appareled , and covered down to the foot . These Indians gave me very good entertainment , and curiously inquired the day of my departure from Vacupa , that at my return they might provide me of food and lodging . They brought certain sick folks before me , that I might heal them , and sought to touch my apparel , and gave me certain Cow-hydes so well trimmed and dressed , that by them a man might conjecture that they were wrought by civil people , and all of them affirmed , ithat they came from Cevola . 
 The next day I followed my journey , and carrying with me the Pintados , I came to another Village where I was well received by the people of the same : who likewise sought to touch my garments , and gave me as particular knowledge of the Land aforesaid , as I had received of those which met me before : and also told me , that from that place certain people were gone with Stephan Dorantez foure or five days journey . And here I found a great cross , which Stephan had left me for a sign , that the news of the good Country increased , and left word , that with all haste they should send me away , and that he would stay for me at the end of the first Desert that he met with . Here I set up two Crosses , and took possession according to mine instruction , because that the Country seemed better unto me then that which I had passed , and that I thought it meet to make and act of possession as far as that place . 
 In this manner I travailed five days , always finding inhabited places with great hospitality and entertainments , and many Turqueses , and Ox-hides , and the like report concerning the country . Here I understood , that after two days journey I should find a desert where there is no food ; but that there were certain gone before to 132 
 built me lodgings , and to carry food for me : whereupon I hastened my way , hoping to find Stephan at the end thereof , because in that place he had left word that he would stay for me . Before I came to the desert , I met with a very pleasant Town , by A pleasant reason of great store of waters conveyed thither to water the same . Here 1 met with many people both men and women clothed in Cotton , and some covered with Oxe-hydes , which generally they take for better apparel then that of cotton . All the people of this Village go in Caconados , that is to say , with Turqueses hanging at their nostrils and ears : which Turqueses they call Cacona . among others , the Lord of this Village came unto me , and two of his brothers very well appareled in Cotton , who also were in Caconados , each of them having his collar of Turqueses about his neck : and they presented unto me many wild beasts , as Conies , Quails , Maiz , nuts of Pine trees , and all in great abundance , and ofiered me many Turqueses , and dressed Oxe-hydes , and very fair vessels to drink in , and other things : whereof I would receive no whit . And having my garment of grey cloth , which in Spaine is called farago^a , the Lord of this Village , and the other Indians touched my gown with their hands , and told me , that of such Cloth there was great store in Totonteac , and that the Store of woolpeople of that Country wore the same . Whereat I clot^and laughed , and said that it was nothing else but such fOfgnteac _ apparel of Cotton as they wore . And they replied : We would have thee think that we understand , that that apparel which thou wearest , and that which we wear are of diverse sorts . Understand thou , that in Cevola all the houses are full of that apparel which we wear , but in Totonteac there are certain little beasts , from whom they take that thing wherewith such apparel as thou wearest , is made . I prayed them to inform me more plainly of this matter . And they told me that the said beasts were about the bigness of the two 
 133 
 Collars ofturqueses two or three times double . 
 branches or spaniels which Stephan carried with him , and they say that there is great store of that cattle in Totonteac . 
 Chap. 3. 
 He entereth into a desert , and the Indians suffer him to want nothing necessary . Following his Voyage , he comes into a fertile valley , and hath certain knowledge given him ( as he had before ) of the state of Cevola and of Totonteac ; and that the coast of the sea in 35. degrees trendeth much to the Westward : and also of the kingdoms of Marata and Acus . 
 THe next day I entered into the Desert , and where I was to dine , I found bowers made , and victuals in abundance by a rivers side : and at night I found bowers and victuals in like sort , and after that manner I found for 4. days travel : all which time the wilderness continueth . 
 At the end of these foure days , I entered into a valley very well inhabited with people . At the first Village there met me many men and women with victuals , and all of them had Turqueses hanging at their nostrils and ears , and some had collars of turqueses like those which the Lord of the Village before I came to the Desert , and his two brothers wore : saving that they beware them but single about their necks , and these people wear them three or foure times double , and go in good apparel , and skins of Oxen : and the women wear of the said Turqueses at their nostrils and ears , and very good waistcoats and other garments . Here there was as great knowledge of Cevola , as in Nueva Espanna of Temis-titan , and in Peru of Cuzco : and they told us particularly the manner of their houses , lodgings , streets and marketplaces , as men that had be oftentimes there , and as those which were furnished from thence with things necessary for the service of their household , as those also had done , which I already had passed . I told them it was impossible that the houses should be 
 134 
 made in such sort as they informed me , and they for my better understanding took earth or ashes , and poured water thereupon , and showed me how they laid stones upon it , and how the building grew up , as they continued laying stones thereon , until it mounted aloft . I asked them whither the men of that Country had wings to mount up unto those lofts : whereat they laughed , and showed me a Ladder in as good sort as I my self was able to describe it . Then they took a Staff and held it over their heads , and said that the lofts were so high one above another . Likewise here I had information of the woollen cloth of Totonteac , where they say are houses like those of Cevola , and better and more in number , and that it is a great Province , and hath no governor . 
 Here I understood that the coast of the sea trended much towards the West : for unto the entrance of this first desert which I passed , the coast still stretched Northward : and because the trending of the coast is a Thtsgradu-thing of great importance , I was desirous to know and see it : and I saw plainly , that in 35. degrees the e^e^ees'at coast stretcheth to the West , whereat I rejoiced no the least . less , then of the good news within land , and so I returned back to proceed on my journey . 
 Through the foresaid valley I travailed five days journey , which is inhabited with goodly people , and so aboundeth with victuals , that it suffices to feed above three thousand horsemen : it is all well watered and like a garden : the burroughs and towns are half and a quarter of a league long , and in all these villages , I found very ample report of Cevola , whereof they made such particular relation unto me , as people which go yearly thither to earn their living . Here I found a man born in Cevola , who told me that he came thither , having escaped from the governor or Lieutenant of the town ; for the Lord of these seven Cities lives and abideth in one of those towns called Ahacus , and in the rest he appointeth lieutenants Ahacus . 
 135 
 under him . This townsman of Cevola is a white man of a good complexion , somewhat well in years , and of far greater capacity then the inhabitants of this valley , or then those which I had left behind me . He said that he would go with me , that I might beg his pardon : and of him I learned many particulars : he told me that Cevola was a great City , inhabited with great store of people , and having many Streets and Marketplaces : and that in some parts of this City there are certain very great houses of five stories high , wherein the chief of the City assemble themselves at certain days of the year . He sayeth that the houses are of Lime and Stone , according as others had told me before , and that the gates , and small pillars of the principali houses are of Turqueses , and all the vessels wherein they are served , and the other ornaments of their houses were of gold : and that the other sixe Cities are built like unto this , whereof some are bigger : and that Ahacus is the chiefest of them . He say that towards the Southeast there is a kingdom called Marata , and that there were wont to be many , and those great Cities , which were all built of houses of Stone , with diverse lofts ; and that these have and do wage war with the Lord of the seven cities , through which war this kingdom of Marata is for the most part wasted , although it yet continueth and maintaineth war against the other . 
 Likewise he says , that the kingdom called Totanteac lies towards the West , which he says is a very mighty Province , replenished with infinite store of people and riches : and that in the said Kingdom they wear woollen cloth like that which I wear , and other finer sorts of woollen cloth made of the fleeces of those beasts which they described before unto me : and that they are a very civil people . Moreover he told me , that there is another great Province and kingdom called Acus ; for there is Acus , and Ahacus with and aspiration , which is the principali of the seven cities : and Acus without and aspiration is a kingdom and Province of it self . He told me 136 
 also , that the apparel which they wear in Cevola is after the same manner as they before had certified me , and that all the inhabitants of the City lie upon beds raised a good height from the ground , with quilts and canopies over them , which cover the said Beds : and he told me that he would go with me to Cevola and farther also , if I would take him with me . The like relation was given unto me in this town by many others , but not so particularly . I traveled three days journey through this valley : the inhabitants whereof made me exceeding great cheer and entertainment . In this valley I saw above a thousand Ox-hides most excellently trimmed and dressed . And here also I saw far greater store of Turqueses and chains made thereof , then in all places which I had passed ; and they say , that all comes from the city of Cevola , whereof they have great knowledge , as also of the kingdom of Marata , and of the kingdoms of Acus and Totonteac . 
 Chap. 4. 
 Of a very great beast with one horn upon his forehead ; and of the courtesies which the Indians showed Frier Marcus of Niga , in his Voyage . Also how cruelly Stephan Dorantez and his companions were used upon their arrival at Cevola , by the Lord thereof . 
 HEre they showed me and hide half as big again mlghtie as the hide of a great ox , and told me that it 
 was the skin of a beast which had but one horn upon ' his forehead , 8c that this horn bendeth towards his breast , and that out of the same goes a point right forward , wherein he hath so great strength , that it will break any thing how strong so ever it be , if he run against it , and that there are great store of these beasts in that Country . The colour of the hide is of the colour of a great Goatskin , and the hair is a finger thick . Here I had messengers from Stephan which brought me word , that by this time he was come to 
 137 
 the farthest part of the desert , and that he was very joyful , because the farther he went , the more perfect knowledge he had of the greatness of the country , and sent me word , that since his departure from me , he never had found the Indians in any lie ; for even unto that very place he had found all in such manner as they had informed him , & hoped that he should find the like at his arrival in the valley which he was going unto , as he had found in the villages before passed . I set up crosses , and used those acts and ceremonies , which were to be done according to my instructions . The inhabitants requested me to stay here three or foure days , because that from this place there were foure days journey unto the desert , and from the first entrance into the same desert unto the Fifteene dales city of Cevola are 15 great days journey more ; also 
 that they would provide victuals for me and other 
 the end of thee . J r . r TO .... , , 
 desert to necessaries tor that voyage . Likewise they told me , 
 Cevola or that with Stephan the Negro were gone above 300 
 Clvola . men to bear him company , and to carry victuals after 
 him , and that in like sort many of them would go with me to serve me , because they hoped to return home rich . I thanked them , and willed them to set things in order with speed , and so I rested there three days , wherein I always informed my self of Cevola , and of as many other things as I could learn , and called many Indians unto me , and examined them severally , and all of them agreed in one tale , and told me of the great multitude of people , and of the order of the streets , of the greatness of the houses , and of the strength of the gates , agreeing altogether with that which the rest before had told me . After three days many assembled themselves to go with me , 30 of the principal of whom I took , being very well appareled , and with chains of turqueses , which some of them wear five or sixe times double , and other people to carry things necessary for them and me , and so set forward on my voyage . 
 138 
 Thus I entered into the second desert on the 9 of May , The second de-and traveled the first day by a very broad and beaten way , & we came to dinner unto a water , where the Indians had made provision for me : and at night we came to another water , where I found a house which they had fully made up for me , and another house stood made where Stephan lodged when he passed that way , and many old cottages and many signs of fire which the people had made that traveled to Cevola by this way . In this sort I traveled 12 days journey being always well provided of Twelve days victuals , of wild beasts , Hares , and Partridges of the doarney-same colour and taste with those of Spaine although they are not so big , for they be somewhat less . 
 Here met us and Indian the son of one of the chief men that accompanied me , which had gone before with Stephan , who came in a great fright , having his face and body all covered with sweat , and showing exceeding sadness in his countenance ; and he told me that a days journey before Stephan came to Cevola he sent his great Mace made of a gourd by his messengers , as he was always wont to send them before him , that he might know in what sort he came unto them , which gourd had a string of bells upon it , and two feathers one white and another read , in token that he demanded safe conduct , and that he came peaceably . And when they came to Cevola before the Magistrate , which the Lord of the ci tie had placed there for his Lieutenant , they delivered him the said great gourd , who took the same in his hands , and after he had spied the bells , in a great rage and fury he cast it to the ground , and willed the messengers to get them packing with speed , for he knew well enough what people they were , and that they should will them in no case to enter into the city , for if they did he would put them all to death . The messengers returned and told Stephan how things had passed , who answered them , that it made no great matter , and would needs proceed on his voyage till he came to 
 139 
 the city of Cevola : where he found men that would not let him enter into the town , but shut him into a great house which stood without the city , and straightway took all things from him which he carried to truck and barter with them , and certain turqueses , and other things which he had received of the Indians by the way , and they kept him there all that night without giving him meat or drink , and the next day in the morning this Indian was a thirst , and went out of the house to drink at a river that was near at hand , and within a little while after he saw Stephan running away , and the people followed him , and slew certain of the Indians which went in his company . And when this Indian saw these things , he hid himself on the banks of the river , and afterwards crossed the high way of the desert . The Indians that went with me hearing these news began incontinently to lament , and I thought these heavy and bad news would cost me my life , neither did I fear so much the loss of mine own life , as that I should not be able to return to give information of the greatness of that Country , where our Lord God might be glorified : and straightway I cut the cords of my budgets which I carried with me full of merchandise for traffic , which I would not do till then , nor give any thing to any man , and began to divide all that I carried with me among the principali men , willing them not to be afraid , but to go forward with me , and so they did . And going on our way , within a days journey of Cevola we met two other Indians of those which went with Stephan , which were bloody and wounded in many places : and assoon as they came to us , they which were with me began to make great lamentation . These wounded Indians I asked for Stephan , and they agreeing in all points with the first Indian said , that after they had put him into the foresaid great house without giving him meat or drink all that day and all that night , they took from Stephan all the things which he carried with him . The next day when 
 140 
 the Sun was a lance high , Stephan went out of the house , and some of the chief men with him , and suddenly came store of people from the city , whom assoon as he saw he began to run away and we likewise , and forthwith they shot at us and wounded us , and certain dead men fell upon us , and so we lay till night and durst not stir , and we herd great rumours in the city , and saw many men and women keeping watch and ward upon the walls thereof , and after this we could not see Stephan any more , and we think they have shot him to death , as they have done all the rest which went with him , so that none are escaped but we only . 
 Chap. 5. 
 The situation and greatness of the City of Cevola , and how friar Marcus took possession thereof and of other provinces , calling the same . The new kingdom of S. Francis , and how after his departure from thence being preserved by God in so dangerous a voyage , he arrived at Compostella in Nueva Galicia . 
 HAving considered the former report of the Indians , and the evil means which I had to prosecute my voyage as I desired , I thought it not good wilfully to lose my life as Stephan did : and so I told them , that God would punish those of Cevola , and that the Viceroy when he should understand what had happened , would send many Christians to chastise them : but they would not believe me , for they said that no man was able to withstand the power of Cevola . And herewithal I left them , and went aside two or three stones cast , and when I returned I found and Indian of mine which I had brought from Mexico called Marcus , who wept and said unto me : Father , these men have consulted to kill us , for they say , that through your and Stephans means their father's are slain , and that neither man nor woman of them shall remain unslain . 
 141 
 A.D. 
 1539 - 
 Then again I divided among them certain other things which I had , to appease them , whereupon they were somewhat pacified , albeit they still showed great grief for the people which were slain . I requested some of them to go to Cevola , to see if any other Indian were escaped , with intent that they might learn some news of Stephan ; which I could not obtain at their hands . When I saw this , I said unto them , that I purposed to see the city of Cevola , whatsoever came of it . They said that none of them would go with me . At the last when they saw me resolute , two of the chief of them said they would go with me ; with whom and with mine Indians and interpreters I followed my way , till I came within sighed of Cevola , which is situate on a plain at the foot of a round hill , and makes show to be a fair city , and is better seated then any that I have seen in these parts . The houses are built in order , according as the Indians told me , all made of stone with diverse stories , and flat roofs , as far as I could discern from a mountain , whither I ascended to view the city . The people are somewhat white , they wear apparel , and lie in beds , their weapons are bows , they have Emralds and other jewels , although they esteem none so much as turqueses , wherewith they adorn the walls of the porches of their houses , and their apparel and vessels , and they use them in stead of money through all the Country . Their apparel is of cotton and of ox hides , and this is their most commendable and honourable apparel . They use vessels of gold and silver , for they have no other mettle , whereof there is greater use and more abundance then in Peru , and they buy the Most rich same for turqueses in the province of the Pintados , where ” and der^n t^iere are say to mines °f great abundance . Of other The province of kingdoms I could not obtain so particular instruction . the Pintados . Diverse times I was tempted to go thither , because I knew I could but hazard my life , and that I had offered unto God the first day that I began my journey : in the end I began to be afraid , considering in what danger I 
 142 
 should put my self , and that if I should die , the knowledge of this Country should be lost , which in my judgement is the greatest and the best that hitherto hath been discovered : and when I told the chief men , what a goodly city Cevola seemed unto me , they answered me that it was the least of the seven cities , and that Toton - Totonteac the teac is the greatest and best of them all , because it hath so many houses and people , that there is no end of them . pnv-tnCe . Having seen the disposition and situation of the place , I thought good to name that Country El Nuevo reyno de san Francisco : in which place I made a great heap of stones by the help of the Indians , and on the top thereof I set up a small slender cross because I wanted means to make a greater , and said that I set up that cross and heap in the name of the most honourable Lord DONE Antonio de Mendosa Viceroy and Captain general of Nueva Espanna , for the Emperor our Lord , in token of possession , according to mine instruction . Which possession I said that I took in that place of all the seven cities , 8c of the kingdoms of Totonteac , of Acus , and of Marata . 
 Thus I returned with much more fear then victuals , He retumeth . and went until I found the people which I had left behind me , with all the speed that I could make , whom I overtook in two days travel , and went in their company till I had passed the desert , where I was A desert . not made so much of as before : for both men and women made great lamentation for the people which were slain at Cevola , and with fear I hastened from the people of this valley , and traveled tenne leagues A valley . the first day , and so I went daily eight or ten leagues , without staying until I had passed the second desert . A second And though I were in fear , yet I determined to go to desert . the great plain , whereof I said before , that I had information , being situate at the foot of the mountains , and in that place I understood , that this plain is inhabited for many days journey towards the East , but I durst not enter into it , considering , that if hereafter 
 ! 43 
 we should inhabit this other Country of the seven cities , and the kingdoms before mentioned , that then I might better discover the same , without putting my self in hazard , and leave it for this time , that I might give relation of the things which I had now seen . At the entrance of this plain 1 saw but seven Towns only of a reasonable bigness , which were a far off in a low valley being very green and a most fruitful soil , out of which ran many Rivers . I was informed that there was much gold in this valley , and that the inhabitants work it into vessels and thin plataeae , wherewith they strike and take ofF their sweat , and that they are people that will not suffer those of the other side of the plain to traffic with them , and they could not tell me the cause thereof . Here I set up two crosses , and took possession of the plain and valley in like sort and order , as I did at other places before mentioned . And from thence I returned on my voyage with as much haste as 1 could make , until I came to the city of Saint Michael in the province of Culiacan , thinking there to have found Francis Vazquez de Coronado governor of Nueva Galicia , and finding him not there , I proceeded on my journey Compostella in till I came to the City of Compostella , where I found 21. degrees of i wr | te not here many other particularities , because latitude . , .. , . r tO i i 
 they are impertinent to this matter : 1 only report that which I have seen , and which was told me concerning the Countries' through which I traveled , and of those which I had information of . 
 