A relation of the Haven of Tecuanapa , a most convenient place for building of ships , situate upon the South sea not far from Nicaragua , which was sent unto the viceroy of Mexico or to the king of Spaine : wherein are described the rivers of Ometepec , Tlacamama , and Tlacolula falling into the said Haven , with the towns , people , and mountains adjoining to the said rivers , and other things fit for the building and victualling of ships . 
 He Port and small harbour of Tecuanapa hath in the driest time of Summer in the channel little less then one fathom at low water , and at full sea one fathom and and half : in the time of rain , with the increasing of the land-water it hath three fathoms and more . It lies towards 
 the West , and there the Bishoprics of Guaxacan and Tlarcali are separated . From hence towards the point called Punta de Intla and Dordaci there is a Bay 2. leagues distant , which though it be no special harbour , yet upon and extremity ships may come and ride there , as in times passed they have done . This Bay on the right hand towards the North makes a lake somewhat large towards the midst of the channel , and in some parts deep , but specially on the side of Cuahintla , but on either side it is but shallow . As you pass between the sea & certain great and large woods of orange trees , and trees of other nature which grow along the sea coast , which are of no great breadth , all the country appears very open : howbeit on the side of Cuahintla the mountains have many creeks and a small lake called Tulaningo , and the country cannot be traveled , except you take the way between the sea and the end of this lake , which may be about two leagues of sandy way . 
 466 
 And on the North side there is another small creek . And going by the sands side one quarter of a league , you come to the way that leads unto Quacapotla a Quacapotla . mansion of Intla . 
 The river of Ometepec being the principal river river of which comes to this haven hath his head in the moun - ®metetec-taines of Xicayan the Touer about 24. leagues from this haven , from diverse brooks which come out of the mountains of Cacatepec , and beneath a town called Suchistlahuaca little more then 3. leagues all the brooks join together : and from that place you may pass down to the sea with Canoas and Lighters : and you might come farther but for the fallen of a furious stream or current which runneth between two great rocks , passing from Cocahulapa a mansion of Ometepec unto Yanguitle a mansion of the said Ometepec . These inconveniences being passed ( which in my judgement may be about one league ) the river is more navigable , so that you may sail in the same about 12. leagues . During the space of which 12. leagues , about a league and a half distance from the waters side , and in many other parts of the same river it hath great quantity of woods which use to grow in hight soils , fit for shiptimber , as Huber-trees , & Suchicuhitil , whereof they of Nicaragua make great profit . Also there be white Nicaragua . oaks and Tehegurtes in great quantity , and many other kinds of timber : and in the mountains there be firtrees , oaks , and cork-trees , which easily may be carried down the river , because they may be cut some 2 , 3 , 4 , and 5. leagues from the river , and may be brought down to the waters side with the service and help of those that dwell in the towns thereabouts . 
 At the head of these brooks where the river begins is the town which is called Xicaian , belonging to the Xicalan . heirs of Francis the Touer y de Guillen , containing about 350. Indians of rude speech and of little policy , being 24. leagues from the sea , little more or less . 
 467 
 The place it self is hight , although the mountains round about be cold . 
 A little from this is the town of Aioanapa possessed Aioanapa . by heirs of perez Gomez , having in it about 300. Indians of the self same speech and quality . The country is more subject to heat then cold ; yet hath it near it could countries' and mountains . It is distant from Xicaian de Touer 4. leagues , and from the sea 20. leagues . 
 Sixe leagues downward towards the South is the town Zuchistlahuaca . of Suchistlahuaca on the said river , and the inhabitants are of the same speech and qualities . The country is more subject to heat then cold . It is in the charge of Gonzalvo Fernandez a citizen of Mexico , and hath about 150. Indians , and is 15. leagues distant from the sea . 
 Ometepec . From this town unto the town of Ometepec are 6. leagues . The place is very hight , and in the same government , and is situate between certain hills one league from the river : he and his followers have under them about 700. Indians , which speak the Ayacastecan , Amusgan , and Niciecan tongues , and this place is from the sea nine leagues . 
 Ihualapa . From this town unto Ihualapa are two great leagues : it is in the government of the heirs of Laurence de Castro , of the foresaid temperature , and the people use the said language , and are of the like stature : and it stands three leagues from the river , and from the sea ten leagues . 
 These are the best towns , and of the best traffic that are upon all this coast . The Indians are rich in Cacao and victuals , and in these towns do the Indians Niciecan . of Niciecan principally trade . And in the town of Ihualapa the chief Alguazil of the province is resident for the most part of the year . 
 Pio a frontier More low beneath the river of Tlacolula , about a town against league or a league and and half from the town of the Mexicans . Ometepec is the town called Pio , which was wont to be 468 
 a town of Tlacolula , and was a frontier town against the Mexicans . There be in it about 50. Indians of the ancient inhabitants : one Graviel de Chiavez a citizen of Mexico hath the government thereof : it is 4. leagues from Ihualapa , and 6. from the sea . 
 A little below this is the town of Huehuatlan in the Huehuatlan . self same government standing one league from the river on certain high hills : it hath 10. Indians , and is from the sea 5. leagues . 
 And one league from this town stands the town of Cuahucapotla a mansion of Anda or Intla : it hath to the Cuahucapotla . number of 15. Indians ; it stands one league and a half from the river , and 4. leagues from the mouth thereof . 
 At the fountains or heads of the rest of the brooks is the town of Cacatepec being in the government of Cacatepec . Raphael de Treyo : he and his tenants have under them some 700. Indians of Niciecan : it is from the sea some 22. leagues . 
 The river which is called Tlacamama comes from tf the mountains of Atoyaque and Amusgos , which are Tlacamama-some 17. leagues from the sea . There it makes a formed river , so big , that it is navigable to the sea with canoas and lighters : I say from a little below Tolistla-huaca a mansion of Xicaian . It is navigable 8. months in the year , and the other 4. not , because that the sands of the plains do soak and drink up the water in such wise , that there remains so little , that there is no passage : howbeit in small lighters timber may be brought down this river one league from the place where it is cut , unto the place that I have spoken of ; whereas bigger vessels may be made ; for nigh unto that place other brooks and running waters do join and meet , which make it a main river . It hath nigh unto it in the mountains of Atoyaque , Cacatepec , and Amusgos many woods of pinetrees , cork-trees , and oaks of great bigness : and beneath those mountains in the warm country , near unto the rivers there is much 
 469 
 timber of those sorts which I mentioned before to be about the river of Ometepec , which may easily be cut and carried down unto Tecuanapa in the time before specified . 
 This river hath likewise towns adjoining to it ; the first at the foot of the mountains is the town of Atoiaque . Atoiaque belonging to the king , & to the heirs of Pronetto : their language is Niciecan , the country hight , the people politic , & it is from the sea 15. leagues . It hath about 200. Indians . 
 One league from this town , and 14. from the sea Xicaian . is the town of Xicaian belonging likewise to the king , and to the heirs of Pronetto . They are Niciecan people and very comely , and in a hight country . It hath by account 300. Indians . There are resident in it the Vicar and Justice ; it is from the river a league and a half . 
 A league from this town , and 14. from the sea is Pinotespan . situate the mansion of Pinotespan subject to Tututepec , which hath with the manors subject unto it 500. Indians . 
 Two leagues from the town , and one from Xicayan , and 13. from Tecuanapa , and 3. from the river is the The town of town of Tlacamama : the people are very comely and Tlacamama . pOiit ; que . it containeth some 100. Indians , and belongeth to the king . 
 More towards the South 5. leagues from the river , and two from this town , and 14. from the sea is the town called Pinotespan deal Rey : They are handsome people , but of slow speech : this town containeth about 100. 
 Indians like unto the former . They be wealthy , because A lake having they make great quantity of salt ; for they have a hard salt saite grows under the water , ( a thing 
 the water . repugnant to nature , that two contraries do grow 
 and are conserved together ) whereout they take it in breaking it with stones upon the ground under the water . 
 It hath also the town of Amusgos , which is in the 47° 
 government of Fernando de Avila , which may be from Tecuanapa 18. leagues . They speak the Amusgan tongue . The country is hot : it stands on the high way from Nicieca : it hath 400. Indians , few more or less . 
 These are all the towns of account situate near this river . 
 Near upon this river are two farms , the one belonging to Pedro Bravo , and the other to him that makes this relation unto your Excellency , which may be from the sea some 8. or 9. leagues all plain ground . And in this territory there is but one town called Quesala situate upon the river , and 6. leagues from the sea ; which in times passed hath been a great town , and now hath but three Indians only , and it is from the farms 3. leagues . 
 The mansion house of DONE Mattheo is more towards the South , standing in a large mountainous and waste country , which aboundeth with cattle being 3. leagues from the river ; and as far from Tecuanapa , as from the place where all the cattle is ; and the sea that way is from it but one league . 
 A little below this mansion about 4. leagues , and 7. leagues from the sea , is a garden of Alonso Pedraza which bears Cacao . 
 And 2. leagues from this garden and 6. leagues from the sea stands the town of Cuahintlan belonging to the king , a town of 19 households , but very rich , for they gather much Cacao and the best in that country . They speak the Tlapanecan tongue . This town hath the sea that way within half a league . 
 And this coast from Cuahintlan to Tecuanapa , and the coast which runneth to Huatulco is a coast of much pearl , for in old time the Indians gathered much pearl there . 
 And 2. leagues from Cuahintlan and 4. from Tecuanapa is a garden of Cacao in the lands of Francisco Maldonado , which is called Cacahu-Atoyaque . 
 471 
 Quesala . 
 Cuahintlan del Rey. 
 Huatulco or Guatulco in 15. deg . and 50. minutes . 
 The provinces of Tututepec and Tlapa . 
 These are the things worthy of relation from the head-springs of this river of Tlacamama unto the sea : and this foresaid river entereth into the river of Ometepec 5. leagues from Tecuanapa . 
 The river of Tlacolula springs within the bounds of Chilsiztlahuaca subject to Comastlahuaca a town of Suchistlahuaca , near which are many mountains . This river is navigable little more then 2. leagues before it entereth into the river of Ometepec , where it is 5. leagues from the sea . 
 Hard by it is the town of Tlacolula abovenamed ; and 3. leagues from it is the town of Azoyoque and old manor of Tlapa . The town of Chilsiztlahuaca hath but 3. Indians ; and the town of Azoyoque hath more then 300. Indians . But because in this haven must be the building of ships , the provinces of Tlapa and Tututepec may stand them in great stead ; the province of Tututepec being neighbour to the river of Tlacamama , and the province of Tlapa to the river of Tlacolula . For they may , as I have said , carry the timber in lighters or rafts down the rivers , and may use the Indians in the towns thereabouts to fell , and draw the same out of the cold mountains ; for in the warm countries the most is plain ground , whereas with very few men and oxen it may be brought unto the place where it should be embarked . 
 There may come flat bottoms , and canoas unto the towns thereabouts , and lade themselves with victuals : For they have already come by that river to the road of Ometepec , & made there provision at the mansion of DONE Mattheo , and at the farms , at that time when his Majesty did people the plains which are between these rivers , containing a large and void country sufficient for the erecting of 20. manors , being a country well furnished with water and pasture without any danger or peril , according to the description hereunto annexed . 
 This small harbour of Tecuanapa being seen and viewed , seems very commodious for to built ships 472 
 in , by reason of the great abundance of mountains full Tecuanapa a of good timber for that purpose , with the commodities of most fit har-rivers , and with the service and victuals from the towns p^idMpsfior thereabouts , which be very good for coast towns . South sea . 
 The desire of him that made this relation , hath be with zeal to serve your excellency ; who therewithal ! desires the Lord God to give the success . 
 