The travails of Job Hortop , which Sir John Hawkins set on land within the Bay of Mexico , after his departure from the Haven of S. John de Ullua in Nueva Espanna , the 8. of October 1568. 
 Ot untruly nor without cause said Job the faithful servant of God ( whom the sacred Scriptures tell us , to have dwelled in the land of Hus ) that man being born of a woman , living a short time , is replenished with many misery's : which some know by reading of histories , many 
 by the view of others calamities , and I by experience in my self , as this present Treatise ensuing shall show . It is not unknown unto many , that I Job Hortop powder-maker was born at Bourne , a town in Lincolnshire , from my age of twelve years brought up in Redriffe near London , with M. Francis Lee , who was the Queens Majesties powder-maker , whom I served , until I was pressed to go on the 3. voyage to the West Indies , with the right worshipful Sir John Hawkins , who appointed me to be one of the Gunners in her Majesties ship called the Jesus of Lubeck , who set sail from Plimmouth in the month of October 1567. having with him another ship of her Majesties , called the Minion , and foure ships of his own , namely the Angel , the Swallow , the Judith , and the William and John. He directed his Viceadmiral , that if foul weather did separate them , to meet at the Hand of Tenerif . After which by the space of seven days and seven nights , we had such storm es at sea , that we lost our long boats and a pinnace , with some men : coming to the Isle of 445 
 A temedie against foy-soned arrows . 
 The river of Calousa . 
 Tenerif , there our general herd that his Viceadmiral with the Swallow , and the William and John were at the Hand called Gomera , where finding his Viceadmiral , he anchored , took in fresh water , and set sail for Cape Blank , where in the way we took a Portugal caravel , laden with fish called Mullets : from thence we sailed to cape Verde . In our course thither we met a Frenchman of Rochel called captain Bland , who had taken a Portugal caravel , whom our vice admiral chased and took . Captain Drake , now Sir Francis Drake was made master & captain of the Caravel , and so we kept our way till we came to Cape Verde , and there we anchored , took our boats , & set soldiers on shore . Our general was the first that leapt on land , & with him Captain Dudley : there we took certain Negroes , but not without damage to our selves . For our general , Captain Dudley , & 8. other of our company were hurt with poisoned arrows : about nine days after , the 8. that were wounded died . Our general was taught by a Negro , to draw the poison out of his wound with a clove of garlic , whereby he was cured . From thence we went to Sierra leona , where be monstrous fish called Sharks , which will devour men . I among others was sent in the Angel with two Pinnaces into the river called Calousa , to seek two Caravels thaf were there trading with the Negroes : we took one of them with the Negroes , and brought them away . 
 In this river in you night time we had one of our pinnaces bulged by a sea-horse , so that our men swimming about the river , were all taken into the other pinnaces , except two that took hold one of another , and were carried away by the sea-horse . This monster hath the just proportion of a horse , saving that his legs be short , his teeth very great , and a span in length : he uses in the night to go on land into the woods , seeking at unawares to devour the Negroes in their cabins , whom they by their vigilancy prevent , and kill him in this manner . The Negroes keep watch , and diligently attend their coming , and when they are gone into the woods , 446 
 they forthwith lay a great tree overthwart the way , so that at their return , for that their legs be so short , they cannot go over it : then the Negroes set upon them with their bows , arrows and darts , and so destroy them . 
 From thence we entered the river called the Casserroes , where there were other Caravels trading with the Negroes , and them we took . In this Hand betwixt the river and the main , trees grow with Oysters upon them . There grow Palmito trees , which be as high as a ships main mast , and on their tops grow nuts , wine and oil , which they call Palmito wine and Palmito oil . The Plantan tree also grows in that country ; the tree is as big as a men thigh , and as high as a fir pole , the leaves thereof be long and broad , and on the top grow the fruit which are called Plantanos : they are crooked , and a cubit long , and as big as a men wrist , they grow on clusters : when they be ripe they be very good and dainty to eat : Sugar is not more delicate in taste then they be . 
 From thence with the Angel , the Judith , and the two pinn esses , we sailed to Sierra leona , where our general at that time was , who with the captains and soldiers went up into the river called Taggarin , to take a town of The river of the Negroes , where he found three kings of that country Taggarin . with fiftie thousand Negroes besieging the same town , which they could not take in many years before , when they had warred with it . Our General made a breach , entered & valiantly took the town , wherein were found five Portugals which yielded themselves to his mercy , and he saved their lives : we took & carried thence for traffic to the West Indies 500. Negroes . The three 5°° - Negroes kings drove 7000. Negroes into you sea at low water , ta^en ' at the point of the land , where they were all drowned in the Oze , for that they could not take their canoas to save themselves . we returned back again in our pinnaces to the ships , and there took in fresh water , and made ready sail towards Rio grande . At our coming thither Rio grande . we entered with the Angel , the Judith , and the 2 pinnaces , 
 447 
 Burboroata . 
 and found there seven Portugal Carvels , which made great fight with us . In the end by Gods help we won the victory , and drove them to the shore , from whence with the Negroes they fled , and we fetched the carvels from the shore into the river . The next morning M. Francis Drake with his carvel , the Swallow , and the William and John came into the river , with captain Dudley and his soldiers , who landed being but a hundred soldiers , and fought with seven thousand Negroes , burned the town , and returned to our general with the loss of one man . 
 In that place there be many musk-cats , which breed in hollow trees : the Negroes take them in a net , & put them in a cage , & nourish them very daintily , & take the musk from them with a spoon . 
 Now we directed our course from Guinea towards the West Indies . 
 And by the way died Captain Dudley . 
 In sailing towards the Indies , the first land that we escried , was the Hand called Dominica , where at our coming we anchored , & took in fresh water and wood for our provision : which done , we sailed towards the Hand called Margarita , where our general in despite of the Spaniards anchored , landed , & took in fresh victuals . A mile ofF the Hand there is a rock in the sea , wherein do breed many fowls like unto Barnacles : in the night we went out in our boats , and with cudgels we killed many of them , and brought them with many of their eggs aboard with us : their eggs be as big as Turkies eggs , and speckled like them . We did eat them , and found them very good meat . 
 From thence we sailed to Burboroata , which is in the main land of the West Indies : there we came in , mored our ships , and tarried two months trimming and dressing our ships , and in the mean time traded with certain Spanyards of that country . There our general sent us unto a town called Placencia , ( which stood on a high hill ) to have entreated a Bishop that dwelled there for 448 
 i56& his favour & friendship in their laws , who hearing of our coming , for fear forsook you town . 
 In our way up the hill to Placencia , we found a Placencia in monstrous venomous worm with two heads : his body the main , was as big as a men arm , and a yard long : our master Robert Barret did cut him in sunder with his sword , and it made it as black as if it were coloured with ink . 
 Here be many Tigers , monstrous and furious beasts , which by subtlety devour and destroy many men : they use the traded ways , & will show themselves twice or thrice to the travellers , and so depart secretly , lurking till they be past , then suddenly & at unawares they leap upon them and devour them : they had so used two of our company , had not one of them looked behind . Our general sent three ships unto the Hand called Coragao , to make provision for the rest , where they remained until his coming . He sent from thence the Angel and the Judith to Rio de Hacha , where we anchored before the town . The Spaniards shot three pieces at us from the shore , whom we requited with two of ours , and shot through the Governors house : we weighed anchor , & anchored again without shot of the town , where we rid five days in despite of the Spanyards and their shot . In the mean space there came a Carvel of advice from S. Domingo , whom with the Angel , and the Judith we chased and drove to the shore : we fetched him from thence in spite of 200. Spaniards hargubush shot , and anchored again before the town , and rid there with them , till our Generals coming , who anchored , landed his men , and valiantly took the Town , with the loss of one man , Rio de la whose name was Thomas Surgeon : we landed and ^acJia taken , planted on the shore for our safeties , our field ordinance : we drove the Spaniards up into the country above two leagues , whereby they were enforced to trade with our General , to whom he sold most part of his Negroes . 
 In this river we killed a monstrous Lagarto or Crocodile in this port at sun set : seven of us went in the 
 ix 449 2 F 
 Cartagena . 
 Campeche . 
 pinnace up into the River , carrying with us a dog , unto whom with ropeyarne we bound a great hook of steel , with a chain that had a swivel , which we put under the dogs belly , the point of the hook coming over his back fast bound , as aforesaid : we put him over board , and vered out our rope by little and little , rowing away with our boat : the Lagarto came & presently swallowed up the dog , then did we row hard , till we had choked him : he plunged and made a wondered stir in the water : we leapt on shore , and haled him on land : he was 23. foot by the rule , headed like a hog , in body like a serpent , full of scales as broad as a sauncer : his tail long and full of knots as big as a fawcon shot : he hath foure legs , his feet have long nails like unto a dragon : we opened him , took out his guts , flayed him , dried his skin , and stuffed it with straw , meaning to have brought it home , had not the ship been cast away . This monster will carry away and devour both man and horse . 
 From hence we shaped our course to Santa Martha , where we landed , traded , and sold certain Negroes : there two of our company killed a monstrous adder , going towards his cave with a Conie in his mouth : his body was as big as any men thigh , and seven foot long : upon his tail he had sixteene knots , every one as big as a great walnut , which they say , do show his age : his colour was green and yellow : they opened him , and found two conies in his belly . 
 From thence we sailed to Cartagena , where we went in , mored our Ships , and would have traded with them , but they durst not for fear of the King : we brought up the Minion against the Castle , and shot at the Castle and Town : then we landed in and Hand , where were many gardens : there in a cave we found certain Botijos of wine , which we brought away with us , in recompense whereof , our general commanded to be set on shore woollen and linen cloth , to the valve thereof . From hence by foul weather we were forced to seek the Port of Saint John de Ullua . In our way thwart of Campeche 45° 
 we met with a Spaniard , a small ship , who was bound for Santo Domingo : he had in him a Spaniard called Augustin the villam nueva , who was the man that betrayed all the Noble men in the Indies , and caused them to be beheaded , wherefore he with two Friars fled to S. Domingo : them we took and brought with us into the Port of S. John de Ullua . Our general made great account of him , and used him like a Noble man : howbeit in the end he was one of them that betrayed us . When we had mored our ships , and landed , we mounted the Ordinance that we found there in the Island , and for our safeties kept watch and ward . The next day after we discovered the Spanish fleet , whereof Lu^on a Spanyard was general : with him came a Spanyard called DONE Martin Henriquez , whom the king of Hon Martin Spaine sent to be his Viceroy of the Indies . He sent Henriquez . a Pinnace with a flag of truce unto our general , to know of what Country those Ships were that road there in the King of Spaines Port ; who said , they were the Queen of Englands ships , which came in there for victuals for their money : wherefore if your general will come in here , he shall give me victuals and all other necessaries , and I will go out on the one side of the Port , and he shall come in on the other side . The Spanyard returned for answer , that he was a Viceroy , and had a thousand men , & therefore he would come in . Our general said , If he be a Viceroy , I represent my Queens person , & I am a Viceroy as well as he : and if he have a thousand men , my powder and shot will take the better place . Then the Viceroy after counsel among themselves , yielded to our Generals demand , swearing by his King and his Crown , by his commission and authority that he had from his King , that he would perform it , and thereupon pledges were given on both parts . Our general bearing a godly and Christian mind , void of fraud and deceit , judged the Spanyards to have done the like , delivered to them sixe gentlemen , not doubting to have received the like from 
 451 
 Augustine de villam nueva a most thankless tray tour . 
 The Spanish viceadmiral fired . 
 them : but the faithless Spanyardes , in costly apparel gave of the basest of their company , as afterwards it was well known . These things finished , proclamation was made on both sides , that on pain of death no occasion should be given , whereby any quarrel should grow to the breach of the league , and then they peaceably entered the port , with great triumph on both sides . 
 The Spaniards presently brought a great Hulk , a ship of sixe hundred , and mored her by the side of the Minion , and they cut out ports in their other ships , planting their ordinance towards us , in the night they filled the Hulk with men , to lay the Minion aboard , as the sequel did show , which made our General doubtful of their dealings : wherefore , for that he could speak the Spanish tongue , he sent Robert Barret aboard the Viceroy , to know his meaning in those dealings , who willed him with his company to come in to him , whom he commanded presently to be set in the bilboes , and forthwith a Cornet ( for a watchword among the false Spaniards ) was sounded for the enterprising of their pretended treason against our general , whom Augustine the villam nova sitting at dinner with him , should then presently have killed with a poynado which he had privily in his sleeve , which was espied and prevented by one John Chamberlayne , who took the poynado out of his sleeve . Our General hastily rose up , and commanded him to be put prisoner in the Stewards room , & to be kept with two men . The faithless Spanyards , thinking all things to their desire had be finished , suddenly sounded a Trumpet , and therewith three hundred Spaniards entered the Minion , whereat our General with a loud and fierce voice called unto us , saying , God and Saint George , upon those traitorous villains , and rescue the Minion , I trust in God the day shall ours : and with that the Mariners & soldiers leapt out of the Jesus of Lubeck into the Minion , and beatrice out the Spanyards , and with a shot out of her fired the Spaniards Vice admiral , where the most part of 300. Spanyards were 45 2 
 spoiled , and blown over board with powder . Their Admiral also was on fire half and hour : we cut our cables , wound off our ships , and presently fought with them : they came upon us on every side , and continued the fight from ten of the clock until it was night : they killed all our men that were on shore in the Hand , saving three , which by swimming god aboard the Jesus of 0 « of those Lubeck . They sunk the Generals ship called the Angel , was 
 and took the Swallow : the Spaniards Admiral had reof ' 
 above threescore shot through her : many of his men were spoiled : foure other of their ships were sunk . Foure Spanish There were in that fleet , and that came from the shore sum ” ko-to rescue them , fifteene hundred : we slew of them five hundred and fourtie , as we were credibly informed by a note that came to Mexico . In this fight the Jesus of Lubeck had five shot through her main Mast : her foremast was struck in sunder under the hounds with a chain shot , and her hull was wonderfully pierced with shot , therefore it was unpossible to bring her away . They set two of their own Ships on fire , intending therewith to have burned the Jesus of Lubeck , which we prevented by cutting our cables in the halse , and winding off by our sternefast . 
 The Minion was forced to set sail and stand off from us , and come to and anchor without shot of the Island . Our general courageously cheered up his soldiers and gunners , and called to Samuel his page for a cup of Beer , who brought it him in a silver cup , and he drinking to all men willed the gunners to stand by their Ordinance lustily like men . He had no sooner set the cup out of his hand , but a demy Culverin shot stroke away the cup and a Coopers plane that stood by the main mast , and ran out on the other side of the ship : which nothing dismayed our general , for he ceased not to encourage us , saying , fear nothing , for God , who hath preserved me from this shot , will also deliver us from these traitors and villains . Then Captain Bland meaning to have turned out of the port , had his main 
 453 
 About and hundred . Englishmen landed . 
 mast stroke over board with a chain shot that came from the shore , wherefore he anchored , fired his ship , took his pinnace with all his men , and came aboard the Jesus of Lubek to our general , who said unto him , that he thought he would not have run away from him : he answered , that he was not minded to have run away from him , but his intent was to have turned up , and to have laid the weathermost ship of the Spanish fleet aboard , and fired his ship in hope therewith to have set on fire the Spanish fleet , he said if he had done so he had done well . With this , night came on . Our general commanded the Minion , for safeguard of her masts to be brought under the Jesus of Lubecks lee : he willed M. Francis Drake to come in with the Judith , and to lay the Minion aboard , to take in men and other things needful , and to go out , and so he did . 
 At night when the wind came off the shore , we set sail , and went out in despite of the Spanyards and their shot , where we anchored , with two anchors under the Island , the wind being Northerly , which was wonderful dangerous , and we feared every hour to be driven with the lee shore . In the end when the wind came larger , we weighed anchor , and set sail , seeking the river of Panuco for water , whereof we had very little , and victuals were so scarce , that we were driven to eat hides , cats , rats , parrats , munkies , and dogs : wherefore our general was forced to divide his company into two parts , for there was a mutiny among them for want of victuals : and some said that they had rather be on the shore to shift for themselves among the enemies , then to starve on shipboard . He asked them who would go on shore , and who would tarry on shipboard , those that would go on shore , he willed to go on foremast , and those that would tarry , on baft mast : fourescore and sixteene of us were willing to depart . Our general gave unto every one of us sixe yards of Roane cloth , and money to them that demanded it . When we were landed , he came unto us , where friendly embracing every one of 
 454 
 us , he was greatly grieved that he was forced to leave us behind him , he counseled us to serve God , and to love one another , and thus courteously he gave us a sorowfol farewell , and promised if God sent him safe home , he would do what he could , that so many of us as lived should by some means be brought into England , & so he did . 
 Since my return into England I have herd that many misliked that he left us so behind him , and brought away Negroes : but the reason is this , for them he might have had victuals , or any other thing needful , if by foul weather he had be driven upon the Islands , which for gold nor silver he could not have had . 
 And thus our general departed to his ship , and we remained on land , where for our safeties , fearing the wild Indians that were about us , we kept watch all night , and at Sun rising we marched on our way , three and three in a rank , until that we came into a field under a grove , where the Indians came upon us , asking us what people we were , and how we came there . Two of our company , namely Anthony Goddard and John Cornish , for that they could speak the Spanish tongue , went to them , and said we were Englishmen , that never came in that country before , and that we had fought with the Spaniards , and for that we lacked victuals , our general set us on shore : they asked us whither we intended to go , we said to Panuco . The Captain of the Indians willed us to give unto them some of our clothes & shirts , which we did : then he bade us give them all , but we would not so do , whereupon John Cornish was then slain with and arrow , which and Indian boy that stood by the Captain shot at him , wherefore he stroke the boy on the neck with his bow , that he lay for dead , and willed us to follow him , who brought us into a great field , where we found fresh water : he bade us fit down about the pond and drink , and he with his company would go in the mean space to kill five or sixe Dear , and bring them 455 
 John Cornish slain . 
 James Collier . 
 8. Englishmen slain . 
 Anotherriver . 
 Seven days travel to Panuco . 
 us . We tarried there till three of the clock , but they came not : there one of our company whose name was John Cooke , with foure other departed from us into a grove to seek relief , where presently they were taken by the Indians , and stripped as naked as ever they were born , and so returned to us . 
 Then we divided our selves into two parts , half to Anthony Goddard , and the rest to James Collier , and thus severally we sought for Panuco . Anthony Goddard with his company , bid us farewell , they passed a river , where the Indians robbed many of them of their clothes , and so passing on their way , came to a stony hill , where they stayed . James Collier with his company that day passed the same river , and were also robbed , and one of them slain by chance : we came that night unto the hill , where Anthony Goddard and his company rested , there we remained till morning , and then we marched altogether from thence , entering between two groves , where the Indians robbed us of all our clothes , and left us naked , they hurt many , and killed eight of us . Three days after we came to another river , there the Indians showed us the way to Panuco , and so left us : we passed the river into the wilderness , where we made wreaths of green grass , which we wound about our bodies , to keep us from the Sun , and gnats of that Country . We traveled there seven days , and seven nights , before we came to Panuco , feeding on nothing but roots , and Guiavos , a fruit like figs. At our coming to the river of Panuco two Spanish horsemen came over unto us in a Canowe : they asked us how long we had be in the wilderness , and where our general was , for they knew us to be of the company that had fought with their countrymen : we told them seven days and seven nights , and for lack of victuals our general set us on shore , & he was gone away with his ships . They returned to their Governor , who sent them with five Canows to bring us all over , which done , they set us in array , where a hundred horsemen with their lances , 456 
 came forceably upon us , but did not hurt us , they carried us prisoners to Panuco , where we remained one night . In the river of Panuco there is a fish like a calf , the Spanyards call it a Mallatin , he hath a stone in his head , which the Indians use for the disease of the Colic , in the night he comes on land , and eateth grass . I have eaten of it , and it eateth not much unlike to bacon . From thence we were sent to Mexico , which is 90 leagues from Panuco . In our way thither , 20 leagues from the sea side , I did see white Crabs running up & down the sands , I have eaten of them , and they be very good meat . There grows a fruit which the Spanyards call Avocottes , it is proportioned like and egg , and as black as a coal , having a stone in it , and it is and excellent good fruit . There also grows a strange tree which they 
 call Magueis , it serves them to many uses , below by A manifold use the root they make a hold , whereat they do take out of tfMagueis . it twice every day a certain kind of liquour , which they sees in a great kettle , till the third part be consumed , & that it wax thick , it is as sweet as any honey , and they do eat it . Within 20. days after that they have taken all the liquour from it , it withereth , & they cut it down , & use it as we use our hemp here in England , which done , they convert it to many uses : of some part they make mantles , ropes , and thread : of the ends they make needles to sow their saddles , panneis , & other furniture for their horses : of the rest they make tiles to cover their houses , and they put it to many other purposes . 
 And thus we came to Mexico , which is seven or eight miles about , seated in a great fen , environed with 4 hills , it hath but two ways of entrance , and it is full of creeks , in the which in their Canows they pass from place to place , & to the Islands there within . In the Indies ordinarily three times a year be wonderful earthquakes , which put the people in great fear and danger : during the time of two years that I was in Mexico , I saw them sixe times : when they come they throw down trees , 
 457 
 houses , and Churches . There is a city 25. leagues from Mexico , called Tlaxcalla , which is inhabited with a hundred thousand Indians , they go in white shirts , linen breeches , and long mantles , and the women wear about them a garment much like unto a flannel petticoat . The kings palace was the first place we were brought unto in Mexico , where without we were willed to fit down . Much people , men , women , and children came wondering about us , many lamented our misery , & some of their clergy asked us if we were Christians , we said , we praised God , we were as good Christians as they : they asked how they might know that , we said , by our confessions . From thence we were carried in a Canow to a Tanners house , which stands a little from the city : the next morning two friars and two priests came thither to us , and willed us to bless our selves , and say our prayers in the Latin tongue , that they might understand us , many of our company did so , whereupon they returned to the viceroy , and told him that we were good Christians , and that they liked us well , and then they brought us much relief , with clothes , our sick men were sent to their Hospitals , where many were cured , and many died . From the Tanners house we were led to a gentleman's place , where upon pain of death we were charged to abide , and not to come into the city , thither we had all things necessary brought us : on Sundayes and holy days much people came , and brought us great relief . 
 The viceroy practised to hang us , and caused a pair of new gallows to be set up , to have executed us , whereunto the noblemen of that country would not consent , but prayed him to stay until the ship of advice brought news from the king of Spaine , what should be done with us , for they said they could not find any thing by us , whereby they might lawfully put us to death . 
 The viceroy then commanded us to be sent to and Island there by , and he sent for the Bishop of Mexico , 4S8 
 who sent foure priests to the Island , to examine and confess us , who said , that the viceroy would burn us , when we were examined and confessed according to the laws of the country . They returned to the Bishop , and told him that we were very good Christians . The Bishop certified the viceroy of our examinations and confessions , and said that we were good Christians , therefore he would not meddle with us . Then the viceroy sent for our master , R. Barret , whom he kept prisoner in his palace , until the fleet was departed for Spayne . The rest of us he sent to a town seven leagues from Mexico called Tescuco , to carded wool among the Indian slaves , which drudgery we disdained , and concluded to beatrice our master's , and so we did : wherefore they sent to the viceroy , desiring him for Gods sake and our Ladies , to send for us , for they would not keep us any longer , they said that we were devils and no men . 
 The viceroy sent for us , and imprisoned us in a house in Mexico , from thence he sent Anthony Goddard , & some other of our company with him into Spaine , with Lu ? on , the General that took us : the rest of us stayed in Mexico two years after , and then were sent prisoners into Spaine , with DONE Juan de Velasco de Varre , admiral and general of the Spanish fleet , who carried with him in his ship , to be presented to the K. of Spaine , the anatomy of a giant , which was sent from China to Mexico , to the viceroy DONE Martin Henriquez , to be sent to the king of Spaine for a great wonder . It did appear by the anatomy , that he was of a monstrous size , the skull of his head was near as big as half a bushel , his neck-bones , shoulder-plates , arme-bones , and all other lineaments of his other parts , were huge and monstrous to behold , the shank of his leg from the ankle to the knee was as long as from any men ankle up to his waste , and of bigness accordingly . 
 At this time , and in this ship , were also sent to be presented to the king of Spaine , two chests full of earth 459 
 1570. 
 Havana . 
 with ginger growing in them , which were also sent from China , to be sent to the king of Spaine . The ginger runneth in the ground like to liccoras , the blades grow out of it in length and proportion like unto the blades of wild garlic , which they cut every fifteene days , they use to water them twice a day , as we do our herbs here in England , they put the blades in their pottage , and use them in their other meats , whose excellent savour and taste is very delightful , and procureth a good appetite . 
 When we were shipped in the Port of S. John de Ullua , the general called our master Robert Barret and us with him into his cabin , & asked us if we would fight against Englishmen if we met them at the sea , we said that we would not fight against our Crown , but if we met with any other , we would do what we were able . He said if we had said otherwise he would not have believed us , and for that we should be the better used , and have allowance as other men had : and he gave a charge to every one of us , according unto our knowledge , Robert Barret was placed with the pilot , I was put in the gunners room , William Cause with the boatswain , John Bear with the quartermasters , Edward Rider , & Geffrey Giles , with the ordinary mariners , Richard the master's boy attended on him and the pilot : shortly after we departed from the port of S. John de Ullua with all the fleet of Spaine , for the port called Havana : we were 26. days sailing thither . There we came in , anchored , took in fresh water , and stayed 16. days for the fleet of Number de Dios , which is the fleet that brings the treasure from Peru. 
 The general of that fleet was called Diego Flores de Valdes . After his coming , when he had watered his ships , both the fleets joined in one , and DONE Juan de Velasco de Varre was the first fifteen days general of both the fleets , who turning through the channel of Bahama , his pilot had like to have cast away all the fleet upon the Cape called Cannaveral , which was prevented by me John Hortop , & our master Robert Barret : for I 460 
 being in the second watch escried land , and called to Robert Barret , bidding him look over board , for I saw land under the lee-bow of the ship : he called to the boatswain , & bid him let fly the before sail sheat , and lay the helm upon the lee , and cast the ship about . When we were cast about , we were but in seven fathom water : we shot off a piece , giving advice to the fleet to cast about , and so they did . For this we were beloved oh the general , and all the fleet . The general was in a great rage , and swore by the king , that he would hang his pilot : for he said , that twice before he had almost cast away the Admiral . When it was day , he commanded a piece to be shot ofF , to call to council : the other Admiral in his ship came up to him , and asked what the matter was , he said , that his pilot had cast away his ship and all the fleet , had it not be for two of the Englishmen , and therefore he would hang him . The other Admiral with many fair words persuaded him to the contrary . 
 When we came in the height of Bermuda , we dis - A sea-monster covered a monster in the sea , who showed himself three ™ ttesliafe times unto us from the middle upward , in which parts °^a man ' he was proportioned like a man , of the complexion of a Mulato , or tawny Indian . The general did command one of his clerks to put it in writing , and he certified the King and his Nobles thereof . Presently after this , for the space of sixteene days we had wondered foul weather , and then God sent us a fair wind , until such time as we discovered the Hand called Faial . 
 On S. James day we made rackets , wheels , and other fireworks , to make pastime that night , as it is the order of the Spanyards . When we came near the land , our master R. Barret conferred with us , to take the pinnace one night , when we came on the Hand called Ter ? era , to free our selves from the danger and bondage that we were going into , whereunto we agreed : none had any pinnace astern then but our ship , which gave great courage to our enterprise : we prepared a bag of bred , and a Botijo of water , which would have served us nine days , and 461 
 provided our selves to go : our Master borrowed a small compass of the Master gunner of the ship , who lent it him , but suspected his intent , and closely made the general privy to it , who for a time dissembled the matter . In the end seeing our pretense , he called R. Barret , commanding his head to be put in the stocks , and a great pair of iron bolts on his legs , & the rest of us to be set in the stocks by the legs . Then he willed a piece to be shot off , and he sent the pinnace for the other Admiral , and all the captains , master's and pilots of both fleets to come aboard of him . He commanded the mainyard to be struck down , and to put 2. pullies , on every yard-arme one ; the hangman was called , and we were willed to confess our selves , for he swore by the king that he would hang us . 
 When the other Admiral , and the rest were come aboard , he called them into his counsel-chamber , and told them that he would hang the master of the Englishmen , and all his company . The Admiral , whose name was Diego Flores de Valdes , asked him wherefore : he said , that we had determined to rise in the night with the pinnace , and with a ball of firework to set the ship on fire , and go our ways : therefore , said he , I will have you the Captains , Master's , and Pilots , to set your hands unto that , for I swear by the king that I will hang them , Diego Flores de Valdes answered , I nor the Captains , Master's , and Pilots will not set our hands to that , for he said , if he had been prisoner as we were , he would have done the like himself . He counseled him to keep us fast in prison , till he came into Spaine , & then send us to the Contratation house in Sivil , where , if we had deserved death the law would pass on us , for he would not have it said that in such a fleet as that was , sixe men and a boy should take the pinnace , and go away , and so he returned to his ship again . 
 When he was gone , the general came to the main mast to us , and swore by the king , that we should not come out of the stocks till we came into Spaine : within 462 
 16 days after we came over the bar of S. Lucar , and came up to the Hurcados , then he put us into a pinnace in the stocks , and sent us prisoners to the Contratation house in Sivill . From thence after one year we brake prison , on S. Stevens day at night , 7. of our company escaped , Robert Barret , I Job Hortop , John Emerie , Humphrey Roberts , and John Gilbert were taken , and brought back to the contratation house , where we remained in the stocks till twelfe tide was passed . Then our keeper put up a petition to the Judge of the contratation house , that we might be sent to the great prison house in Sivill , for that we broke prison , whereupon we were presently led thither , where we remained one month , and then from thence , to the castle of the Inquisition house in Triana , where we continued one year : which expired , they brought us out in procession , every one of us having a candle in his hand , and the coat with S. Andrewes cross on our backs : they brought us up on and high scaffold , that was set up in the place of S. Francis , which is in the chief street of Sivill : there they set us down upon benches , every one in his degree , and against us on another scaffold sat all the Judges , and the Clergy on their benches : the people wondered , and gazed on us , some pitying our cases , other said , burn those heretics . When we had fit there two hours , we had a sermon made to us : after which one called Bresinia , secretary to the Inquisition , went up into the pulpit with the process , and called Robert Barret and John Gilbert , whom two familiars of Robert Barret the Inquisition brought from the scaffold before the Judges , where the secretary read the sentence , which ' 
 was that they should be burned , and so they returned to the scaffold , and were burned . 
 Then I Job Hortop , and John Bone were called , and Job Hortop brought to the place , as before , where we herd our hls cmdm-sentence , which was , that we should go to the Games , and there row at the oars end ten years , and then to be brought back to the Inquisition house , to have the coat with S. Andrewes cross put on our backs , and 
 463 
 from thence to go to the everlasting prison remediless , and so we were returned from the scaffold from whence we came . Thomas Marks , & Thomas Ellis were called , and had sentence to serve in the Galleys eight years , and Humphrey Roberts , and John Emery to serve five years , & so were returned to the benches on the scaffold , where we sat till foure of clock in the afternoon . Then we were led again to the Inquisition house , from whence we were brought . The next day in the morning Bresinia the treasurer came thither to us , and delivered to every one of us his sentence in writing . I with the rest were sent to the Galleys , where we were chained foure and foure together : every men daily allowance was 26. ounces of course black biscuit and water , our clothing for the whole year two shirts , two pair of breeches of course canvas , a read coat of course cloth , soon on , and soon off , and a gown of hair with a friars hood : our lodging was on the bore boards , and banks of the Galleys , our heads and beards were shaved every month , hunger , thirst , cold , and stripes we lacked none , till our several times expired . And after the time of 12. years , for I served two years above my sentence , I was sent back to the Inquisition house in Sivill , and there having put on the coat with S. Andrewes cross , I was sent to the everlasting prison remediless , where I wore the coat 4. years , & then upon great suit , I had it taken off for 50 ducats , which Hernando the Soria treasurer of the kings mint lent me , whom I served for it as a drudge 7. years , and until the month 1590. of October last , 1590 , and then I came from Sivill to 
 S. Lucar , where I made means to come away in a flyboat , that was laden with wines and salt , which were Flemings goods , the king of Spaines subject's , dwelling in Sivil , married to Spanish women , and sworn to their king . In this month of October last , departing from S. Lucar , at sea , off the southermost Cape , we met and English ship , called the Galeon Dudley , who took the Flemming , & me out of him , & brought me to Ports-464 
 1590. mouth , where they set me on land , the 2. day of December last passed , 1590. From thence I was sent by 1590. 
 M. Muns the lieutenant of Portsmouth , with letters to the R. honourable the Earl of Sussex , who commanded his secretary to take my name and examination , how long I had be out of England , and with whom I went , which he did . And on Christmas even I took my leave of his honour , and came to Redriffe . 
 The Computation of my imprisonment . 
 I suffered imprisonment in Mexico two years . 
 In the Contratation house in Sivill one year . 
 In the Inquisition house in Triana one year . I was in the Galleys twelve years . 
 In the everlasting prison remediless , with the coat with 
 S. Andrews cross on my back 4. years . 
 And at liberty I served as a drudge Hernando de Soria 3. years , which is the full compliment of 23. years . 
 Since my departure from England , until this time of my return , I was five times in great danger of death , beside the many perils I was in , in the Galleys . 
 First in the Port of S. John de Ullua , where being on shore , with many other of our company , which were all slain saving I , and two other that by swimming god aboard the Jesus of Lubek . 
 Secondly , when we were robbed by the wild Indians . 
 Thirdly , after we came to Mexico , the viceroy would have hanged us . 
 Fourthly , because he could not have his mind to hang us , he would have burned us . 
 Fiftly , the general that brought us into Spaine , would have hanged us at sea . 
 Thus having truly set down unto you my travels , misery and dangers , endured the space of 23. years , I end . 
 