Parescer de DONE Alvaro Ba^an , marks de Santa Cruz , tocante la Armada de Francisco Draque , estando en las yslas de Vayona : Hecha en Lisboa a 26 de Otubre , estilo de Espanna de 1585. 
 O que paresce , que podra hazer el Armada Inglese , en caso que quiere passar a las Indias , y entrar en el mar del Sur , ( common lo would hecho otra vez Francisco Draque ) con las treynta y dos naves y galeones , y much lanchas y vergantines deremo que trae , y cinco 
 mil hombres de guerra , que es el numero que a los de Vayona parescio que venian en el armada , es lo siguiente . 
 Levera sum derotta all Rio de Jenero , que es en la costa del Brasil en 23 grados de la parte del Sur de la Linea . Es puerto capaz de muchos navios y muy seguro , adonde se tiene agua , lenna , y carnem : y tam bien podra tomar harina de Maiz en un lugar dos oh tres leguas del dicho puerto , que se dize San Vincente . Y por ser camino per las islas de la Madera , Canaria , y Cabo Verde , podra saquear estas islas , dandole el tiempo lugar a ello . 
 Desde Vaiona a la isla de Madera con los vientos Nortes , que aora correran ( passados los vientos de Vallee , 88 
 que aora reynan , por estar la costa de Espanna llovida ) yra la Armada en seis dias ; de alii a las Canarias en quatro , y de las Canarias a Cabo verde en ocho , que son per todos diez y ocho dias : y tardera lo que se tuviere en saquear las islas . 
 De Cabo Verde all rio de Jenero tardera quarenta Rio de Jenero . dias , que vernan a ser todos dos meses : por manera , que estando el Armada todo este mes en Galicia , podra ser en el rio de Jenero en fin de Deziembre . 
 A la entrada de la baia del Rio de Jenero ay una baxa , adonde con facilidad se hara un fuerte , en que pueden ^u&arPor estar mass que quimentos hombres : y ponendole sum juerte artilleria , guardera el puerto , y el fuerte quedara assalado , que por la una parte del sudueste y nordeste tiene los dos canales , por donde entran los navios en el puerto : En el qual podra Francisco Draque concertar sum Armada , y dexar alii alguna gente , y partir con la que le paresciere , para entrar en el Mar del Sur , y yr en seguimiento de sum viaje all Estrecho de Magallanes ( que es quinientas Estrecho de y cinquenta leguas de a quel puerto , y esta en cinquenta y Magallanes . dos grados y medio de parte del Sur ) y entrar por el Estrecho a la Mar deal Sur por todo el mes de Febrero ; Mar deal sur . y yr a la ciudad de los Reys o Lima , que esta en la Limaesciudad costa , y es de dos mil vezinos : y por no ser gente de guerra , m puesta en milicia , y lugar abierto since f^Uatomar fortaleza , ni artilleria , le podra tomar y saquear , y yr ' 
 se apoderando de la tierra ; pues tornando los navios , que ay en aquella mar , no les podra entrar socorro de Espanna . 
 Y es de creer que se preverra a tomar a Panama . Panama . 
 No queriendo hazer este viaje , repartira sum armada La segunda en dos vandas , y saqueare la isla de San Domingo , Puerto viaje . Rico , y la costa de Tierra firma , hasta Cartagena y an Domingo . Number de Dios. Y desde el rio de Chagre , que es J^^cZgre . xv . leguas de Number de Dios , podra meeter la Infanteria en lanchas de remo , y en las varcas de carga y descarga en a quel rio , que son mass de cinquenta , y Hegar hasta paMma la Venta de Cruzes , que es cinco leguas de Panama , que , a^ert0 yfaM por ser lugar abierto , sera facil a saquear . a saquear . 
 La Havana . Y tambien corre peligro la Havana ; que aunque tiene fortaleza , es chica y flaca , y sacando artilleria en tierra , la tomaran con facilidad . 
 Y de mass de los dannos que podran hazer , conform a este discorso , no sera el menor , cortar el hilo a la Tomar las navigation de las Indias , a tomar las flotas , si alii ^otas ' fueren . 
 Lo que Convernia hazer para reparar estos dannos . 
 DEspachar caravelas con grandissima diligencia a los virreys y governadores de las Indias , avertiendo les de la Nueva de la Armada Inglese , para que esten prevenidos , y se ponganen orden . Aunque , segun el numero de las Naves que han salido de Inglatierra , tengo por sin duda , havran passado de aquellas parts alguna banda dellas , hasta Tierra nueva . Porque la Reyna a tenido cuidado de embiar y tomar las naos de la Pesqueria deal Baccalao : Y assi es de creer since duda lo de las Indias . 
 Y teniendo se consideration a que , por lo que se intiende de Inglatierra , han solido mass de ochenta navios con los de Armada : Convernia que sum Magestad mandasse j untar otra para buscar la Inglese , y combatir con ella , ordinando que los galeones que tiene la corona deste Reino , y los que tiene sum Magestad en el Rio de Sevilla se aderescan de yr opposito , dandoles carena , para che estubiessen a punto a qualquier viaje , por largo que fuesse : y que assi mismo se embara^e un galeon del Duque de Florencia , que esta muy bien armado y artillado , y a partido de Alicante ara Cadiz , y Quarenta naos complimiento hasta quarenta naos gruesas , que se hallaran gruesas . en Viscaia y Guiposcoa : y que adere^adas , artilladas , y puestas en orden , como conviene , se avituallen por ocho meses , y que desde luego se levanten hasta mil marineros de Catalunna y Genoa para departir en las naves , y se trayen , como se hizo para la armada de la Ter^era : y que assi mismo se levanten seys mil 90 
 soldados , dando condutas para mass gente , que esta , para que aya este numero de servicio . 
 Tambien convernia , que de Viscaia venga para esta Armada 20 patazes , y veynte Azabras de Castro . Que las patazes sean the 50 hasta 60 toneladas : y las Azabras , como las que vinieran a la Jornada de la Tergera . 
 Que se porvea el artilleria , polvera , y cuerda , y plomo necessario , arcabuzes , mosquetas , y picas de respite para la guardia de la costa . 
 Converne hazer otra armada de dos naos cada 400 toneladas , y otras quatro de a dozientas , y quatro patazes , y mil soldados , de mass de la gente de mar . 
 Aviendo visto y considerado , que en dos meses han hecho tantos dannos los Ingleses con los navios de mercantes que navegan por estos mares , y que es de creer que haran lo mismo en las flotas que fueren y vinieren de las Indias , convernia , que , como para la ordenan^a en tiempo de paz , lleva la armada las naos Capitana y Almirante , que llevassen aora otras dos mass por lo menos en cada flota : y no por esto se would de dexar de asegurar las con Armada . 
 Todas estas prevenciones , me paresce , se deuen hazer , para solo lo que toca la Armada Inglese , y otros navios que han salido de aquel Reyno . 
 Pero en caso que DONE Antonio Veniese con la Armada , y quisiese intentar lo d’este Reyno , seran menester las prevenciones siguientes . 
 QUe se apercibiesen el cond de Benavente , Marques de Soria , cond de Altamira , cond de Monte Rey , Marques de Cerraluo , y los de mass Sennores y Cavalleros , a quien se dio orden que estubiesen a punto , quando se vino a este Reyno . 
 Que se exercibiese tarn bien la gente de las Ciudades de Toro , Zamora , Salamanca , cuidar para socorrer a la part dentro Doro y Minno . Y las de Estremadura y Sevilla para socorrer esta Ciudad de Lisbona , y sum Comarca . 
 The damage which may be done bypassing by the river of Jenero into the South sea . 
 Que se avituallen los castillos desta ciudad , ribera , y comarca , y provean de polvere , cuerda , y plomo , y lo demas tocante el artilleria , como lo he pedido en las relaciones , que he embiado a sum Magestad en 7 de manjo deste anno 1585. Que se provean las galeras por quatro meses : y vengan otras seys de Espanna a este Rio con 120 soldados por galera , para que los pueden repartir , en las ocho que estan aca . Y en caso que esto se ay , que le armada Inglesa no pass a las Indias , y se ocupen en lo deste Reyno , porque havre navios de Ingleses , que acuden a lo uno y a lo otro , sera formoso hazer otra armada para lo de las Indias , the doze naos , quatro patajes , y mil y quinjentos soldados . 
 Todo esto , me paresce , conviene all servicio de sum Majestad , se prevega y apercibiese con mucha diligencia y cuidado , proveiendo del dinero necessario para ello , since que se aguarde lo uno a lo otro , sino que todo se haga since deserirlo : Remitiendo me en todo a mejor parescer . Hecha en Lisboa a 26 de Otubre de 1585. Annos . 
 The opinion of DONE Alvaro Ba^an , Marks of Santa Cruz , and high Admiral of Spaine , touching the army of sir Francis Drake lying at the Isles of Bayona in Galicia , written in Lisbon the 26 of October after the account of Spaine in the year 1585. 
 THat which it seems unto me , that the English army may do , if they seek to pass unto the West Indies , and enter into the South sea ( as Francis Drake hath done once before ) with their thirty ships and galleons , and many pinnaces and shalops with oars , which they have with them , and 5000 men of war , which they of Bayona think to be in the fleet , is as follows . 
 They may take their course to the river of Jenero , which is on the coast of Brasil in 23 degrees to the 92 
 South of the Equinoctial line . It is and haven capable of many ships and very safe , where there is water , wood and flesh : and likewise Drake may have corn of Maiz in a town two or three leagues from the said haven , which is called S. Vincente . 
 And because the course is by the Isles of Madera , the Canaries , and Cape verde , he may sack those Islands , the time serving him for that purpose . 
 From Bayona to the Isle of Madera , with the Northern winds which now will begin to blow , when the Western winds be passed , which presently do blow because that it begins to rain on the coast of Spaine , the fleet may run in 6 days , and from thence to the Canaries in foure , and from the Canaries to the Isles of Cape Verde in eight , which all together make eighteene days : and he may stay as much time more as shall serve him to sack the Islands in . 
 He may sail from Cape Verde to the river of Jenero in 40 days , which in the whole amount unto two months . So that the fleet remaining all this month of October on the coast of Galicia , it may come to the river of Jenero in the end of December . 
 At the entry of the bay of the river of Jenero there is a flat low Island where a fort may very easily be made , wherein above 500 men may be left : and placing his artillery therein , he may keep the haven , & the fort will be able to hold out all assault , because that on the Southwest and Northeast sides are two channels whereby the ships come into the haven : wherein Francis Drake may repair his army , and leave there some people , and depart with so much of the rest as shall seem good unto him to enter into the South sea , & go on upon his voyage to the straight of Magelan , which is 550 leagues from the foresaid haven , and stands in 52 degrees & a half towards the South , and may enter by the straight into the South sea all the month of February , & so may to go to the city of Lima , otherwise called the city de los Reys , which stands on the sea coast 
 93 
 Madera . 
 Canaries . 
 The Isles of Cape Verde . 
 The river of Jenero . 
 A fort may be built on and Island in the mouth of the river of Jenero . 
 The straight of Magelan . The city of Lima easy to be taken , though it have 2000 inhabitants . 
 1585. having two thousand inhabitants in it . But in respect that they be no warlike people nor exercised in arms , and because the place is open and without fortress & artillery , he may take and sack it , and make himself 
 The ships in the South sea may be burned . master on the land , & afterwards taking those ships which are in that sea , our people can have no succour of ships out of Spaine , but by the straight of Magelan , which 
 Panama may be taken . The second course which indeed Drake took . is a long way about . It is also very credible that he will be able to take Panama . If he seek not to take this course he may divide his army into two parts , & sack the Isle of S. Domingo , Puerto Rico , the coast of Tierra firma unto Cartagena and Number de Dios. 
 And from the river of Chagre , which is fifteene leagues from Number de Dios , he may send his footmen in shalops with oars and in the vessels which carry goods up and down the river , whereof there are above fiftie there , and pass up to the lodging of the Crosses , called 
 Panama being and open place is easy to be taken . Havana easy to be taken . in Spanish Venta de Cruzes , which is five leagues from Panama , which because it is and unwalled town may easily be taken . And Havana also will be in great danger , which albeit it have a fortress , yet it is but little and weak , and bringing his great ordinance on shore he may take the same with great facility . And beside these domages which he may do , according to this discourse , it will not be the least to cut ofF 
 The Indian fleet may be taken . the navigation of the Indies , to take the West Indian fleet , if they chance to be there . What course is to be taken to prevent these mischiefs . r I ' ' Oh dispatch Caravels with all possible diligence to the A viceroys and governors of the Indias , advertising them of the news of the English army , that they may be provided , and make themselves ready for them . Albeit , considering the number of ships which have be set 94 
 1585. forth out of England , I assure my self , that some part Sir Barnard of them are gone out of those parts unto Newfoundland Drake took For the Queen hath taken careful order to send to intercept the ships of the fishermen that go to Baccalaos . Jugali And it is likewise to be thought that she hath done fishers re-the like for the intercepting of the fleet of the Indies , turningfrom 
 And considering that according to our intelligence out of England , above fourescore ships , and the army of Drake His’lntM-have be set forth from thence , it is meet that his gence was too majesty should prepare another army to seek the English as s‘Me fleet , and to fight with it , commanding that the Galleons which belong to the crown of Portugall , and those of his Admiralty . majesty which lie in the river of Sivill be prepared to send against them , and to give them the Carena , that they may be in a readiness for any voyage how long soever it be : And likewise to arrest a Galeon of the Duke of Florence , which is very well armed and furnished with great ordinance , and passed lately from Alicante towards Cadiz , and to make up the number of fortie great ships , Fortie great which are to be had in Biscay and Guipuscoa : and that being rigged , armed and set in good order , they be r ' victualed for eight months , and that forthwith there be levied a thousand mariners of Catalunna and Genoa to be divided among the Fleet , and be conducted , as they were for the Fleet of Ter^era : furthermore that sixe G8 ? - Ter-thousande soldiers be levied , giving commandment marks to press a greater number , to the end that these may ofSantaCruz . be able men for service . 
 Moreover it is needful for this army that 20. pataches be brought from Biscay , and 20. Azabras from Castro . That the pataches be from 50. to 60. tons : and that the Azabras be like those which were in the expedition to Terser a. 
 That sufficient provision be made of artillery , powder , match , and led , and harquebusses , muskets , and chosen pikes for the keeping of the coast . 
 It is also meet to provide another army of two ships Another army of 400. tons apiece , and other foure of 200. tons , SM es‘ 
 and foure pataches and a thousand soldiers , beside mariners . 
 The Indian Having seen and considered that the Englishmen with hened merchant's ships only that traverse these seas have with 4. ships made such havoc in two months , and that it is to be ofwarre . thought that they will do the like against the fleets which go and come from the Indies : it is expedient , that as by order in time of peace the fleet hath and Admiral and Viceadmiral , that now it should have two more at the least in eke Fleet : and nevertheless they are to be wafted home with and army . 
 In mine opinion all these provisions ought to be made only in regard of the English army , and the rest of the ships which have be set out of that kingdom . 
 But in case that DONE Antonio should come with and army , and should seek to invade this kingdom , these provisions following would be needful . 
 What pro - r ■ 5Hat warning be given to the Cond de Beneventa , to ma^lf^on the Marks de Soria , to the Cond of Altamira , Antonio should to the Cond of Monterey , to the Marquess of Zerraluo , come with an and to the rest of the Lords and Knights , which are to have order to be in a readiness , against he come unto this kingdom . 
 That the people also be trained of the cities of Toro , Zamora , and Salamanca , to be ready to succour the country between the rivers of Doro and Minno : and the people of Estremadura and Sivilla are likewise to be trained to be ready to succour the city of Lisbon , and the country about the same . 
 Also that the castles of this city , river and territory be victualed and provided of gunpowder , match and led , and all things else belonging to the artillery , as I have And army of recluested in the relations which I sent unto his majesty 14. galleys to the 7. of March of this present year 1585. 
 be provided . That the galleys be furnished for foure months : and 
 that sixe more be brought from Spaine to this river of Lisbon with and hundred and twentie soldiers for each galley , that they may be divided among the eight galleys which remain here . 
 And in case it fallen out that the army of the English go not for the Indies , but occupy themselves upon this kingdom , ( for there may be English ships , which may attend the one and the other ) we shall be inforced to make another army , beside that for the Indies , of twelve ships , foure pataches , and a thousand five hundred soldiers . 
 In mine opinion all this is meet for his majesties service to be foreseen to be made ready with great diligence and care , and to provide money needful for the same , without neglecting the one or the other , but that all these things be done without delay : Referring my self in all things to those of wiser judgement . Written in Lisbon the 26 of October , 1585. 
 Another army of 12. great ships , 4 pataches , andi$oo soldiers . 
 