A brief note of a voyage to the East Indies , begun the 10 of April 1591 , wherein were three tall ships , the Penelope of Captain Raimond , Admiral , the Merchant royal , whereof was Captain , Samuel Foxcroft , Viceadmiral , the Edward Bonaventure , whereof was Captain , M. James Lancaster , Rear-admiral , with a small pinnace . Written by Henry May , who in his return homeward by the West Indies , suffered shipwreck upon the isle of Bermuda , whereof here is annexed a large description . 
 He tenth of April 1591 we departed from Plymmouth with the ships aforesaid . In May following we arrived at Grand Canaria one of the fortunate Islands . Also towards the end of this month we took a Portugall ship being bound for Brasil , within three degrees to the 
 Northward of the Equinoctial , which served greatly to our refreshing . The 29 of July following we came to Aguada Saldania a good harbour near the cape of Buona Speranza , where we stayed about a month with the Merchant royal , which by reason of sickness in our fleet was sent home for England with diverse weak men . Here we bought and ox for a knife of three pence , a sheep for a broken knife or any other odd trifle , of the people which were Negroes , clad in cloaks or mantles of raw hides , both men and women . The 8 of September the Penelope & the Edward Bonaventure weighed anchor , and that day we doubled the cape of Buona Speranza . The 12 following we were taken with and extreme tempest or huricano . This evening we saw a great sea break over our admiral the Penelope , and their light struck out : and after that we never saw them 194 
 J592 ' any more . In October following we in the Edward fell with the Westermost part of the isle of S. Laurence about midnight , knowing not where we were . Also the next day we came to and anchor at Quitangone a Quitangone place on the main land of Africa , which is two or three Mozam-leagues to the Northward of Mozambique , where the * ' Portugals of the isle of Mozambique fetch all their fresh water . Here we took a pangaia , with a Portugall boy in it ; which is a vessel like a barge , with one mat-saile of Coco nut leaves . The barge is sowed together with the rinds of trees , and pinned with wooden pins . 
 In this pangaia we had certain corn called millio , Hens , and some farthels of blue Calicut cloth . The Portugal ! boy we took with us , and dismissed the rest . From this place we went for and island called Comoro , upon the °f coast of Melinde , which stands about 11 degrees to the ComonSouth of the equinoctial : in which island we stayed all November , finding the people black and very comely , but very treacherous and cruel : for the day before we departed from thence they killed thirty of our men on shore , among whom was William Mace our master , and two of his mates ' ; the one of them being in the boat with him to fetch water , the other being on shore against our ship ; they having first betrayed our boat . From hence we went for the isle of Zanzibar , on the coast of Melinde , They Winter whereas we stayed and Wintered until the beginning of of r tO r n • ° ° Zanzibar . 
 February following . 
 The second of February 1592 we weighed anchor , and set sail directly for the East Indies ; but having calms and contrary winds , we were until the month of June before we could recover the coast of India near Calicut ; whereby many of our men died for want of refreshing . In this month of June we came to and anchor at the isles of Pulo pinaom , whereas we stayed until the first °f day of September , our men being very sick , and dying Pul° PtnMm-apace . This day we set sail , and directed our course for Malaca : and we had not be far at sea , but we took a ship of the kingdom of Pegu of some fourescore 
 195 
 They return homeward . 
 tons with wooden anchors , and about fiftie men in her , with a pinnace of some eighteene tons at her stern , both laden with pepper . But their pinnace stole from us in a gust in the morning . Here we might have taken two ships more of Pegu laden likewise with pepper and rice . In this month also we took a great Portugall ship of six or seven hundred tun , laden chiefly with victuals , chests of hats , pintados , and Calicut clothes . Beside this we took another Portugall ship of some hundred tun , laden with victuals , rice , Calicos , pintados , and other commodities . These ships were bound for Malaca with victuals : for those of Goa , of S. Thomas , and of other places in the Indies do victuali it , because that victuals there are very scarce . 
 In the month of November 1592 we shaped our course for the island of Nicubar lying certain leagues to the Northwest of the famous island of Sumatra ; whereas within short time we came to anchor : and here we had very good refreshing : for after we arrived there , the people ( whom we found in religion Mahumetans ) came aboard us in their canoas , with hens , cocos , plantans , and other fruits : and within two days they brought unto us reals of plate , giving us them for Calicut cloth : which reals they found by diving in the sea , which were lost not long before in two Portugall ships which were bound for China , & were cast away there . This was the furthest place that we were at to the Southeast : and here because our company by this time was much wasted and diminished , we resolved to turn back to the isle of Zeilan . Wherefore we weighed anchor in the month of November , and arrived at Zeilan about the end of the same month . In this island grows great store of excellent cinamom , and the best diamonds in the world . Here our captain meant to stay to make up our voyage : whereof he conceived great hope , by certain intelligence which we had received ; but the company , which were in all but 33 men and boys , being in a mutiny , and every day ready to go together by the ears ( the captain being sick 196 
 and like for to die ) would not stay , but would needs go home . 
 The 8 of December 1592 we set sail homeward , but some 15 days before we had sighed of the cape of Good hope , we were forced to share our bred , by reason we had certain flies in our ship , which devoured most part of our bred before we were aware : so that when we came to sharing , we had but 31 pound of bred a man to carry us into England , with a small quantity of rice a day . 
 The last of March 1593 we doubled the cape of Bona Speranza . 
 They double the cape of Bona Sper-anza . 
 The isle of 
 In April next ensuing we came to anchor at the island of S. Helena , whereas we found and English man a tailer , which had be there 14 months before we came thither : Helena . 
 so we sending our boat on shore with some ten men , they found this English man in the chapel ; who by reason of the heat of the climate was enforced to keep himself out of the Sun. Our company hearing one sing in the chapel , supposing it had be some Portugal ! , thrust open the door , and went in unto him : but the poor man seeing so many come in upon him on the sudden , and thinking them to be Portugals , was first in such a fear , not having seen any man in 14 months before , The strange and afterwards knowing them to be Englishmen , and fg^reand some of them of his acquaintance , in such joy , that what sudden joy . between excessive sudden fear & joy , he became dis 
 tracted of his wits , to our great sorrows . Here we found of his drying some 40 goats . The party had made him for want of apparel two suits of goats skins with the hairy side outward , like unto the Savages of Canada . Here we stayed all this month . This man lived until we came to the West Indies , and then he died . 
 In the month of June 1593 we arrived at the island of Trinidad in the West Indies , hoping there to find refreshing : but we could not get any , by reason that the Spanyards had taken it . Here we were imbayed between the island and the main ; and for want of victuals the company would have forsaken the ship : 
 197 
 Trinidad in the West Indies . 
 whereupon the captain was enforced to swear everyman not to forsake the ship until we should see further occasion . Out of this bay , called Boca de Dragone , it pleased God to deliver us ; from whence we directed our course for the isle of S. Juan de Puerto rico , but fell with the small isle of Mona , where we abided some fifteene days , finding in that place some small refreshing . And here arrived a ship of Caen in Normandy , whereof was captain one Monsieur Charles de la Barbotiere , who greatly refreshed us with bred and other provision , which we greatly wanted . And so we took our leaves the one of the other . 
 In July having foul weather at Mona , we were forced to weigh anchor , and to set sail , directing our course for CapeTiburon . Cape Tiburon : and in doubling of the cape we had a gust from the shore , which carried away all our sails from the yards : so that we had left but one new forecourse to help our selves withal : which canvas the aforesaid Frenchman did help us withal . Also having doubled the foresaid cape in the distress aforenamed , the foresaid capitan de la Barbotiere with his pinnace gave chase unto us again ; who being come never unto us , I went aboard him , certifying him what distress we were in . The gentleman replied to me again , that there was not any thing in his ship , but what he could spare he would help us withal . So to conclude , we agreed with him for canvas . Moreover , he said that if we would go with Qr Guanaba . him to and harbour called * Gonnavy , which is to the Northward of Cape Tiburon , that then he would help us with fresh victuals enough . Whereupon I returned aboard our ship , and certified our captain of all : who made it known unto the company ; which no sooner herd of it , but they would all go in . So here we stayed with the aforesaid Frenchman 15 days : but small refreshing we could get , because the Spaniards stood in some fear of the Frenchman of war , supposing our ship to be a Portugal , and that we were his prize : nevertheless he certified them to the contrary . And in staying 198 
 so long with him , and having little refreshing , our company began to be in a mutiny , and made report that the captain & I went aboard the Frenchman but to make good cheer , and had not any care of them : but I protest before God , that our care was to get victuals whereby we might have be gone from him . But in the mean time a great part of our company had conspired to take away the Frenchmans pinnace , and with her to board the man of war . While these things were in complotting , one of their consorts went aboard the Frenchman , and certified him of all the conspiracy . Whereupon the captain of the French ship sent for our captain and me to come aboard to dinner : and we stayed with him all the afternoon , being invited unto supper : and being at supper , he himself would not a great while come to us : but at length he came . At his coming we asked of him what news . Who answered us , that either we must depart from him , or else he must go seek some other harbour . Whereupon I told captain Lancaster ; who prayed me to tell him that rather then we would be any hindrance unto him , we would be gone . But in the mean time , while we were thus talking together , the Frenchman weighed & set sail : which we perceived , and asked him what he meant by it . He replied to the captain & me , that he kept us for his security , and that our men had purposed as is aforesaid . When he came thwart our ship , it blew a pretty gail of wind : the boat being astern of them , having in her two Moors & two men of Pegu , which we had given them , brake away . Then was the Frenchman worse then before , & did threaten us very soar that we should pay his voyage . In the mean time the Edward seeing us passed , weighed and set sail to go for England : and they did share among them all the captains victuals & mine , when they saw the Frenchman keep us as prisoners . So the next morning we went to seek out the Frenchmans pinnace : which being at Laguna we shot ofF a piece , & so she came to us , having in her three more of 
 199 
 They wracked upon Bermuda the 17 of December 1593. 
 our company , Edmund Barker our lieutenant , and one John West , and Richard Lucland one of the mutinous crew . The which I told the Frenchman of ; & he could not deny , but that there was such a thing pretended . Then I was put into the French pinnace to seek their boat : and in the mean time they would go to see if they could overtake our ship . And the next day we should meet again at Cape S. Nicolas : so the next morning we met together all three of us , but herd no news of his boat . So he having Spanyards and Negroes aboard of us , requested to have them . Our captain desired him to send his boat aboard our ship , and he should have them with all his heart . So with much ado he sent his boat and had them . Then he demanded of them , if his boat were not aboard the ship . They answered no . So that then Monsieur de la Barbotiere was satisfied : and then we were great friends again , to all our joys . 
 The 12 of August 1593 our captain was sent aboard our ship : but before his departure he requested the captain of the French ship that he would give me passage home with him , to certify the owners what had passed in all the voyage , as also of the unruliness of the company . And this day we took our leaves the one of the other ; the Edward for England : and we bore in for Gonnavy , where afterwards we found the Frenchmans boat . 
 The last of November 1593 Monsieur de la Barbotiere departed from a port called Laguna in Hispaniola . The 17 of December next ensuing it was his fortune to have his ship cast away upon the Northwest part of the isle of Bermuda about midnight ; the pilots making themselves at noon to be to the Southward of the island twelve leagues , certified the captain that they were out of all danger . So they demanded of him their wine of heighth : the which they had . And being , as it should seem , after they had their wine , careless of their charge which they took in hand , being as it were drunken , through 200 
 their negligence a number of good men were cast away : and I being but a stranger among 50 and odd Frenchmen & others , it pleased God to appoint me to be one of them that were saved , I hope to his service & glory . We made account at the first that we were cast away hard by the shore , being high cliffs , but we found our selves seven leagues off : but with our boat and a raft which we had made & towed at our boats stern , we were saved some 26 of us ; among whom were no more English but my self . Now being among so many strangers , & seeing not room for the one half , I durst neither press into the boat , nor upon the raft , for fear lest they should have cast me over board , or else have killed me : so I stayed in the ship which was almost full of water , until the captain being entered the boat , called me unto him being at hand , for that it stood upon life or death : and so I presently entered , leaving the better half of our company to the mercy of the sea . After this we rowed all the day until and hour or two before night year we could come on land , towing the raft with the boat . When we came T& descrip-on shore , being all the day without drink , every man * ™ < > ftheisle took his way to see if he could find any : but it was J r u ‘ long before any was found . At length one of the pilots digging among a company of weeds found fresh water to all our great comforts , being only rain water : and this was all the fresh water that we found on shore . 
 But there are in this Island many fine bays , wherein if a man did dig , I think there might be found store of fresh water . This Island is divided all into broken Islands : and the greatest part I was upon , which might be some 4 or 5 miles long , and two miles & a half over ; being all woods , as Cedar & other timber , but Cedar is the chiefest . Now it pleased God before our The saving of ship did split , that we saved our carpenters tools , or tkwptnurs else I think we had be there to this day : and having l^atim ' recovered the aforesaid tools , we went roundly about thee a bark cutting down of trees , & in the end built a small strangely built bark of some 18 tun , for the most part with tronnels and fatvuhed . 
 201 
 Good harbors in you East part of Bermuda . And excellent fishing for pearls in Bermuda . 
 The people never Cape Briton use traffic of rich furs . 
 very few nails . As for tackling we made a voyage aboard the ship before she split , and cut down her shrowds , and so we tackled our bark , and rigged her . In stead of pitch we made lime , and mixed it with the oil of tortoises ; and assoon as the carpenters had calked , I and another , with each of us a small stick in our hands , did plaster the mortar into the seams , and being in April , when it was warm and fair weather , we could not sooner lay it on , but it was dry , and as hard as a stone . In this month of April 1594 , the weather being very hight , we were afraid our water should fail us ; and therefore made the more haste away : and at our departure we were constrained to make two great chests , and calked them , and stowed them on each side of our main mast , and so put in our provision of rainwater , and 13 live tortoises for our food , for our voyage which we intended to Newfoundland . In the South part of this Island of Bermuda there are hogs , but they are so lean that you can not eat them , by reason the Island is so barren : but it yields great store of fowl , fish and tortoises . And to the Eastward of the Island are very good harbours , so that a ship of 200 tun may ride there landlocked , without any danger , with water enough . Also in this Island is as good fishing for pearls as is any in the West Indies , but that the place is subject to foul weather , as thundering , lightning and rain : but in April and part of May we had very fair and hight weather . The 11 of May it pleased God to set us clear of the Island , to the no little joy of us all , after we had lived in the same almost the space of 5 months . And the 20 of May we fell with the land never to Cape Briton , where we ran into a fresh water river , whereof there be many , and took in wood , water , and ballast . And here the people of the country came unto us , being clothed all in furs , with the furred side unto their skins , & brought with them furs of sundry sorts to fell , beside great store of wild ducks : so some of our company having saved some small beads , bought 
 202 
 some of their ducks . Here we stayed not above foure hours , and so departed . This should seem to be a very good country . And we saw very fine champion ground , and woods . From this place we ran for the bank of Newfoundland , whereas we met with diverse , but none would take in a man of us , until it pleased God that we met with a bark of Falmouth , which received us all for a little time ; and with her we took a French ship , wherein I left capitan de la Barbotier my deer friend , and all his company , and stayed my self aboard the English bark : and having passage in the same , in the month of August I arrived at Falmouth 1594. 
 