A principal ruttier containing most particular directions to sail from S. Lucar in Andalusia by the Isles of the Canaries , the small Isles called Las Antillas , along the South parts of the Isles of S. Juan de Puerto rico , Hispaniola and Cuba : and from Cabo de Corrientes , or Cabo de S. Anton without and within the little Isles called Los Alacranes , to the port of S. Juan de Ullua in Nueva Espanna : and the course from thence back again by Havana , and through the Channel of Bahama to Spaine : together with the speciali marks of all the Capes , Islands , and other places by the way ; and a brief declaration of their latitudes and longitudes . 
 Punta de Naga . 
 F you depart from the bar of S. Lucar de Barameda towards the West Indias in the Summer time , you must stir away Southwest until you come to the headland called Punta de Naga upon the Isle of Tenerif . But if your departure be from the said bar in the 
 Winter , you must stir away Southwest and by South , until you come to the height of Cape Cantin on the coast of Barbarie : the marks and signs whereof be these following . 
 The marks to know Cape Cantin . 
 CApe Cantin is a low Cape and small to the sea ward , and makes a snout like the nose of a galley , and hath upon the top of the point a Heath or shrubby place , and on the top thereof stand two hammocks , that to the seaward being higher then the other ; but that on the Souther side shows like a tower : and his Cape is in 32. degrees and J. 
 306 
 And he that will seek from this Cape to discover Punta de Naga beforesaid , must stir away Southwest and by West , until he bring himself Northeast and Southwest with the same point , and then he must stir away South to fetch the said point . 
 The signs of Punta de Naga . 
 THe said point or Headland is and high point of Land , and plain upon the top like a table , and without it there are two little rocky Islands ; and upon the North side of the said point is another point called Punta de hidalgo , and upon the top thereof are 2. picked P ™ 1 ? & rocks like unto the ears of a Hare . 1 a ' 
 The course from the Canaries to the West Indies . 
 F you set sail from any of the Islands of the Canaries for the West Indias , you must stir away 30. or 40 leagues due South , to the end you may avoid the calms of the Island of Fierro : calms of and being so far distant from the said Pterr°-Island , then must you stir away West 
 Southwest , until you find your self in 20. degrees , and then sail West and by South until you come to 15. degrees and And from thence stir away West and by North ; and so shall you make a West way by reason of the Northwesting of the Compass : which West variation way will bring you to the Island of Deseada . °^the 
 J ° J compass . 
 The marks of the Island of Deseada . 
 THis Island Deseada lies East Northeast , and West 
 Southwest , having no trees upon it , and it is proportioned like a Galley , and the Northeast end thereof makes a low nose like the snout of a galley ; and by coming near it , and passing by the Norther end thereof , you shall perceive white broken patches like heaps of sand with read strikes in them : & the Southwest 3°7 
 Deseada in 15. degrees and a half . 
 end of this Island makes like the tilt of a galley . And this Island stands in 15. degrees and J. 
 Marks of the Island of Monserate . 
 MOnserate is and high Island , and round , full of trees , and upon the East side thereof you shall perceive certain white spots like sheets : and being upon the South side at the very point of the Island , somewhat off the land , it makes like a little Island , and putting your self either East or West from that point , in the midst thereof will appear a great broken land . 
 Marks of the Island of Marigalanta . 
 MArigalanta is a smooth Island , and full of wood or trees , and as it were of the fashion of a galley upon her deck : and being on the Southeast side about half a league off you shall make certain hammocks of black stones , and certain white patches : but on the West side appear fair white sandy shores or plains . 
 Marks of the Isle of Dominica . 
 THe Island of Dominica lies Northwest and Southeast , and upon the Northwest side it shows more high : and if you come near it at full sea , it will show like two Islands , but by coming nearer unto it , you shall perceive it to be but one : and upon the Southeast side you shall make or see a plain and long point , and upon the same point appears a cliff like to the cliff of Cape Tiburon ; and upon the North side a little from the land it shows like a little Island , and upon the top thereof is , as it were , and high steeple , and upon the Norther side you shall perceive it like many white sheets . 
 Marks of the Island of Guadalupe . 
 THe Island of Guadalupe lies on the West of Deseada , and upon the Southwest part thereof appear many high mountains , but upon the East side it makes certain tables , which are called the high part of Guada-308 
 lupe . And this Island is cut North and South ; so that the Canoas of India do pass from the North to the South of it , as if it were two Islands . 
 Marks of the Isle of Matalina , or Martinino . 
 THE Isle of Matalina is high and full of mountains , having in the midst thereof 3. hammocks : the middlemost homocke being highest shows like the great bowl of and hat . And upon the North side it appears like three little Islands . And in this Island there are warlike Indians like those of Dominica . 
 Marks of the three small Islands called Islas de Los Santos , or the Islands of Saintes . 
 Warlike and dangerous Indians like those of Dominica . 
 LOs Santos are 3. Islandes lying one close by another upon the South side of Guadalupe . For to go with S. Juan de Puerto rico you must stir away Northwest , until you fallen with the Isle of Saba . 
 Marks to know the Isle of Saba . 
 SAba is a little Island , and round about it you shall see the bottom ; but fear not , for there is no danger but that which you shall see ; and round about it , it makes as it were certain heaps of white sand ; and by the side thereof it shows like a Ship under sail : but follow that direction that I have given , and you shall see La virgin gorda . 
 Marks to know the Isle called La virgin gorda . 
 LA virgin gorda is and high Island and round , and seeing it , you shall espy all the rest of the Virgins which lie East and West one from another , and are bore without any trees . You may go about by them until 
 These z . the white and the grey Islands are rather bore rocks in the sea , fir so doth Far-rallon the Spanish word signify . But 1 interpret it Island , because all the rocks separatedfrom the bigger Islands are said to be little Islands . This white y bore Island is made white by the dung of birds and sea 
 you see the little grey Island , which you shall see by it self by the Virgins ; and coming near to the said Island , over that you shall by and by raise sighed of the white that little Island , which seems like a ship under sail . And if resort unto it . 
 3°9 
 you will pass between this little white Island or bore rock , and the green Island , you must beware that you leave the white Island on the larbourd side of you , and come no nearer it then a caliver-shot , and so shall you pass through 12. fathom-water : and then stir away Northnorthwest , and so shall you enter into the Haven of Puerto rico : and if you chance to pass the said Island by night , go by the foresaid direction , until the first watch be out , and then take in your sails , and so drive until it be near day : and then hoist sails , and stir away Southwest , seeking the said Port : and when you come to the entering within , you must stay till 10. of the clock for the sea-turne . And know , that having the Loguilo at Southwest , then shall the Harbour be off you North and South . 
 Directions from Monserate to Santa Cruz. 
 HE that departeth from Monserate to Santa Cruz , must stir away Westnorthwest : and by the same course you shall seize upon S. Juan de Puerto rico . 
 ' Marks to know the Isle of Santa Cruz. 
 SAnta Cruz is and Island not very high , all full of hammocks : and coming with it at full sea , it will show like the Virgins : and upon the East side there are two hammocks higher then all the rest . And by this course you may go to the Isle of S. Juan de Puerto rico ; and having found it , you may sail along the South coast East and West , until you come to Cabo Roxo . 
 Marks to know Cape Roxo . 
 CApe Roxo is a low Cape and trailing to the seaward , having certain heaps of broken ground thereon , which are like a homocke , and at full sea the same shows like a little Island from the land by it self , but coming near unto it , it will make all a whole land . 
 310 
 Directions from Cabo roxo to the Isle of Mona . 
 IF you will seek Mona from Cape roxo , you must stir away West and by North . 
 Marks of the Isle of Mona . 
 THe Isle of Mona is a low , round , and smooth Island , lying low by the sea , and full of trees : and to go from thence to the Isle of Saona you must stir away West ; and if you fallen with it in the night season , and come any thing near the land , then stir away West and by South , until it be near day , that you may keep your self by the land ; and if so be that in the Morning you see it not , then stir away Northwest , and so shall you find it : and if it be fair weather , and you perceive that the current hath set you to the Southwest , then stir away Northnorthwest , and so shall you go clear off the land . 
 Marks of the Isle of Saona . 
 IF you chance to see the Isle of Saona , it is and Island smooth with the sea , and lies Northeast and Southwest , and you shall see the trees before you see the Island : and on the Southwest end of this Island appears a great high bank of white sand which is called the head of Saona . And if you would come to and anchor , you may , for all is clear ground . And to go from this Island to Santa Catelina , you must stir away Northwest . 
 Marks of the Isle of Santa Catelina . 
 SAnta Catelina is a little low Island all full of low rocks even from the water , and hath not any trees , and it is close by the land ; and if you do not run along the coast of Hispaniola , you shall not see it : and from that Island to go to Saint Domingo , you shall sail along as the land lies , West and by North : 
 ^11 
 and before you come to the point called Causedo , you shall see certain holes in rocks , which lie alongst as These rocks the rocks do that cast up the water , which will show are called Los to SpOuting of Whale's . And a little ahead off the Mutes ’ °r that » y°u shah see the point of Andresa : and ahead The point of thereof the point of Causedo . This point or Causedo Causedo . lies low close by the water , and passing thereby , the coast will make to thee Northwest and Southeast ; and San Domingo , from thence to S. Domingo are 5. leagues . And if the wind chop up at North upon you , by means whereof you should be cast off from the coast or Port , and that Sierras de las you happen to see the old Mines ( called Sierras de las minas mejas . mjnas viejas ) bear Northwest off you , and The teats which are within the land be open of you , then shall you be North and South with the harbour ; and if The old Mines bear North off you , then shall you be below the harbour . 
 The point of Hisao . 
 The Isle of Beata . 
 Ocoa . 
 Puerto hermoso . 
 The Isle of Alto Velo . 
 Directions from Saint Domingo to Nueva Espanna . 
 IF you will sail from Saint Domingo in Hispaniola to Nueva Espanna , stir away Southsouth west , until you come up as far as the point of Nizao : and from thence stir away Westsouth west , and so you shall find the Isle of Beata . And if you sail from this point of Nizao for Ocoa , you must pass along the coast West and by North , until you come to Puerto Hermoso , or The beautiful haven , which is 18. leagues distant from Saint Domingo : and if you proceed from Puerto Hermoso for Nueva Espanna , you must stir away Southsouthwest , until you look out for Beata and Alto velo . 
 Marks of the Isle of Beata . 
 BEata is a small Island and not very high : you may pass along the outside thereof , and there is no danger but that you may see ; and by and by you shall raise Alto velo : and from thence you must stir away 312 
 West and by South , to give a birth from the Islands called Los Frails , or The Friars . And when you Los Frails . are as far ahead as the Frails , then must you stir away West and by North , and so shall you go right with Bacoa , and before you come to it , you shall see Bacon . high craggy cliffs , and at the descending of them white paths like great sheets ; these high craggy mountains are called Las sierras de donna Maria . And before you Las ster^s de come to the said point of Bacoa , you shall discover a anam ' little low Island even with the Sea and full of trees , which is called Isla Baque . Ida Baque . 
 Directions from Isla Baque to Cape Tiburon . 
 IF you will go from the Island Baque , or from the ape point of Bacoa for Cape Tiburon , or to the isle of gf Navaza , you must stir away Westnorthwest , and edge jqavaza _ in somewhat to the Northwest , and you shall pass between Navaza and Cape Tiburon . 
 Marks of Cape Tiburon , which is the Western cape of Hispaniola . 
 CApe Tiburon lies sliding down to the Seaward , and makes a sharp clifFe like the snout of a Tiburon or shark-fish ; and upon the top thereof it appears like white ways with certain gullets or drains upon it , which are caused by the passage of the water from the mountain in the Winter time . 
 Marks of the Isle of Navaza . 
 NAvaza is a little round Island full of low trees or shrubs , and it lies East and West from Cape Tiburon , and from this small Island to go for Sierras de Cobre , or The mountains or mines of Copper upon the Southeast part of Cuba , you must stir away Northnorthwest . 
 [ Directions from 
 3*3 
 Directions from Cape Tiburon to Cabo de Cruz in Cuba . 
 Sierras de Cobre . 
 Sierras de Tarquino . 
 IF you will sail from Cape Tiburon to Cape de Cruz in Cuba , you must stir away Northwest , and you shall see the Sierras or mountains de Cobre ; and from thence you may go along the coast West towards Cabo de Cruz ; and before you come at it you shall see The great Tarquino , and from this Tarquino you shall have to Cape de Cruz 30. leagues , and this great Tarquino is the highest land upon all that coast ; and then by and by you shall see the lesser Tarquino , from whence to the foresaid Cape you have 12. leagues , and so shall you go discovering the coast , until you come to Cabo de Cruz. 
 Marks of Cabo de Cruz. 
 CApe de Cruz is a low Cape full of shrubs ; and from thence Westward you shall see no land ; for the distance or bay is great between the said Cape and the Isles called Los Jardines . 
 Directions from Cape de Cruz to Isla de Pinos . 
 IF you sail from Cape de Cruz to seek the Island of Pinos , you must stir away Westnorthwest . And note , that if in this course you happen to sound , do not fear ; for you have nine fathoms . If also going this course , you meet with certain little Islands upon Los Caimanes . the larboard side , which are called The Caimanes , or The crocodiles , having sighed of them , stir away Northwest , and so shall you find the Island of Pinos . And if by seeing the said Islands called Caimanes you are amazed , you shall know by the latitude , whither they be the Jardines or no : for if you find your self in one and twentie degrees , then be you sure they are Los Jardines . The Jardines , and then stir out again South , till you be 314 
 clear of them ; and when you have brought them North of you , then may you stir away West , if it be by day ; if it bee’by night , West and by South , till you see the Island of Pinos . 
 The marks of Isla de Pinos . 
 THe Island of Pinos stretcheth it self East and West , and it is full of hammocks , and if you chance to see it at full sea , it will show like 3. Islands , as though there were diverse sounds between them , and that in the midst is the greatest ; and in rowing with them , it will make all a firm land : and upon the East side of these three hammocks it will show all ragged ; and on the West side of them will appear unto you a low point even with the sea , and oftentimes you shall see the trees before you shall discern the point . 
 Directions from the Isle of Pinos to Cape de Corrientes . 
 IF you sail from the foresaid Isle of Pinos to Cape de Corrientes , stir away West and by North ; and before you come to the said Cape upon the Northside of you , you shall see certain mountains all full of hammocks , which are called Las Sierras de Guanaguarico , Las sierras de and that upon the West part hath more hammocks then that on the other . 
 Marks of Cape de Corrientes . 
 CApe de Corrientes is a low Cape , though not so low as the other part of the land that lies along by it ; 
 for it is more low , and hath upon it 4. or 5. great splats like unto oxen , and the very point of the Cape is all white sand : and from thence Westward you shall discern no land , for it makes a great bay : and from hence you must sail to Cape de Sant Anton. 
 [ Marks of 
 315 
 THe cape of Sant Anton is low by the sea , and all full of shrubs or trees ; and you shall see within the land a lake of fresh water ; and if you want water , there you may water : and upon the North side of the said Cape you shall discern a palm tree higher then the rest of the trees , and it shows round like a bowl at the top , like to the top of a ship : and North from the Cape are certain sholdes which are 2. or 3. leagues long . 
 Directions from the Cape de S. Anton to Nueva Espanna on the outside of the small Islands called Los Alacranes or The Scorpions . 
 IF you will sail from Cape Sant Anton to Nueva Espanna with a North wind , then stir away Westnorthwest from 21. to 22. degrees , and then found upon the pracel or flat ; and if you see by this direction , that you hold water , then stir away Northwest , until you loose the ground ; and then follow your course again , until you have brought your self into 24. degrees and J. and then sail West until you The Isle bring your self North and South with the Isle of Vermeja . Vermeja , or The read Isle : then stir away Southwest , 
 Villa rica . and by this way you shall find Villam rica on the coast 
 of Nueva Espanna . And if by going this course you be in 19. degrees and J. and chance not to see the land , then stir away West until you see Villam rica , and from thence sail you South for the harbour of 8. Juan de S. Juan de Ullua : and if you should be near the Ullua - land you must stir South and by West towards thee A volcan or same harbour . And if you chance to see the Volcan urmng 1. or burning bill to bear west & by South from you , then know , that the harbour of S. Juan de Ullua shall East and west off - you . 
 316 
 Villa rica stands in 19. degrees and J. and the signs thereof are certain high hills full of hammocks of many heads , which have on the top of them certain white patches after the manner of white beaten ways ; and these hills lie Northeast and Southwest . And if you doubt whither these be the Sierras Sierras de or hills of S. Martin , wet your led or found , and if Sant Martin . you find bottom , they are the Sierras of Villa rica : Sierras de and sail you to the landward , and look by how much rica‘ you come nearer the land , so much will they seem lower unto you : but so do not the hills of S. Martin ; for the nearer you come to them , the higher will they appear to you : and likewise if they be the hills of S. Martin , you shall not find bottom , but even at land it self . 
 Marks of Rio de las palmas , and of the river of mountains called Rio de las montannas . 
 Rio de las palmas . 
 Rio de las montannas . 
 Rio de Panuco . Rio Hermoso , or The beautiful river . The current of the bay of Mexico { the wind being at the East ) sets to the North , and 40. leagues from the shore to the Northeast . 
 F you should chance to fallen with Rio de las palmas , or The river of palms , or else with the river of Mountains , it is all a plain land , and full of trees and certain woody hammocks , and among them certain heaps of sand , and all this along by the sea side : and if you 
 went by land to the river of Panuco , you shall have many mouths or openings of plaias or strands , where also are many lizas or oazy places , which stretch to Rio Hermoso . 
 You must beware what part soever you happen of this coast to fallen withal , to discover it , and although you know it , you must found the depth ; because if the winds be Easterly , the current sets there much to the North : but if you should be 40. leagues at sea , then this current sets to the Northeast . 
 [ Marks of 
 3'7 
 S. Luis de Tampice . 
 Marks of Rio Hermoso or The beautiful river . IF you will seek the river called Rio Hermoso , looking well within the land , you shall see three hammocks of and high hill , and those two which are to the landward within , are rounder then the other which is nearest the sea , for that it is longer and bigger , and lies North and South , and you shall be 4. leagues at sea when you shall see them : and they are called The sierras , or mountains of Tamaclipa ; and from thence to the river of Panuco there is no high land , but all low and even with the sea , and full of palm trees and other trees . 
 Marks of the river of Panuco . 
 IF you fallen with the river of Panuco ( between which and the foresaid Villam rica stands the Island called Isla de Lobos or The Isle of seals ) the marks be these . From the mouth of the river it makes a great bay without , and at the end of this bay upon the Northside there is oazy , low , and bore ground altogether without trees , and at the out end of the oazy low place upon the West side it makes a low homock like to a Lizards head : and when you see the aforesaid cliff , you shall be in the opening of the mouth of the said river , and then shall you see a little low tower having on the top of it a cross , which the fishermen call Marien : and this bar hath on it 2. fathom water , and 2. and and you need not to stay for the tIED , for that it flows not there : and that you may the better know whither you be in this bay which I have mentioned , or not , you shall see certain hills at West Southwest , which are called Las sierras de Tarquia ; and forthwith also you shall see the oazy place that I speak of , which goes to the mouth of the river where stands a town called S. Luis de Tampice , and from thence to Panuco you have 9. leagues by land . 
 318 
 The marks of Isla de lobos , or The Isle of seals . 
 I Sia de lobos is a small Island nothing so big as the card does show it , and in it is a little grove or wood of palm trees , and all the rest of the Island is without trees , and round about it are sundry playas or strands , and it is enclosed round about with arrazifes or shoalds , and chiefly towards the main land . And from thence to Cape Roxo or The read Cape are 3. Cabo Roxo . leagues . And if you will come to anchor at this Island to A watering water , for that there is water in it , you may ride on all the South side close by the point that stretcheth to the Westward , and you may pass by the East side of it , and ride in 22. fathom , and until you come to 15. fathoms , all is clean ground . 
 Marks of the river of Tuspa . 
 IF you fallen with the river of Tuspa , you must beware the sholdes which run 5. or 6. leagues into the sea : and upon this river of Tuspa within the land there are high hills which lie Northeast and Southwest , and have their ending upon the bay of Cassones : and The bay of upon the river you shall perceive a white cliff , which Cassones . will show unto you like the castle of S. Juan de Ullua . 
 Marks of the river of S. Peter and S. Paul . 
 IF you chance to fallen with the bay of Cassones , and upon the river of S. Peter and S. Paul , take heed : for the said bay is a deep bay , and the hills of Tuspa have their ending upon this bay . And in the mouth of this river of S. Peter and S. Paul are two hammocks of white sand , the Westermost being bigger then that on the Northeast . And by and by you shall perceive the water to change white which comes out of the river , and sounding you shall find sand mixed with clay upon your led ; and look upon the West 
 319 
 All these are upon the coast of Tabasco . Las sierras de S. Pablo . 
 Punta delgada , or The slender point . 
 Cabezas anegadas are sunken heads or rocks under water . 
 Comedera de Pescado . 
 side , and you shall see the Sierras or mountains of S. Paul , which are two , and that on the North side is higher then the other . 
 Marks of Almeria . 
 IF you should chance to fallen or come upon the plains of Almeria , it is a land full of many hammocks , some with tuftes of trees on them , and some bore with white sand , and in 60. fathoms you shall have clay or oaze , and in 30. fathom to the landward sand . And from thence to Punta de hidalgo or Punta delgada the coast lies Northeast and Southwest . 
 Soundings of Villa rica . 
 IF you fallen with Villam Rica in 30. fathoms , you shall find clay or oaze , and in some places stones , and near the land you shall have sand : and upon the port of S. Juan de Ullua you shall have in some places clay or oaze , and in some places herring bones , and in other places maze and , and upon the rocks called Cabezas anegadas you shall have small black sand at 17. fathom two leagues from land . And if you see a coast that lies Northeast and Southwest , and another Northwest and Southeast , you shall be upon S. Paul : and if you should be upon Cabezas anegadas , you shall find in 30. fathoms great sand & black , and in 28. fathoms you shall have the sand white like the shavings of free stone : and from S. Paul to the bar of Vera Cruz it is clay or oaze , and from thence to S. Juan de Ullua you have many deeps , which at one sounding bring you clay , and at another sand , and at another clay and maze together , and herring bones : and in some 35. or 40. fathom you shall find rocky ground , and in some places sand , and in some other places herring bones : and we call this Comedera de pescado , or The food of fish . 
 320 
 The course from Cabo de Corrientes and Cabo de S. Anton upon the West end of Cuba , towards Nueva Espanna , within the Isles called Los Alacranes , or The Scorpions . 
 F you sail from Cape de Corrientes toward Nueva Espanna on the inside of The Alacranes , you must stir West : and when you think you have sailed 35. or 40. leag . you shall found upon the pracel , and you shall come upon » = = = ^ = = 1 many bristlings of waters , which , if it were fair weather , would seem a skull of fish . And before you come out of the bristlings , if you found you shall have depth as I have said . If you go from Cape de S. Anton by the inside of The Alacranes , you must stir away West and by South , and you shall find sounding in the same order as I have said : you shall have white sand , and near the land you shall find it like the shavings and peckings of free stone , and white sand like houre-glasse-sand , and sometime periwinkles or small shells . Also if you found in deep water , and on the sudden find rocks , then know that you are upon The Alacranes , and then stir away Westsouthwest until you find clean ground , and till you bring your self into 18. or 20. fathoms . And if you go deeping your water , then stir away West , and by these depths you shall go sounding ; and then taking your heighth by sun or star , you must beware that you pass not 21. degrees & J. or 21. degrees and J. at the most ; and in this heighth , and at 18. or 20. fathoms you shall follow your way : and if you deepen water , edge to the Northwestward , and if you altar more your depth , edge to the Southwestward , until you have got so far ahead as Cape Sisal , and discovered the coast of Campeche , which coast lies North and South , and you shall take up on your led x 321 x 
 Cabo de Corrientes . 
 Cabo de S. 
 Anton. 
 Cape Sisal upon the coast of Campeche in Yucatan Or Isla de Arenas . 
 white sand like hourglass sand , and sometime periwinkles or small shells ; and by and by you shall go increasing depth , until you loose it , and so shall you pass between the Triangle and the Sandy Hand . 
 The course between the Triangle and the Sandy Island to S. Juan de Ullua . 
 WHen you have lost your depth , stir away South _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ west to fetch the Sierras or hills of S. Martin : Martin . and to know the hills of S. Martin , there are 2. hills stretching Northeast and Southwest , and the Southwest is greater then that on the Northeast , but the Northermost hill is higher , and makes on the top a flat point and very high , and without it , it hath and Island which Roco partida . is called Roca partida , or The cloven rock : and if it be clear , on the Southwest side and high land like a topsail will appear , and then shall you be North and Or Minsapa . South with The Pan or Loaf of Nisapa . Note , that these Sierras or Hills of Sant Martin are all black and full of trees , and make no show as Villam rica does : And mark this , that by how much you come nearer them , so much the higher will they show unto you : neither shall you find any bottom till you be at the very shore . 
 The course from Roca partida or The cloven rock to S. Juan de Ullua . 
 IF you depart from Roca partida or The cloven rock for Sant Juan de Ullua , you must stir away Westnorthwest , and so shall you fetch or fallen with Or Antoni - the point of Anton Mislardo : and if you happen to serro ' found upon The sunken rocks called Cabezas anegadas , you shall have black sand and 17. fathom water , and you shall be but a league from the land , and if you be 2. leagues from the land , you shall have 34. fathoms . 
 322 
 The course from Sant Juan de Ullua in the bay of Mexico to Spaine in Europe . 
 GOD'S you depart from S. Juan de Ullua to Havana , you must stir away Northeast until you bring your self in 25. degrees , and from thence you must stir away East from the little Islands called Las Tortugas , until you have the sounding of them ; and if you find 
 white sand very small , you shall be East and West with them , and if your sounding bee shelly ground and periwinkles , or small shells or scales , then shall you be Northeast and Southwest , and the shells or scales must be read , and if at some time you take up black sand , then are you North and South with the said Tortugas . 
 Marks of The Tortugas . 
 IF you chance to fallen with The Tortugas , they are 5. or 6. little Islands of white sand , low and close by the sea , saving one which hath on it some shrubs or bushes of trees : and they are in 25. degrees . 
 The course from The Tortugas towards Havana . 
 IF you depart from The Tortugas towards Havana with a fresh wind , you must stir away Southwest : and if it be fair weather , and a small gale of wind , then stir South , that the current may not draw you in , nor set you too much to the Westward : and if you fallen with Los Organos , they are a rank of high and low hills with many sharp heads like unto Organ pipes and at the entering thereof on the South side is Rio de puercos , or The river of hogs ; and at the further end is the deep bay called Baya honda , and there is the round loaf or heap called El pan de baya honda , that is to say , The loaf of the deep bay : and from this place until you come to Cape 
 323 
 Las Tortugas , 
 The hills called Los Organos upon Cuba near Havana . Rio de Puercos . Baya honda . 
 The tower of Havana . 
 de S. Anton all is sholdes and flats 4. or 5. leagues into the sea , even as far as the said Cape : and from Baya honda or The deep bay to Havana , all the coast is full of high and low hills , which they call La Quadrilla de sierras , which is as much to say , as A company of hills together like soldiers on a heap ; and more to the Eastward you shall descry and high hill which is called El pan de Cabannas . And if you fallen with Havana , you shall see on the Southwest side and hill called La meza de Marien , or the Table of Marien ; and if it be clear , you shall see lower to the Westward the heap or loaf that is called El pan de Cabannas . You must note , that about Havana it is all low land even with the sea , till you come to Mesa de Marien , and then look well within the land , and you shall see 2. little round trees like to the teats of women's breasts ; and bringing your self North and South , you shall be with the harbour of Havana , and then shall you soon perceive the tower that is upon the cliffs of Havana . 
 Marks of the haven or port called Puerto de Marien . 
 PUerto de Marien is a harbour that you may enter into without any danger or fear , but at the entrance thereof you must borrow on the West side , by reason of the rocks and shelves , and when you are within , then borrow on the East shore , and leave the Note . other side , and so shall you enter safe : and from this place to Havana is all low land . Note , that if you overpass the harbour of Havana to the Eastward , or if the current hath set you passed it by means of calms , then shall you perceive at full sea upon the Chipiona a coast certain broken places like the entrances of har-towne standing bours , because the land is low ; and coming near ^fAndalu^ia shore you shall see in some places of the coast next unto S. Playas or strands of sand which show like unto Lucar . Chipiona : and looking Eastward along the sea coast , 
 324 
 you shall see a round loaf which is called El pan de ElPan Matanzas : and also you shall perceive in certain tanz^ ' places round white heaps of sand called Barrancas , If you will recover Havana , go along the coast close creeks or by the land , for the current runneth very swift in the broken channel , and there is no fear but of that which you may see ; for all the coast is clean ground . * 
 The course from Havana to Spaine . 
 IF you will sail from Havana to Spaine , you must stir away Northeast , till you come to the head of The Martyrs called La Cabeza de los Martyrs . If it chance before you come to the said head , that the wind should chop up at North on you , then stand to the Eastward , until you bring your self as far ahead as Matanzas ; then cast about to the West , to discover the land of The Martyrs , or of Florida , that the current may not set you on The Mimbres : and if by chance you see The Pan de Matanzas at full sea , it hath these marks following . It is a round heap or loaf , and high withal , and on the Western side thereof , appears a rock like to the head of a Tortoise : and between this Pan and the hills of Seluco , there will appear unto you a great broken land , like as it were sunken places , and upon the East side of this Pan towards Punta de los Puercos it is all low land , and you shall see no high land at all : and being so far shot , that this Pan de Matanzas shall bear Westnorthwest and Southsoutheast off you , and being desirous also to avoid the fury of the current of the channel of Bahama , stir away Northnortheast , and by this course you shall pass the channel , and win the coast of Florida . 
 Cabeza de los MarAres . 
 Which 
 MarAres are a number of small Hands lying ahead the Cape of Florida . 
 Los Mimbres . The marks of Pan de Matanzas . 
 Punta de los Puercos . 
 The furious current in the channel of Bahama . 
 Marks of the head of The Martyrs called Cabeza de los Martyrs . 
 THe head of The Martyrs are three heaps of white sand full of trees , and that in the midst hath on the top a crown , as it were of white sand , and is higher 325 
 Directions to and bigger then the other two : and to know whither you know whither be entrej ; unto the channel , mark well how the coast lies chaneuof you ; and if you perceive that the coast bears off Bahama or no . you East and West , you are not in the channel ; but if the coast should bear off you Northeast and Southwest , then are you in the channel ; and taking your heighth you shall know : for if you find your self in 24. degrees and then are you East and West with the head of The Martyrs : and if you see the coast bear off you Northeast and Southwest , ( as I have said ) stir away 4. or 5. leagues from the landward right off ; and then stir away Northeast : and being in 28. degrees and a Cabo de half , you shall be shot out of the channel , and then shall Cannaveralin yOU he gast anj West with Cape de Cannaveral , or ahalfi : The CaPe of Redes . 
 The course to come through the channel of Bahama homeward for Spaine . 
 The course in TO F in Winter you should pass through the channel of Winter . J [ Bahama for Spaine , stir away the first Sangradura or course Eastnortheast , and afterwards East and by North , and so shall you pass by the South side of Bermuda : and you must take heed that you go these foure hundred or five hundred leagues , because you shall The Isle of not come near the said Isle of Bermuda ; & when 
 Bermuda . yOU are gOne this course , then put your self in what 
 heighth you will , and make your way as you will your The course in self . But if you pass the channel in the Summer time over ™ 1 ™ ? towards Spaine , stir away Eastnortheast , and you shall northerly . pass by the North side of Bermuda ; and when you have brought your self in 35. degrees , stir East and by North until ! you bring your self to 25. degrees and and from thence stir away East for the Isle of Fayal or of Flores . 
 Marks to know the Isle of Fayal . 
 THe Island called Fayal upon the Southwest side , makes and high hill or loaf like to the top of Brasilia in the Island of Terzera ; and behind that 326 
 high Pike or loaf is and harbour called Puerto Pini , Puerto Pint. and upon the East side it makes a little plain Island ; 
 and upon the North side there stands a rock or Island by it self . And from this Island being one of the Azores , you may shape your course to which of the Islands you please , or to any other place which you know . 
 Marks to know the Isle of Flores . 
 IF you happen to fallen with Flores first , by this you shall know it : the Island lies Northeast and Southsouthwest , and the West end thereof makes a rock or cliflfe like the clifFe of Tiburon ; and coming near the land , you shall see two little Islands near the point of the land ; and to the Northward of this clifFe or rock a little from the land you may ride and water ; and between that and the village , in every bay you may likewise ride and water : and you shall see the water run into the sea in every part that you look on . 
 Now follows the course and direction to sail from Passage on the Northeast part of S. Juan de Puerto rico , unto Havana , by the North side of the Isle of Hispaniola , and by The old channel . 
 F you depart from S. Juan de Puerto rico to seek Cabo deal Enganno , you must stir away Westnorthwest , and so shall you see a round heap or loaf in the sea , which lies on the Southwest side of the gulf of Semana ; and from thence it begins about the hill of the Cape 
 del Enganno , & this is the mouth of the gulf . And if it should be near night when you see this land , stir away Northwest with a small sail , because of certain rocks 
 El Passaje a place on the Northeast part of the Isle of S. Juan de Puerto rico . 
 Cabo del Enganno the most Easterly Cape of Hispaniola . Or Samana . 
 called Las Ovejas , or The Sheep : and in the morning cast Las Ovejas . about to see the land to the Southwestward ; and if when 
 327 
 Isla de Tortuga : otherwise called Hinagua . The Isle of Jaico . 
 Las sierras de Cabanca . 
 Cayo Romano . This word Cayo in the Biscaian tongue signifies a flat or a should . 
 Cabo de Cruz. 
 you see the land , it seems unto you a small island at full sea like a round mountain , then is it The cape deal Enganno : and from thence stir away West and by North towards Cabo Franco . 
 Marks of Cabo Franco . 
 CAbo Franco is a low Cape even with the sea , and hath these markes* And from thence stir away West , and you shall see and high mountain , and on the top thereof a cloudy homock like the top of a hat : and at the foot of this hill is the haven or harbour called El puerto de plata . And if you will go into this port , you must leave the Island on the West side , and then take heed of that which you see , and borrow on the castles side . And from thence to go with the old channel , you must stir away Northwest , until you come out of sighed of land , and then stir away West and by North , and so shall you go with the land of Baracoa , and here are hills very high , which make the teats which look like 3. crowns . And you shall pass between the Isle of Tortugas , or Hinagua , and the Island of Jaico : and from thence run alongst the coast Northeast and Southwest ; and having doubled the outmost high hill or mountain , you shall see in the midst thereof a round hill , and upon the Southwest side by the sea you shall see a low even land foure or five leagues long , and a low point , and this point of the hill is called La sierras de Cabanca ; and then begins the bay of Cayo Romano : and ahead the sierras you shall see a round loaf which is in the midst of the same bay , and ahead of that you shall see a hill flat on the top like a table sixe or seven leagues , which hill is not very high , and from these hills to Cayo Romano you have five and thirtie leagues , and you must stir the one half of the course Northwest , and the other half Northwest and by West , and so shall you make or see the said Cayo Romano upon the larboard side of you . Note , that from Cayo Romano to Cabo de Cruz you have three leagues , and they lie North and South one from another . 
 328 
 Romano is and high Island , and lies Northeast Southwest , and stretcheth it self as it were 4. 
 leagues : and coming on it Northeast & Southwest , it makes a loaf or round heap or homock ; in the midst 
 This Island lies ioo . leagues from Havana . 
 there are two saddles , as we term them , or low partitions , the one on the one side , and the other on the other side ; and coming with it North and South , it makes all one low send or saddle in the midst . And if night should come on you at this Cayo Romano , enter not the channel , because in the mid way is and Isle , flat , or Cayo , which lies North and South with Cayo Romana , and it is called Cayo de la Cruz : and at full sea you shall discern a heath , which this Cayo hath in the midst of it , which is like to a sail ; but all night bear but your foresail a glass one way and another glass the other way until it be day , and then enter the channel , and leave these Cayos , on the larbourd side of you . 
 Note , that if you be within sighed of the Parcel , and The g-eat see two little Islands of white sand , that then you are Parcel-on the cantell of the Parcel : and if you go more a head coasting the Parcel , about fifteene leagues , you shall see three Islands full of trees , which are called Las LasAnguiUas . Anguillas and all these three Islands bear North and South one from another . Item from Cayo de Cruz to Havana , if it be by day , stir away West Northwest ; but if it be by night , then stir a point more to the Westward : and if in this course you chance to see the Parcel , fear not ; for in the lowest water there are sixe fathoms ; then cast about to the Southwestward to get out about two glasses , and then stir away Westnorthwest until it be day and so shall you go by the Cayos : and in this course you must keep twentie foure leagues or thereabouts . And from this Cayo the Another Cayo Cruz sixe or seven leagues lies another Cayo upon & °r 7 Segues the Northeast and by North , which is great and white , e 
 and all even ; But the point on the Southwest is 
 329 
 El puerto de Matanzas or The haven of slaughters . 
 Las Sierras de Guana . 
 Cruz del Padre . 
 La Bata de Conel . 
 La Baia de Caos , or Cayos . 
 Or 
 Cameloquea . 
 smaller , and upon the said point is a shrub or bush which shows like a sail : also there is a bank of white sand along by the seaside , which in the midst thereof makes a cliff full of trees that seems like a saddle : and upon the Northeast side ( for on this manner the coast lies along from the Cape ) going by the channel you shall see certain hills eighteene or twentie leagues long lying Northeast and Southwest being all saddle-like : and bringing the point Southwest off you , you shall be in the midst of the channel : and from thence you have as far to Matanzas as to Cayo Romano . Likewise from thence on the side of Havana you shall see certain hills which show to be three , and lie Northeast and Southwest , and that on the Southwest is highest : they are called Las Sierras de Guana : and North and South from them lies a flat , which is called Cayo de Nicola , which stretched out two leagues into the Sea , and in the middle of the said flat there is a little Island of white sand : and from thence you must sail to Cruz deal Padre . 
 Marks of Cruz deal Padre . 
 CRuz del Padre is a Cape all broken in pieces : and from thence you must stir away Northeast , because of the Bay that is there , called the Bay of Conell , and this Bay stretcheth to the Bay of Caos , which is within 20 leagues of the said point : and then stir away West Northwest to go with the Port of Matanzas , and with the hills of Camoniaca . 
 Marks of the hills of Camoniaca . 
 THe hills of Camoniaca lie Northwest and Southeast , and the Southeast side is low land and even : also upon the Northeast side it is even land , and runneth towards the Bay of Matanzas , and in the middle of these hills there is one high hill , and upon the Northeast side there appears a round heap : and 
 330 
 if you see this hill at West Southwest , the Pan or round heap of Matanzas will bear off you West and by South . 
 Marks of the round hill called El pan de Matanzas . 
 THis Pan is a round heap standing on a low land and if you bring your self North and South with it , it will make you two saddles ; and on the West side it makes a great parted land as it were sinking with the sea . Note that wheresoever you shall go to seek the Tortugas , and shall come with the coast and find it bear off you Northeast and Southwest , I advice you to go along the coast to the Southwestward : you may not deepen more then fortie five fathoms , for if you do , you shall cast your self without the Tortugas . 
 Also you must note , that if by chance you find your self shot between the Tortugas , and the Martyrs , and that you cannot go on the outside of the said Tortugas , then cause one to go to the top , to see if you can descry them ; and if you cannot see them , stir away Southwest until you see them ; and having got sighed of them , sound , and you shall find eighteene or ninteene fathoms : and so sholding stir away South and by West , and go by this course . And fear you not the sholding , for you shall meet with 12 fathoms , and shall have black sand in your sounding . And going nearer to the end of the said Tortugas ( for he that is on the top shall see them all ) as you pass by , you shall find but eight fathoms , and stony ground , and that is the shouldst water you shall have . And you shall pass by a bustling of a tIED , that shoules out of the channel that way : but you need not fear any thing for you shall have no less then eight fathom water : and being passed the said bustling but a minion shot , you shall lose the ground and be in the channel . 
 331 
 Note . 
 WHen you shall pass this course , go not out of sighed of the Tortugas . And if you will go from thence to Havana , having a fair wind , stir away Southwest because the current may not set you off : and if with a fresh wind and Northerly , then stir away Southerly . 
 