De Guiana carmen Epicum . 
 Hat work of honour and eternal name , 
 For all the t’atchieve , Fills me with hands 
 To my hearts 
 world t’envie and us 
 fury , and gives armed 
 peace , that else would 
 gladly turn My limbs and every sense into my thoughts Rapt with the thirsted actium of my mind ? O Clio , Honours Muse , sing in my voice , Tell the attempt , and prophecy th’exploit Of his Eliza-consecrated sword , That in this peaceful charm of Englands sleep , Opens most tenderly her aged throat , Offering to pour fresh youth through all her veins , That flesh of brass and ribs of steel retains . Riches , and Conquest , and Renown I sing , Riches with honour , Conquest , without blood , Enough to seat the Monarchic of earth , 446 
 Like to Joves Eagle on Elizas hand . Guiana , whose rich feet are mines of gold , Whose forehead knocks against the roof of Stars , Stands on her tiptoes at fair England looking , Kissing her hand , bowing her mighty breast , And every sign of all submission making , To be her sister , and the daughter both Of our most sacred Maid : whose barren ness Is the true fruit of virtue , that may get , Bear and bring forth anew in all perfection , What heretofore savage corruption held In barbarous Chaos ; and in this affair Become her father , mother , and her heir . 
 Then most admired Sovereign , let your breath Go forth upon the waters , and create A golden world in this our iron age , And be the prosperous forewind to a Fleet , That seconding your last , may go before it In all success of profit and renown : Doubt not but your election was divine , ( Aswell by Fate as your high judgement ordered ) To raise him with choice Bounties , that could add Height to his height ; and like a liberali vine , Not only bear his virtuous fruit aloft , Free from the Press of squint-eyd Envies feet , But deck his gracious Prop with golden bunches , And shroud it with broad leaves of Rule oregrowne From all black tempests of invasion . 
 Those Conquests that like general earthquakes shook The solid world , and made it fallen before them , Built all their brave attempts on weaker grounds , And less persuasive likelihoods then this ; 
 Nor was there ever princely Fount so long Powr’d forth a sea of Rule with so free course , And such ascending Majesty as you : Then be not like a rough and violent wind , 447 
 That in the morning rends the Forests down , Shoves up the seas to heaven , makes earth to tremble , And tombs his wasteful bravery in the Even : But as a river from a mountain running , The further he extends the greater grows , And by his thrifty raze strengthens his stream , Even to join battle with th’imperious sea Disdaining his repulse , and in despite Of his proud fury , mixeth with his main , Taking on him his titles and commands : So let thy sovereign Empire be increased , And with Iberian Neptune part the stake , Whose Trident he the triple world would make . 
 You then that would be wise in Wisdoms spite , Directing with discredit of direction , And hunt for honour , hunting him to death . With whom before you will inherit gold , You will lose gold , for which you lose your souls ; 
 You that choose nought for right , but certainty , And fear that valour will get only blows , Placing you faith in Incredulity . 
 Fit till you see a wonder , Virtue rich : Till Honour having gold , rob gold of honour , Till as men hate desert that gets nought , They loath all getting that deserves not ought ; And use you gold-made men as dregs of men ; And till your poisoned souls , like Spiders lurking In sluttish chin ekes , in mystes of Cobwebs hide Your foggy bodies and your dunghill pride . 
 O Incredulity , the wit of Fools , That slovenly will spit on all things fair , The CoWards castle , and the Sluggards cradle How easy t’is to be and Infidel ? 
 But you Patrician Spirits that refine Your flesh to fire , and issue like a flame 
 448 
 On brave endeavours , knowing that in them The tract of heaven in morn-like glory opens , That know you cannot be the Kings of earth , ( Claiming the Rights of your creation ) And let the Mines of earth be Kings of you ; That are so far from doubting likely drifts , That in things hardest y’are most confident : You that know death lives , where power lives unused , Joying to shine in waves that bury you , And so make way for life even through your graves ; That will not be content like horse to hold A threadbare beaten way to home affairs : But where the sea in envy of your reign , Closeth her womb , as fast as t’is disclosed , That she like Avarice might swallow all , And let none find right passage through her rage : There your wise souls as swift as Eurus led Your Bodies through , to profit and renown , And scorn to let your bodies choke your souls , In the rude breath and prisoned life of beasts : You that herein renounce the course of earth , And lift your eyes for guidance to the stars , That live not for yourselves , but to possess Your honour’d country of a generail store ; 
 In pity of the spoil rude selflove makes , Of them whose lives and yours one air does feed , One soil doth nourish , and one strength combine ; You that are blessed with sense of all things noble , In this attempt your complete woorthes redouble . 
 But how is Nature at her heart corrupted , ( I mean even in her most ennobled birth ) How in excess of Sense is Sense bereft her ! That her most lightening-like effects of lust Wound through her flesh , her soul , her flesh unwounded ; 
 And she must need incitements to her good , Even from that part she hurts ! O how most like x 449 2f 
 Art thou ( heroic Author of this Act ) To this wrong’d soul of Natute that sustainest Pain , charge , and peril for thy countries' good , And she much like a body numb’d with surfeits , Feels not thy gentle applications For the health , use , and honour of her powers ! Yet shall my verse through all her ease-locked ears Trumpet the Noblesse of thy high intent : And if it cannot into act proceed , The fault and bitter penance of the fault Make read some others eyes with penitence , For thine are clear ; and what more nimble spirits , Apter to bite at such unhooked baits Gain by our loss ; that must we needs confess Thy princely valour would have purchased us . Which shall be fame eternal to thy name , Though thy contentment in thy grave desires , Of our advancement , fail deserv’d effect . 
 O how I fear thy glory which I love , lest it should dearly grow by our decrease . Nature's that stick in golden-graveld springs , In muck-pits cannot escape their swallowings . 
 But we shall forth I know ; Gold is our Fate , Which all our acts does fashion and create . 
 Then in the Thespiads bright Prophetic Fount , Me thinks I see our Liege rise from her throne , Her ears and thoughts in steep amaze erected , At the most rare endeavour of her power . And now she blesses with her wonted Graces Th’industrious Knight , the soul of this exploit , Dismissing him to convoy of his stars . 
 And now for love and honour of his worth , Our twice-borne Nobles bring him Bridegroom-like , That is espoused for virtue to his love With feasts and music , ravishing the air , To his Argolian Fleet , where round about 
 4So 
 His bating Colours English valour swarms In haste , as if Guianian Orenoque With his Fell waters fell upon our shore . And now a wind as forward as their spirits , Sets their glad feet on smooth Guianas breast , Where ( as if each man were and Orpheus ) A world of Savages fallen tame before them , Storing their theft-free treasuries with gold , And there does plenty crown their wealthy fields , There Learning eats no more his thriftless books , Nor Valour Estridge-like his iron arms . There Beauty is no strumpet for her wants , Nor Gallique humours putrify her blood : But all our Youth take Hymens lights in hand , And fill eke roof with honor’d progeny . There makes Society Adamantine chains , And joins their hearts with wealth , whom wealth disjoin’d . 
 There healthful Recreations strow their meads , And make their mansions dance with neighbourhood , That here were drown’d in churlish Avarice . 
 And there do Palaces and temples rise 
 Out of the earth , and kiss th’enamored skies , Where new Britannia humbly kneels to heaven , The world to her , and , both at her blessed feet , In whom the circles of all Empire meet . 
 G. C. 
 Ad Thomam Hariotum Matheseos , & universas Philosophias peritissimum , de Guiana Carmen . Dat. Anno. 1595. 
 MOntibus est Regio , quasi muris , obsita , multis : Circumsepit aquis quos Raleana suis . 
 Intus habet largos Guiana recessus : Hostili gestans libera colla jugo . 
 Hispanus clivis illis sudavit , & alsit Septem annos , novies : nec tamen invaluit . 
 451 
 Numen , & omen inest numeris . Fatale sit illi : Et nobis virtus sit recidiva , precor . 
 Gualtero patefacta via est duce & auspice Ralegh Mense uno : worser factum hoc nomine quo celebrem ? 
 Nocte dieque ; datis velis , remisque laborans , Exegit summae dexteritatis opus . 
 Scilicet expensis magnis non ille pepercit , Communi natus consuluisse bono . 
 Providus excubuit simili discrimine Joseph : 
 Sic fratres , fratrem deseruere suum : Fama coloratam designet sibona , vestem : Vestis Scissa malis sic fuit illa modis . 
 Mira leges . Auresque animumque tuum arrige . Tellus Haec aurum , & gemmas graminis instar , habet . 
 Ver ibi perpetuum est : ibi prodiga terra quotannis Luxuriat , sola fertilitate nocens . 
 Anglia nostra licet dives sit , & undique foelix : Anglia , si confers , indigna frugis erit . 
 Expertes capitum , volucres piscesque ferasque ; Praetereo : haud prosunt , quae novitate , placent . 
 Est ibi , vel nusquam , quod quaerimus . Ergo petamus : Debt Deus , hanc Canaan possideamus . Amen . 
 Tui Amantiss . L. K. 
 