Here follow the names of those worthy Spaniards that have sought to discover and conquer Guiana : Extracted out of the writings of Juan de Castellanos clerigo , who compiled the book entitled , Primera part de las Elegias de varones illustres the Indias . 
 THe enterprise of Guiana was undertaken by Diego de Ordas of the kingdom of Leon , in the year 1531. He was one of the captains of Cortes in the conquest of Mexico . This Ordas made his entrance by the river of Amana , by which we entered , and spent fiftie days before he came to the river of Orenoque , which we passed in fifteene . He nam the river by which he entered , Viapari ; which name it still retaineth in the Spanish descriptions . It lies South from Trinidad some five leagues . He transported out of Spaine a thousand soldiers . He died afterwards at sea in returning for Spaine . 
 2 Juan Corteso arrived at the river of Amazones or Orellana with three hundred men : He marched up into the country . But neither he nor any of his company did return again . 
 3 Gaspar de Sylva , with his two brother's , departed from Teneriff , accompanied with two hundred men to assist Diego de Ordas . They sought El Dorado by the river of Amazones : but staying there a short time , they fell down to Trinidad , where they all three were buried . 
 4 Juan Gonsales set sail from Trinidad to discover Guiana . He reposed himself more on the faith of his guides , then on his small number of men . He by trial found the confines of Guiana , so far as he entered , to be populous , plentiful of victuali , and rich in gold . Upon such proofs as he brought with him , to make good his report , many others adventured to follow his steps . 
 496 
 5 . 6 Philip de Uren , & after him Pedro de Limpias , who both successively commanded the Almains , were leaders in this actium . Limpias was slain by and Indian Cacique nam Porima . 
 7 Jeronimo the Ortal undertook it by the way of Maracapana . After great travel and his substance all spent , he died on the sudden at S. Domingo . 
 8 . 9 Ximenes , brother of DONE Ximenes de Quesida the Adelantado , and Pedro de Orsua were both at sundry times in the same conquest . 
 10 Father lala , a Friar , taking with him only one companion , and some Indian guides passed into the provinces of Guiana . He returned with good intelligence , and brought with him Eagles , idols , and other jewels of gold , An. 1560. He assayed the second time to pass in like manner , but was slain by the Indians . 
 11 Hernandez de Serpa also undertook it . The Indians of Cumanawgoto killed him , and defeated his army . 
 12 Afterwards , Diego de Vargas , and his son DONE Juan followed this enterprise , and at their first setting out , were slain by the Indians . 
 13 Caceres undertook this discovery from Nuevo Reyno de Granada . He came no nearer to it then Matachines , which borders upon the said kingdom of Granada . He rested there and peopled that place . 
 14 It was also attempted by Alonzo de Herera , at two several times . He endured great misery , but never entered one league into the country . He sought it by Viapari or Amana , and was at last slain by a nation of Indians called Xaguas . 
 15 It was also undertaken by Antonio Sedenno , with whom Herrera and Augustine Delgado joined in the conquest of Trinidad , against Bawcunar a famous king of that place . He passed by Maracapana in the year 1536 to discover El Dorado with 500 chosen men . In this journey he god much gold , and took many Indian prisoners , whom he manacled in irons ; and many of x 497 21 
 them died as they were led in the way . The Tigers being fleshed on those dead carkeisses , assaulted the Spaniards , who with much trouble hardly defended themselves from them . Sedenno was buried within the precinct of the empire near the head of the river Tinados . Most of his people perished likewise . 
 16 Augustine Delgado searched the country to the Southward of Cumanawgoto with 53. footmen , and three horsemen . The wars that were then between the Indians of the vale , and those of the mountains , served well for his purpose . By which occasion he found means to pass so far , until he came to and Indian Cacique , nam Garamental , who entertained him with all kindness , and gave him for a present some rich jewels of gold , sixe seemly pages , tenne young slaves , and three nymphs very beautiful , which bore the names of three provinces from whence they were sent to Garamental chief commander of all that country . Their names were Guanba , Gotoguane , and Maiarare . These provinces are of and excellent temperature , very healthful , and have and admirable influence in producing fair women . The Spaniards afterwards to requite the manifold courtesies that they received in that country , took and carried away , beside all the gold that they could get , all the Indians that they could lay hold on : they conveyed them in irons to Cubagua , and should them for slaves . Delgado afterwards was shot in the eye by and Indian : of which hurt he died . 
 17 Diego de Losada succeeded in his brother's place . He had many more men ; who in the end wasted themselves in mutinies : those that lived returned to Cubagua . 
 18 Reynoso undertook this journey : but having endured exceeding troubles , in the discomfort of his mind , he gave it over , and was buried in Hispaniola . 
 19 Pedro de Orsua , in the year 1560. sought it with 400. Spaniards by the river of Orellana . He embarked his men in the country of the Motijones . As they passed down the river , they found Synamom trees . 
 498 
 His men murdered him , and afterwards the said rebels beheaded lady Anes his wife , who forsook not her lord in all his travels unto death . 
 20 Frier Francis Montesino was in the province of Maracapana with 100. soldiers bound for Guiana , when Lopez Aguirri the tyrant made insurrection in all those parts of the Indies . What became of this intended journey is not expressed . 
 In this discovery of Guiana you may read both of Orellana , who discovered the river of Amazones An. 1542. and of Berreo , with others that have trodden this maze , and lost themselves in seeking to find this country . 
 