Certain notes of the voyage to Brasill with the Minion of London aforesaid , in the year 1580. written by Thomas Grigs Purser of the said ship . 
 He thirde day of November in the year abovesaid we departed in the Minion of London from Harwich , from which time no great thing worth the knowledge or regard of others happened until the 22. of December the next month , which day for our own learning & use we ob - 
 served the setting of the Sun ne , which was West southwest , we then being under the line Equinoctial , where we found the air very temperate , and the wind for the most part Southeast and East southeast . The same day we also observed the rising of the moon , being one day after the full , which rose at East northeast . 
 The first land that we fell with upon the coast of The isle ofS . Brasill was the island of S. Sebastian , where we arrived Sebastian . g Jay of JanUary in the year 1581. 
 The 16. day Thomas Babington , and others in our pinnace , went a shore to Guaybea , where they met with John Whithall his father and mother in law , who having received letters from thence to be delivered at Santos , came aboard , and then we weighed and set sail , and the TheykofS . 28. day we arrived at the island of Santa Catelina , Catelina . near the entrance of Santos . 
 Our course from S. Sebastian was Southwest and by West , and betwixt the Southwest and by West , and West southwest . 
 This island of Santa Catelina seems at the first to be a part of the island of Girybia . we anchored at nine fathom black osie ground . 
 Upon the island there grow many Palmito-trees , but no fresh water is there to be found . 
 The third day of February we arrived before the town 34 
 of Santos , and were there well received and entertained of They arrive the Captain , the kings officers , and all the people . at Santos . 
 The fourth day we took into our ship a beef alive , which served for the victualling of the ship , and the refreshing of our men , and to make us the merrier at Shrovetide . 
 The eight day we delivered to M. John Whithall a bedstead with the appurtenances , which were sent to him from our merchants of London . 
 The 18. day the captain of Santos came aboard our ship , by whom we had knowledge of foure great French ships of war , that had be at the river of Jenero , which there took three Canoas , but were driven from thence by their castles & forts , and were looked for here at Santos . Whereupon the Captain requested us to lend them some armour and artillery , and we lent them twentie calivers , and two barrels of powder . 
 The 19. day our skiff which we had sent to Alcat - The yk of rarzas , and had be away sixe days , came again , and brought good store of great and good fish , and told us ’ 
 that there was good store of fish to be taken there by the hook , and as much wood as we could have of the Palmito-tree . 
 The 20. day at night Nicholas Gale , one of our company , fell over our ships side , and was drowned in the port of Santos before the town , where our ship road at anchor . 
 The 22. day two of the Canoas which the Frenchmen took in the river of Jenero , returned to Santos , and reported that the foure French ships were passed to the southwards , as they thought , for the Straights of Magellan , and so into the South sea . 
 The 23. day the aforesaid Nicholas Gale , who fell overbord two days before , was found again , and taken up three miles from our ship , and our company went to his burial in the Church at Santos . 
 This day the Captain and Justices of Santos wished us to tarry in their road till the last of April , for they 
 had sent a bark of Santos to Baya at the kings charges , to know whither we should have trade there or not , and this bark could not return before that time . 
 About this time there arrived at Fernambuck a ship from Portugall , which brought news that the Islands , Indies , and Portugall it self was molested and troubled by the Spaniards , and that the Portugales had both English and Frenchmen to Lisbone to defend them against Spaine . 
 The 25. day we sent two of our men , namely Thomas Michael and Simon Thorn to Baya in a bark that went thither from Santos . 
 The two and twentie day of Aprill our Master and Thomas Babington having some talk and conference with the Padres of Santos , they ( our men being ready to go to the River of Jenero ) told them , that they were sorry for our banishment from the Church , and that the Ministrador had written from Rip de Jenero , that forasmuch as these twentie years or more the English nation had denied the Church of Rome and her proceedings , therefore the Ministrador commanded that none of us should come to their Church : the Padres willed us herein to have patience , and to take it in good part , and promised to stand our friends in their word and writing , both to the Ministrador and to the Bishop at Baya , and further requested all our English company to have no ill opinion of them . 
 Their lading The 28. of April we jaded sugars into our ships . 
 of sugars . The 2I _ of Pvlay we took in fresh victuals from 
 Santos . 
 The 10. day of June we gratified one losto Thorno , dwelling in Santos , with some of our English victuals , and entertained him in good sort in our ship , and this day we were promised to have a Pilot at Santos to carry us to Baya . 
 The 11. day we went to fish , to make provision for our ship and men , and from that time till the eighteenth day we fetched water , and cut wood for our fire , and trimmed 36 
 our ship of the harms and leaks which the worms had Leaks in the made in her while we rid at the island of S. Sebastian , pinion made and in the mean time we departed from before the w°rmes-towne of Santos . Our Master sent his skiff from the bar of Santos , thinking to have brought Thomas Babington and William Euet with the Pilot , which we had tarried for three days : and as the skiff was going , William Euet being by the Rivers side , called to our pinnace , and sent a letter to our * Master , which Thomas * Whose name Babington had written , wherein were not news , but that the Ministrador was arrived at Santos from the River of ' Jenero , and would speak with our Master , but he willed that whatsoever Thomas Babington did write , no credit should be given to it . And further he wished us presently to depart for Sant Sebastian , and there to dispatch our business , and then to send back for Babington and himself to Guaybea , where he ( if he were well ) would give his attendance to come aboard . 
 As we rid two leagues a seaboard the bar of Santos Their dewee broke a cable in the open sea , which happened the 15. day of this month . ’ 
 We arrived at S. Sebastian the 15. day , and there shifted our ballast , and had in stones , and hailed our ship a ground to stop our leaks , & carried our cask a shore to be hooped for water , which indeed might better have be done in Santos , before the Ministrador came thither : yet we finished all things pertaining to our ship , by the 22. of this month , at S. Sebastian . 
 The first day of July Thomas Babington came aboard with William Euet , in our pinnace , and the rest of our men that went for them : but there was no Pilot brought according to promise to carry us to Baya . 
 The things that we observed and noted in the time of our being at Santos , were these . 
 All such wares and merchandizes as owe no custom in Brasill , their use is , to set a price upon the same , how they shall sold : which is done by the magistrates of the town , according to the ordinances of their king . 
 Some part of Peru but 12. days journey from Santos . 
 The Portu-galesforbidden to use their mines . 
 But for all such merchandizes as do owe custom there , the merchants are to fell them according as they may , to the greatest profit and advantage that they can . 
 Concerning the province of Peru , we learned that one part of it by land & water is but twelve days journey from the town of Santos , and from thence it may be about foure or five days journey by water to the main river of Plate . 
 From the head of the river of Plate , and from their chief towns there , they do trade and traffic by land into Peru by wagons , and horses or mules . 
 The said river of Plate is so full of sands and dangers , and the fresh so fierce sometime , that not shipping dares to deal with it , small barks to their knowledge may go up it , and not else . 
 The Portugales here cannot be suffered to use their Mines of treasure in these parts , upon pain of death , the contrary being commanded by the king and the Viceroy , who is as their king in place of authority . 
 About twentie leagues from Santos there is a certain kind of wild Savages , lying in the mountains , which are in friendship with the Portugales , and they have continual wars with certain other Savages that dwell towards the borders of Peru , which is distant from Santos about 400. or 500. leagues . Those Savages of Peru have store of gold and silver , but they know not the use of it . 
 Look what Savages of their enemies they take , they fell them to the Portugales for knives , combes , axes or hatchet's , and other trifles : they will fell one for a penny-knife to a Portugal , and after two years they are worth twentie or thirtie ducats to the Portugal . 
 This people have also continual wars with the Spaniards : and this was told us by one of those Savages , which hath dwelled among the Portugales these seven years , with his master called Sennor Manoel Veloso . And this fellow would willingly have come with us for 
 There are certain rocks that lie off between the isle of Alcatrarzas and S. Sebastian , about two leagues , Theyleof which are to be taken heed of , which a far off in fair Alcatrarzas weather show like the sails of ships . 
 There are other rocks that lie off S. Catelina also five leagues to the East and by South into the sea off the island . 
 At our coming up to Santos we found foure fathom and a half water in the shallowest place , and the like we found within a league after we were departed from S. Catelina , little more or less , but after you have run in the depth of foure fathom and a half , about a mile or less , then you shall have it deeper again more and more . 
 Before the town of Santos we road in eight and tenne fathom water . 
 