A ruttier which declareth the situation of the coast of Brasil from the Isle of Santa Catelina unto 
 The Isle of Santa Catelina . Rio Grande . 
 Puerto de Biaza , or Laguna . 
 Isla de raparo . 
 the mouth of the river of Plata , and all along up within the said river , and what arms and mouths it hath to enter into it , as far as it is navigable with small barks . 
 Rom the Isle of Santa Catelina , ( which is in 28 degrees of Southerly latitude ) unto Rio Grande is fortie leagues . This river by another name is called Ygai . The Island of Santa Catelina is sixe leagues in length : It hath two small Hands on the North side between the main land and 
 it : and on the South side it hath a shoaled of rocks , which lies hidden very near unto the point of the Isle . You are to pass between the firm land and the point of the Isle . 
 From Santa Catelina to the haven of Biaza , which by another name is called la Laguna , are twelve leagues : it is a good haven within : but you must stay the full sea to enter into it , because it hath shoaldes in the mouth , and it may be known by a small Island which lies a league into the sea which is called La Isla de Raparo , that is The Island of succour or defence , and you must ride there to search the channel . 
 From this harbour unto the river before nam there Rio Grande . is not haven for a ship to harbour it self . And Rio Grande hath many shoalds in the mouth thereof . It is a river that none but very small ships can enter into . Certain And this river divides the country of the people called Hands 12 Carios from other nations which are called Guavaes . And leagues distant from this river unto the entrance of the mouth of thee from the mouth river of Plate it is all a plain land , and very low : you °Plate ’which " must sa^e a ons two or three leagues into the sea from aree^n the sh°re > untiU you come to certain Islands which lie number . twelve leagues from the mouth of the river of Plate . 
 From Rio Grande unto these Islands are 68 leagues . And from these Islands unto the Cape of Saint marry the coast runneth Northeast and Southwest , somewhat inclining a point to the South . The Islands are three , and may be known as you come from the sea by two points , which show like the ears of a conie : you may ride between them and the main . 
 From Rio Grande to the Cape of Saint Marie are 80 The Cape of leagues : and the Cape may be known by one Island s - Ma ™ - which lies from it a league and and half into the sea . 
 You may sail between the main and that Island , be - from Cape cause there is above 8 or 9 fathoms water . The Cape of Saint Marry . Saint Marry stands in 3 5 degrees of Southerly latitude . Isla de 
 The Cape of Santa Maria upon the point thereof hath a little hill which stands over against the Isle of Seales . From this coast of Santa Maria you must coast along thee The way to land always on the North shore , and along the same are en . ter certain Baize . From the Cape unto the river of Solis are ' 
 tenne leagues , the coast runneth East and West . There IO leagues stands and Island over against the mouth thereof . From within the this river of Solis unto Los tres Mogotes which are on e-the main land is three leagues . And from Los Mogotes tes leagues ’ unto the Isles of Saint Graviel are other 8 or 9 leagues Saint Graviel more : all this distance runneth East and West . These 8 leagues . are five small Islands : to ride here you must keep somewhat near the main within and harquebus shot half a league before you come at the Islands , and straightway you shall see a cross standing on the said land , and there is and harbour for some winds . 
 From Saint Graviel unto the river of Sant Juan going Rio the 8. Juan along the same coast , I say on the North shore , are three 3 leagues . leagues : it is very well known by the broken cliff which it hath , which is a white hill . The entrance into this river is very dangerous : because it is shallow , and none but very small ships can enter into the same : the entrance thereof is on the West side very near the land , great Caracks may ride within the harbour . From this Martin Gar-river unto the Isle of Martin Garzia are three leagues : it zia 3 leagues . 
 xi 97 g 
 is one Island alone , and you must sail along the coast on the North shore : and after you be come unto the Island , I say , over against the same , you shall have three fathoms water , and on the West side it hath a little creek where you may ride . 
 He that desires to cross over the river of Plate unto Rio de Buenos the river de Buenos Aeres from the Isles of Saint Graviel , Aeres on the must shape his course Southwest : and the cut over is Sthe river f sixeteene leagues and upon his arrival on the South Plate . shore of the river , he must seek a channel of three fathoms water , and strait he must go along the coast until he come to a broken cliff and a point like unto the firm land , which is distant from this channel three or foure leagues : and when thou seest this broken cliff , The first keep thee a league from it . Here upon this river of Spanish colonic Buenos Aeres was the first Colony that DONE Pedro de Oliver of ” Mendoza planted . This river lies very much hidden : Buenos Aeres , because it is not seen , it is very shallow at a low sea , wherefore you must come in with the first of the flood . 
 From the Isle of Martin Garzia unto certain small The Isles of Islands which are called the Isles of Saint Lazarus is two San Lazaro . leagUeS ) these are shoalds : and to go thither you must go hard aboard the main . for there goes the channel : all this is to be passed on the North shore , and with small barks , and with good heed . 
 From the Isle of Martin Garzia to the mouths of the river are eight leagues in passing along on this side to seek one of the mouths of the river Parana , as it is hereafter described . But you had need first to harbour in a bay , which is in the very cliff or Barranca , and you must stay for the full sea . And if you fallen into the Rio Uruay . mouth of the river which is called Uruay , you must leave it on the right hand , I say on the North side . And forthwith leaving the said mouth forward towards the West , you may enter into the first mouth although it seem narrow ; or rather you may enter into any of Parana is the the mouths : for all of them meet together in Parana , great river . which is the main river . 
 And he that desires to go from the Isle of Martin Garzia to the river of Palmas , which is the best of all Rio de las these arms , or mouths to speak more properly , is to Palmat ' shape his course to the West , and coming over to the other shore , and sailing along the coast Northnorthwest he shall discover the mouth of this river of Palmas : and he must enter hard by Los Juncales , which lie on the South side : and afterwards within is very deep sounding . All these mouths of this river which are 5 , are full of sholds towards the East above the space of two leagues . And if the course of the water were not swift there , you could not enter into them , as I have already said , and you must pass all along with much heed and foresight . 
 And if peradventure you have passed Cape Saint Marry and are come over to Cape Blanco , consider it , that it is so even and smooth a land , that you can scarcely discern it a league from the main , unless it be a very clear day : and after this sort the coast lies low unto the river de Buenos Aeres . And from thence the coast lies somewhat high unto the entrance of the river de Palmas : all the coast runneth as I said before . And all along this coast are naughty people , which eat those which they kill , and many Tigers . 
 From the Isle of Martin Garzia unto Sant Salvador is nine or tenne leagues . This is and Island which stands two leagues within the first mouth : where Sebastian Cabota took possession . And this country is very well peopled by a people called Carios ; and you must beware of all these people : for they are your deadly enemies . The most Southerly mouth of Parana called Rio de Palmas is sixteene leagues long , and it hath many turnings , and many palm or datetrees growing near it , whereupon it is called The river of palm trees : and forthwith it entereth into the river Parana , as soon as these sixteene leagues are finished . All the other arms contain likewise sixteene leagues in length , saving one small or narrow arm , which is called The river de los Beguaes ; for this containeth fortie leagues in length . From this 
 99 
 Cape Blanca on the South side of the mouth of the river of Plate a very low and even land . 
 Man-eaters upon the south shore . 
 Sant Salvador and Island ten leagues off . Sebastian Cabota . 
 16. Leagues . 
 Santo Spirito 50 leagues from Rio de Palmas . 
 Los Tenbuis a people . 
 15. Leagues . 
 The Quiloacas 20. leagues . 
 This town perhaps may be the town ofSantaAnna , 15. leagues . The Mequaretas a people . 20 leagues . 
 The Mepenes 30 leagues . 
 8. leagues . 
 The river Paraguai . 
 The 7. currents . 
 The town of Piquiri or Picora 170 leagues up the river of Parana . 
 you must enter by the mouth of the river of Palmas unto Santo Spirito , the way is fiftie leagues : you are to pass still along the cliffs . As you enter on the left hand which is on the West shore up this river there are many Isles , lake's and small rivers , and many Indians which are your enemies . 
 From Santo Spirito unto a people which are called Los Tenbuis is fifteene leagues . This is by the narrow arm whereby they pass into the river Parana : it is the more because it is the longer way . From the Tenbuis by this narrow arm upward unto the Quiloacas , which is another nation , are twentie leagues ; and all up this river is great store of people . 
 From the Quiloacas , to a place where the Spaniards now have built a town , are fifteene leagues . From this town unto the people called Los Mequaretas is twentie leagues . Here are many sholds which continue thirtie leagues . All these thirtie leagues are sunken lands : where are many Isles , flats , and nations , which are our enemies . 
 From the Mequaretas unto the people called Mepenes are these thirtie leagues . And from hence begin the coasts of the firm land unto the mouth of the river Paraguai ; saving that there are eight leagues more of sunken ground . 
 From the Mepenes unto the mouth of the river of Paraguai are thirtie leagues : it is a river that cannot be mistaken although it hath many arms and Islands and dangers , it hath a mark two leagues beneath the mouth on the East side , to wit , and high land , where are 7 points , which we call the 7 currents : and immediately above these currents there is and Island as you pass up the river over against the point aforesaid stands the mouth of Paraguai . This mouth is very plain to be found in seeking whereof a man cannot be deceived . From this mouth the river of Parana is divided , which is a very great river : and it goes unto the town of Piquiri , which is and hundred and seventie leagues : and it runneth all this space 
 IOO 
 North and South , and in the way are many flats and shoalds ; and great store of people , which are a bad nation , although they be divided . From the place where these two rivers are divided , that is to say , from the mouth of Paraguai are sixtie leagues unto the city of Assumption . This is a good river , and better to sail then all the rest of the rivers , which are in this country . And from this town to Los Xaraes are 200. leagues , very well inhabited with people of diverse nations , which serve the Spanyards . 
 THE TWO FAMOUS VOYAGES 
 