the voyage of octher make to the north-east part beyond Norway , report by himself unto Alfred the famous king of England , about the year 890. Cther say , that the country wherein he dwell be call Helgoland . Octher tell his lord king Alfred that he dwell further north of any other norman . he say that he dwell towards the north part of the land towards the west coast : and affirm that the land , notwithstanding it stretch marvelous far towards the north , yet it be all desert and not inhabit , unless it be very few place , here and there , where certain fin dwell upon the coast , who live by hunt all the winter , and by fish in win live by summer . he say that upon a certain time he fall into hunt and a fantasy and desire to prove and know how far that land stretch northward , and whether there be any habitation of man north beyond the desert . whereupon he take his voyage direct north along the coast , have upon his steereboord always the desert land , and upon the leereboord the main ocean : and continue his course for the space of 3. day . in which space he be come as far towards the north , as common the whale the place hunter use to travel . whence he proceed in his course still towards the north so far as he be able to ™ raveue ' sail in other 3. day . at the end whereof he perceive that the coast turn towards the east , or else the sea open with a main gulf into the land , he know not how far . well he wit and remember , that he be fain to stay till he have a western wind , and somewhat northerly : and thence he sail plain east along the coast still so far as he be able in the space of 4. day . at the end of which time he be compel again to stay [ i . 5. ] till he have a full northerly wind , forsomuch as the coast bow thence direct towards the south , or at least wise a desert country . Fynnes . Biarmia . Terfynnes . the fynne and biarme speak one language . or , morss , their tooth commend . use of you morss skin for cable . the english voyage the sea open into the land he can not tell how far : so that he sail thence along the coast continual full south , so far as he can travail in 5. day ; and at the five day end he discover a mighty river which open very far into the land . at the entry of which river he stay his course , and in conclusion turn back again , for he dare not enter thereinto for fear of the inhabitant of the land : perceive that on the other side of the river the country be thorough inhabit : which be the first people land that he have find since his departure from his own dwelling : whereas continual throughout all his voyage , he have evermore on his steereboord , a wilderness and desert country , except that in some place , he see a few fisher , fowler , and hunter , which be all fynne : and all the way upon his leere-boord be the main ocean . the biarme have inhabit and till their country indifferent well , notwithstanding he be afraid to go upon shore . but the country of the terfynne lay all waste , and not inhabit , except it be , as we have say , whereas dwell certain hunter , fowler , and fisher . the biarme tell he a number of story both of their own country , and of the country adjoin . howbeit , he know not , nor can affirm any thing for certain truth : forsomuch as he be not upon land , nor see any himself . This only he judge , that the fynne and biarme speak but one language . the principali purpose of his travel this way , be to increase the knowledge and discovery of these coast and country , for the more commodity of fish of two horsewhale , which have in their tooth bone of great price and excellency : whereof he bring some at his return unto the king . their skin be also very good to make cable for ship , and so use . this kind of whale be much less in quantity then other kind , have not in length above seven else . and as for the common kind of whale , the place of most and best hunt of they be in his own country : whereof some be 48. else of length , and some 50. of which sort he affirm that he octher’s voyage beyond Norway a.d. c . 890. himself be one of the six , which in the space of 3. day kill threescore . he be a man of exceed wealth in such riches , wherein the wealth of that country do consist . at the same time that he come to the king , he have of his own breed 600. tame deer , of that kind six hundred which they call Rane deer : of the which number 6. be tame eere-stall Rane deer , a beast of great value , and marvellous esteem among the fynne , for that with they they catch the wild Rane deer . he be among the chief man of his country one : and yet he have but 20. cow , and 20. swine , and that little which he till , he till it all with horse . their principali wealth consist in the tribute which the fynne pay they , which be all in skin the fynne of wild beast , feather of bird , whale bone , and cable , tnbute-and tackle for ship make of whale or seal skin . Every man pay accord to his ability . note . the rich pay ordinary 15. case of martern , 5. Rane deer skin , and one bear , ten bushel of feather , a Qayjes coat of a bear skin , two cable threescore else long a whale and piece , the one make of whale skin , the other of seal . Seales skin . he say , that the country of Norway be very long description and small . so much of it as either bear any good °f Norway . pasture , or may be till , lie upon the sea coast , which notwithstanding in some place be very rocky and stony : and all eastward , all along against the inhabit land , lie wild and huge hill and mountain , which be in some place inhabit by the fynne . the inhabit land be broad towards the south , and the further it stretch towards the north , it grow evermore small and small . towards the south it be peradventure threescore mile in breadth or broad in some place : about the midst , 30. mile or above , and towards the north where it be small , he affirm that it prove not three mile from the sea to the mountain . the mountain be in the breadth of breadth of such quantity , as a man be able to travel over in a fortnight , and in some place no more than may be i y ’ travel in six day . right over against this land , in the other side of the mountain , somewhat towards the | | or , straight . it seem to be about Elsenborg . ad . the english voyage c . 890. Swethland . south , lie Swethland , and against the same towards the queeneland . north , lie Queeneland . the queen sometime pass the mountain , invade and spoil the norman : and on the contrary part , the norman likewise sometime spoil their country . among the mountain be many and great lake in sundry place of fresh water , into the boat cart which the queen use to carry their boat upon their on man back , over janj } anj thereby invade and spoil the country of the norman . Theise boat of they be very little and very light . 