a testimony of the right and appendance of the crown of the kingdom of Britain , take out of m. Lambard his and pKatovotda , folio 137. page . 2. ARthurus qui fuit quondam inclytissimus rex Britonum , vir magnus fuit and animosus , and mile illustris . Parum fuit ei regnum istud , non fuit animus ejus contentus regno britanniae . subjugavit igitur sibi strenue scantiam totam , quae modo norweia voco , and omnes insulas ultra scantiam , scz . Islandiam , and grenlan-diam , quae sunt de appendiciis Norweiae , and Suechordam , and hyberniam , and Gutlandiam , and daciam , semelandiam , winlandiam , curlandiam , Roe , Femelandiam , wirelan-diam , Flandriam , Cherelam , Lappam , and omnes alias terras and insulas , Orientalis oceani usque russiam ( in Lappa scilicet posuit orientalem metam regni britanniae ) and multas insulas ultra scantiam , usque dum sub Septentrione , quae sunt de appendicibus scantiae , quae modo norweia voco . fuerunt autem ibi Christiani occult . Arthurus autem Christianus optimus fuit , and fecit eos baptizari , and unum deum per totam Norweiam venerari , and unam fidem christi semper inviolatam custodire , and suscipere . ceperunt universi proceres Norweiae uxores suas de nobili gente Britonum tempore illo , unde norwegienses dicunt se exiisse de gente and sanguine regni huius . impetravit enim temporibus illis Arthurus rex a domino Papa , and a curia romana , quod confirmata sit norweia , in perpetuum coronae britanniae in augmentum regni huius , vocavitque illam dictus Arthurus Cameram britanniae . hac vero de causa dicunt Norwegienses , se debere in regno isto cohabitare and dicunt se esse de corpore regni huius , scilicet de corona britanniae . maluerunt enim manner in regno isto , quam in terra eorum propria . Terra enim eorum arida est , and montuosa , and sterilis , and non sunt ibi segete nisi per loca . ista vero opulenta est , and fertilis , and crescunt hic segete , and caetera universa . qua ex causa saepius per vice gesta sunt bella 5 A.D. 5I7 - atrocissima inter Anglos and Norwegienses , and interfecti sunt innumerabiles . occupaverunt vero Norwegienses terras multas and insulas regni huius , quas adhuc detinent occupatas , nec potuerunt unquam postea penitus evelli . tandem modo confederati sunt nobis fide , and sacramento , and per uxores suas , quas postea ceperunt de sanguine nostro , and per affinitate , and conjugia . ita demum constituit , and eis concessit bone rex edouardus propinquus noster ( qui fuit optimus filius pacis ) per common consilium totius regni . qua de causa possent , and debent praedicti de caetero nobiscum cohabitare , and remanere in regno , sicut conjurati fratres nostri . the same in english . ARthur which be sometime the most renown king of the Britain , be a mighty , and valiant man , and a famous warrior . this kingdom be too little for he , and his mind be not content with it . he therefore valiant subdue all Scantia , which be now call Norway , and all the island beyond Norway , to wit , island and Greenland , which be appertain unto Norway , Sweveland , Ireland , Gotland , Denmark , Semeland , Windland , Curland , Roe , Femeland , Wireland , Flanders , Cherilland , Lapland , and all the other land and island of the east sea , even unto Russia ( in which Lapland he place the easterly bound of his british empire ) and many other island beyond Norway , even under the north pole , which be appendance of Scantia , now call Norway . Theise people be wild and savage , and have not in they the love of God nor of their neighbour , because all evil come from the north , yet there be among they certain Christians live in secret . but king Arthur be a exceed good Christian , and cause they to be baptize , and throughout all Norway to worship one God , and to receive and keep inviolable for ever , faith in Christ only . at that time all the noble man of Norway take wife of the noble nation of the Britain , whereupon the norse say , that they be descend of the race and blood of this kingdom . the aforesaid king Arthur obtain also in those day of the pope and court of room , that Norway shall be for ever annex to the crown of Britain for the enlargement of this kingdom , and he call it the chamber of Britain . for this cause the norse say , that they ought to dwell with we in this kingdom , to wit , that they belong to the crown of Britain : for they have rather dwell here then in their own native country , which be drieand full of mountain , [ i . 3. ] and barren , and no grain grow there , but in certain place . but this country of Britain be fruitful , wherein corn and all other good thing do grow and increase : for which cause many cruel battle have be oftentimes fight betwixt the Englishman and the people of Norway , and infinite number of people have be slay , and the norse have possess many land and island of this empire , which unto this day they do possess , neither can they ever afterward be full expel . but now at length they be incorporate with we by the receive of our religion and sacrament , and by take wife of our nation , and by affinity , and marriage . for so the good king Edward ( who be a notable maintainer of peace ) ordain and grant unto they by the general consent of the whole kingdom , so that the people may , and ought from henceforth dwell and remain in this kingdom with we as our love swear brethren . 