the conquest of the isle of Anglesey and man by Edwin the saxon king of Northumberland write in the second book and five chapter of Beda his ecclesiastical history of the english nation . Duinus Nordanhumbrorum gentis , id est , ejus quae ad borealem Humbri fluminis plagam inhabitat , ----- majore potentia cunctis qui britanniam incolunt , anglorum pariter and Britonum populis praefuit , praeter cantuarios tantiim , necndn and menavias Britonum insulas , quae inter hiberniam and britanniam sitae sunt , anglorum subjecit potestati . the same in english . EDwin king of the people of Northumberland , that be to say , of they which inhabit to the north of the river Humber , be of great authority than any other potentate in the whole isle of Britain , bare rule as well over the english as the british nation , except only the people of Kent : who also bring in subjection under the english , the isle of man and Anglesey , and the other northwestern isle of the briton , which be situate between Britain and Ireland . another testimony allege by Beda to the same purpose . Lib. 2. cap . 9 anno ab incarnation domini sexcentesimo vicesimo quarto , gens Nordanhumbrorum , hoc est , ea natio anglorum quae ad aquilonarem Humbri fluminis plagam habitat , cum rege suo eduino , verbum fidei ( praedicante Paulino , cujus supra meminimus ) suscepit : cvi videlicet regi in auspicium suscipiendae fidei , and regni coelestibus potestas , . and terreni creverat imperii : ita ut ( quod Nemo anglorum ante eum fecit ) omnes britanniae fine , qua vel ipsorum vel Britonum provinciae habitabantur , sub ditione acceperit . Quin and menavias insulas ( sicut and supra docuimus ) imperio subjugavit anglorum . Quarum prio quae ad austrum est , and situ amplior , and frugum proventu atque ubertate foelicior , nongentarum sexaginta familiarum mensuram , juxta aestimationem anglorum , secunda trecentarum and ultra spatium tenet . the same in english . [ i - 4 ] in the year from the incarnation of our lord , six hundred twenty and four , the people of Northumberland , to wit , those english people which inhabit on the north side of the river of Humber , together with their king Edwin , at the christian preach and persuasion of Paulinus above mention , embrace the gospel . under which king , after he have once accept of the christian faith , the power both of the heavenly and of his earthly kingdom be enlarge ; insomuch , that he ( which no english king have do before he ) bring under his subjection all the province of Britain , which be inhabit either by the english man themselves , or by the briton . Moreover , he subdue unto the crown of England ( as we have above signify ) the Hebrides , common call the western island . the principali whereof be more commodious and pleasant seat towards the south , and more abound with corn than the rest , contain accord to the estimation of the english , room enough for 960. family , and the second for 300. and above . 