part of a epistle write by one yvo of Narbona unto the archbishop of Bourdeaux , contain the confession of a Englishman as touch the barbarous demeanour of the Tartar , which have live long among they , and be draw along perforce with they in their expedition against Hungary : record by Matthew Paris in the year of our lord 1243. the lord therefore be provoke to indignation , by reason of this and other sin commit among we Christians , be become , as it be , a destroy enemy , and a dreadful avenger . this i may just affirm to be true , because a huge nation , and a barbarous and inhumane people , who law be lawless , who wrath be furious , even the rod of God anger , overrun , and utter waste infinite country , cruel abolish all thing where they come , with fire and sword . and this present summer , the foresay nation , be call Tartars , depart out of Hungary , which they have surprise by treason , lay siege unto the | | Neust. it . very same two town , wherein i my self abode , with many thousand of soldier : neither be there in the say 5° town on our part above 50. man of war , who , together with 20. crossbow , the captain have leave in garrison . all these , out of certain high place , behold the enemy vast army , and abhor the beastly cruelty of Antichrist his complice , signify forthwith unto their governor , the hideous lamentation of his christian subject , who sudden be surprise in all the province adjoin , without any difference or respect of condition , fortune , sex , or age , be by manifold cruelty , all of they destroy : with who carcase , the tartarian chieftain , and their brutish and savage follower , glut themselves , as with delicious cate , leave nothing for vulture but the bare bone . and a strange thing it be to consider , that the greedy and ravenous vulture disdain to pray upon any of the relic , which remain . Oide , and deform woman they give , as it be , for daily sustenance , unto their cannibal : the beautiful devour they not , but smother they lament and scritch , with force and unnatural ravishment . like barbarous miscreant , they quell virgin unto death , and cut off their tender pap to present for dainty unto their magistrate , they engorge themselves with their body . howbeit , their spial in the mean time descry from the top of a high mountain the duke of Austria , the king of Bohemia , the patriarch of Aquileia , the duke of Carinthia , and ( as some report ) the earl of Baden , with a mighty power , and in battle array , approach towards they , that accurse crew immediate vanish , and all those tartarian vagabond retire themselves into the distress and vanquish land of Hungary ; who as they come sudden , so they depart also on the sudden : which their celerity cause all man to stand in horror and astonishment of they . but of the say fugitive , the prince of Dalmatia take eight : one of which number the duke of Austria know to be a english man , who be perpetual banish out of the realm of England , in regard of certain notorious crime by he commit . this fellow , on the behalf of the most tyrannical king of A.D. 1243. the Tartar , have be twice , as a messenger and interpreter , with the king of Hungary , menace and plain foretell those mischief which afterward happen , unless he will submit himself and his kingdom unto the Tartar yoke . well , be allure by our prince to confess the truth , he make such oath and protestation , as ( i think ) the devil himself will have be trust for . First therefore he report of himself , that present after the time of his banishment , namely about the 30. year of his age , have lose all that he have in the city of Aeon at dice , even in the midst of winter , be compel by ignominious hunger , wear nothing about he but a shirt of sack , a pair of shoe , and a hair cap only , be shave like a fool , and utter a uncouth noise as if he have be dumb , he take his journey , and so travel many country , and find in diverse place friendly entertainment , he prolong his life in this manner for a season , albeit every day by rashness of speech , and inconstancy of heart , he endanger himself to the devil . at length , by reason of extreme travail , and continual change of air and of meat in Caldea , he fall into a grievous sickness , insomuch that he be weary of his life . not be able therefore to go forward or backward , and stay there a while to refresh himself , he begin ( be somewhat learned ) to commend to write those word which he hear speak , and within a short space , so apt to pronounce , and to utter they himself , that he be repute for a native member of that country : and by the same dexterity he attain to many language . this man the Tartar have intelligence of by their spy , draw he perforce into their society : and be admonish by a oracle or vision , to challenge dominion over [ i . 21. ] the whole earth , they allure he by many reward to their faithful service , by reason that they want interpreter . but concern their manner and superstition , of the disposition and stature of their body , of their country and manner of fight etc , he protest the particular follow to be true : namely , that they be 52 above all man , covetous , hasty , deceitful , and merciless : notwithstanding , by reason of the rigour and extremity of punishment to be inflict upon they by their superior , they be restrain from brawling , and from mutual strife and contention . the ancient founder and father of their tribe , they call by the name of god , and at certain set time they do celebrate solemn feast unto they , many of they be particular , and but four only general . they think that all thing be create for themselves alone . they esteem it none offence to exercise cruelty against rebel . they be hardy and strong in the breast , lean and pale-faced , rough and huf-shouldred , have flat and short nose , long and sharp chin , their upper jaw be low and decline , their tooth long and thin , their eyebrow extend from their forehead down to their nose , their eye inconstant and black , their countenance writhen and terrible , their extreme joint strong with bone and sinew , have thick and great thigh , and short leg , and yet be equal unto we in stature : for that length which be want in their leg , be supply in the upper part of their body . their country in old time be a land utter desert and waste , situate far beyond Chaldea , from whence they have expel lion , bear , and such like untamed beast , with their bow , and other engine . of the hide of beast be tan , they use to shape for themselves light , but yet impenetrable armour . they ride fast bind unto their horse , which be not very great in stature , but exceed strong , and maintain with little provender . they use to fight constant and valiant with javelin , mace , battle-ax , and sword . but special they be excellent archer , and cunning warrior with their bow . their back be slight arm , that they may not flee . they withdraw not themselves from the combat , till they see the chief standard of their general give back . vanquish , they ask no favour , and vanquish , they show no compassion . they all persist in their purpose of subdue the whole world under their own subjection , as if they be but one man , and yet they be more than million in number . they have 60000. Courriers , who be send before upon light horse to prepare a place for the army to encamp in , will in the space of one night gallop three day journey . and sudden diffuse themselves over a whole province , and surprise all the people thereof unarm , provide , disperse , they make such horrible slaughter , that the king or prince of the land invade , can find people sufficient to wage battle against they , and to withstand they . they delude all people and prince of region in time of peace , pretend that for a cause , which indeed be no cause . sometime they say , that they will make a voyage to Colen , to fetch home the three wise king into their own country ; sometime to punish the avarice and pride of the roman , who oppress they in time past ; sometime to conquer barbarous and northern nation ; sometime to moderate the fury of the german with their own meek mildness ; sometime to learn warlike feat and stratagem of the french ; sometime for the find out of fertile ground to suffice their huge multitude ; sometime again in derision they say , that they intend to go on pilgrimage to saint James of Galicia . in regard of which sleight and collusion certain undiscreet governor conclude a league with they , have grant they free passage through their territory , which league notwithstanding be violate , be a occasion of ruin and destruction unto the foresay governor etc 