part of the great charter grant by king Edward the first to the baron of the cinque port , in the sixth year of his reign 1278. for their good service do unto he by sea : wherein be mention of their former ancient charter from Edward the confessor , William the conqueror , William Rufus , Henry the second , king Richard the first , king John , and Henry the three continue unto they . Dward by the grace of God king of England , lord of Ireland , and duke of Gascoigne , to all archbishop , bishop , abbot , prior , earl , baron , justice , sheriff , provost , officer , and to all bailiffs and true subject greeting . you shall know that for the faithful service that our baron of the five port hitherto to our predecessor king of England , and unto we late in our army of wale have do , and for their good service to we and our heir king of England , true to be continue in time to come , we have grant and by this our charter confirm for we and our heir , to the same our baron and to their heir , all their liberty and freedom . so that they shall be free from all toll , and from all custom ; that be to say from all lastage , tallage , passage , carriage , 293 Edward the confessor . the english voyage rivage , asponsage , and from all wreck , and from all their sale , carry and recary through all our realm and dominion , with sock and souke , toll and theme . and that they shall have infangthefe , and that they shall be wreckefree , lastagefree , and lovecopfree . and that they shall have den and strand at great Yarmouth , accord as it be contain in the ordinance by we thereof make perpetual to be observe . and also that they be free from all shire and hundred : so that if any person will plead against they , they shall not answer nor plead otherwise then they be wont to plead in the time of the lord , king Henry our great grandfather : and that they shall have their findelle in the sea and in the land : and that they be free of all their good and of all their merchandise as our freeman . and that they have their honour in our court , and their liberty throughout all the land wheresoever they shall come . and that they shall be free for ever of all their land , which in the time of lord Henry the king our father they possess : that be to say in the 44. year of his reign , from all manner of summonce before our justice to any manner of plead , journey in what shire soever their land be . so that they shall not be bind to come before the justice aforesaid , except any of the same baron do implead any man , or if any man be implead . and that they shall not plead in any other place , except where they ought , and where they be wont , that be to say , at Shepeway . and that they have their liberty and freedom from henceforth , as they and their predecessor have have they at any time better , more full and honourable in the time of the king of England , Edward , William the first , William the second , Henry the king our great grandfather , and in the time of king Richard , and king John our grandfather , and lord king Henry our father , by their charter : as the same charter which the same our baron thereof have , and which we have see , do reasonable testify . and we forbid that no man unjust trouble they nor their merchandise upon our 29+ forfeiture of ten pound . so nevertheless , that when the same baron shall fail in do of justice or in receive of justice , our warden , and the warden of our heir of [ i . 118. ] the cinque Portes , which for the time shall be , their port and liberty may enter for to do their full justice . so also that the say baron and their heir , do unto we and to our heir king of England by the year their full service of 57 ship at their cost by the space of fifteen 57 - " f day at our somounce , or at the somounce of our heir . we have grant also unto they of our speciali grace that they have outfangthefe in their land within the port king 1^ . day aforesaid , in the same manner that archbishop , bishop , at their mne abbot , earl and baron , have in their manor in they . county of Kent . and they be not put in any assize , jury , or recognizance by reason of their foreign tenure against their will : and that they be free of all their own wine for which they do travail of our right prize , that be to say , of one ton before the mast , and of another behind the mast . we have grant furthermore unto the say baron for we and our heir , that they for ever have this liberty , that be to say , that we or our heir shall not have the wardship or marriage of their heir by reason of their land , which they hold within the liberty and port aforesaid , for the which they do their service aforesaid : and for the which we and our progenitor have not the wardship and marriage in time past . but we our aforesaid confirmation upon the liberty and freedom aforesaid , and our grant follow to they of our especial grace , of new have cause to be make , save always in all thing our kingly dignity : and save unto we and to our heir , plea of our crown , life and member . wherefore we will and sure command for we and our heir that the aforesaid baron and their heir for ever have all the aforesaid liberty and freedom , as the aforesaid charter do reasonable testify . and that of our especial grace they have outfangthefe in their land within the port aforesaid after the manner that archbishop , bishop , 295 abbot , earl and baron have in their manor in the county of Kent . and that they be not put in assize , jury , or recognizance by reason of their foreign tenure against their will . and that they be free of their own wine for which they travail of our right price or custom , that be to say of one ton of wine before the mast , and of another ton behind the mast . and that likewise for ever they have the liberty aforesaid : that be to say : that we and our heir have not the wardship or marriage of their heir by reason of their land which they hold within the liberty and port aforesaid , for which they do their service aforesaid , and for which we and our predecessor the wardship and marriage have not have in time past . but our aforesaid confirmation of their liberty and freedom aforesaid and other grant follow to they of our especial grace of new we have cause to be make . save always and in all thing our regal dignity . And save unto we and our heir the plea of our crown of life and member as be aforesaid . Theise be witness , the reverend father Robert of portuens Cardinali of the holy church of Rome , friar William of Southampton prior povincial of the friar preacher in England , William of Valencia our uncle , Roger of the dead sea , Roger of Clifford , master Robert Samuel deane of Sarum , master Robert of Scarborough the archdeacon of east ride , master Robert of Seyton , Bartholomew of Southley , Thomas of Wayland , Walter of Hoptan , Thomas of Normannel , Steven of pennes-t , Frances of Bonava , John of Lenetotes , John of Metingham and other . give by our hand at Westminster the fourteenth day of June , in the six year of our reign . 