the voyage of Henry earl of Derbie , after duke of Hereford , and last king of England , by the name of Henry the four , An. Dom. 1390. into Prussia and Lettowe , against the infidel , record by Thomas of Walsingham . ominus henricus comes de Derbie per idem tempus profectus est in le Pruys , ubi cum adjutorio marescalli dictae patriae , and cujusdam regis vocati Wytot devicit exercitum regis de Lettowe , captis qua-tuor ducibus , and tribus peremptis , and amplius quam trecentis , de valentioribus exercitus supradicti pariter interemptis . Civitas quoque voco two will , in cujus castellum rex de Lettowe nomine Skirgalle confugerat , potenti virtute dicti comitis maxim , atque suorum capta est . namque qui fuerunt de familia sva primi murum ascenderant , and vexillum ejus super muros , caeteris vel torpentibus vel ignorantibus , posuerunt . captaque sunt ibi vel occisa quatuor millia plebanorum , fratre regis de Poleyn inter caetero ibi perempto , qui adversarius nostri fuit . obsessumque fuit castrum dictae civitatis per quinque hebdomada : say propter infirmitate , quibus vexabatur exercitus magistri de Pruys and de Lifland noluerunt diutius expectare . facti sunt Christiani de gente de Lettowe octo . et magister de Lifland duxit secum in svam patriam tria millia captivorum . fl alias Vilna . [ I. 123. ] An. Dorn . 139° . 3°4 a bout the same time lord Henry the earl of Derbie travail into Prussia , where , with the help of the marshal of the same province , and of a certain king call Wytot , he vanquish the army of the king of Lettowe , with the captivity of four lithuanian duke , and the slaughter of three , beside more than three hundred of the principali common soldier of the say army which be slay . the city also which be call Will or Vilna , into the castle whereof the king of Lettow name Skirgalle flee for his safeguard , be , by the valour of the say earl especial and of his follower , surprise and take . for certain of the chief man of his family , while other be slothful or at least ignorant of their intent , scale the wall , advance his colour thereupon . and there be take and slay four thousand of the common soldier , and among other be slay the king of Poland his brother , who be our profess enemy . and the castle of the foresay city be besiege for the space of five week : but by reason of the infirmity and inconvenience wherewith the whole army be annoy , the great master of Prussia and of Lifland will not stay any long . there be convert of the nation of Lettowe eight person unto the christian faith . and the master of Lifland carry home with he into his country three thousand captive . 