Carta lubecensibus ad septennium concessa . anno 41. henrici 3. Enricus dei gracia rex angliae , dominus Hibernia ? , dux normanniae , Aquitaniae , and come Andegaviae , omnibus ballivis suis salutem . Sciatis nos ad instantiam dilecti and fidelis fratris nostri Ricardi comitis cornubiae in regem romanorum electi , suscepisse in protectionem and defensionem nostram and salvum and securum conductum nostrum burgenses de Lubek in Alemania cum omnibus rebus and mercandisis quas in regnum nostrum deferent , well facient deferri . et eis concessimus , quod de omnibus rebus and mercandisis suis nihil capiatur ad opus nostrum vel alterius contra voluntatem eorundem ; sed libere vendant and negocientur inde in regno praedicto , prout sibi viderint expedire . et ideo vobis mandamus , quod dictis burgen-sibus vel eorum nunciis in veniendo in terram nostram cum rebus and mercandisis n'est , ibidem morando , and inde recedendo , nullum inferatis , aut ab aliis inferri permittatis impedimentum aut gravamen . nec eos contra quietantiam praedictam vexetis , aut ab aliis vexari permittatis . in cujus rei testimonium have litera nostras fieri fecimus patentes per septennium durante : dum tamen iidem Burgenses interim bene and fideliter se habuerint erga praefatum electum fratrem nostrum . testae meipso apud westmonasterium undecimo die Maii anno Regni nostri quadragesimo primo . haec litera duplicata est , pro bur-gensibus and mercatoribus dacis , Brunswig , and Lubek . 324 the charter of Lubek grant for seven year , obtain in the one and forty year of Henry the three . HEnry by the grace of God king of England , lord of Ireland , duke of Normandy and Aquitaine , and earl of Anjou , to all his bailiff send greeting . know you that at the instant request of our well-beloved and trusty brother Richard earl of Cornewal be of late elect king of the roman , we have receive under our protection and defence , and under our safe and secure conduct , the citizen of Lubek in Alemain , with all their good and ware , which they shall bring or cause to be bring into our kingdom . we have also grant unto they , that of all their good and merchandise , nothing shall be seize unto the use of our self , or of any other without their own consent , but that they may free sell and exercise traffic therewith , accord as they shall think expedient . and therefore we straight command you , that neither your self do offer , nor that you permit any other to offer any impediment or molestation unto the say burgher or unto their messenger , either at their come into our land , with their good and merchandise , in the time of their abode there , or at their departure from thence , and that you neither molest they your self , nor yet suffer they by other to be molest , contrary to the aforesaid charter . in testimony whereof , we have cause these our letter to be make patent , during the space of seven year next follow . provide , that the say burgher do in the mean time behave themselves well and faithful towards our foresaid elect brother . witness our self at Westminster the eleven day of march , in the one and forty year of our reign . this letter be double , namely for the burgher , and the merchant of Denmark , of brunswig , and of Lubeck . 