a catalogue of the great master of the order of the dutch knight , common call the hospitalary of Jerusalem : and what great exploit every of the say master have achieve , either in conquer the land of Prussia , or in tame and subdue the infidel , or else in keep they under their obedience and subjection , take out of Munster . he order of the dutch knight have their first original at Jerusalem in the year of our lord 1190. within the hospitali of the bless virgin : and the first master of the say order be call Henry of Walpot , under who many good thing , and much wealth and riches be throughout all Germany and Italy procure unto the order : and the say hospitali be remove from Jerusalem unto Ptolemais , otherwise call Aeon , and the foresay order grow and mighty increase , whereof i will hereafter discourse more at large in my treatise of Syria . Henry of Walpot decease in the year of Christ 1200. the 2. master be Otto of Kerpen , and he continue master of the order for the space of six year . the 3. be Hermannus Bart a godly and devout person , who decease in the year 1210. be inter at Aeon , as his predecessor be . the 4. be Hermannus the Saltza , who thirty year together govern the say order , and manage the first expedition of both the first war move against the prussian infidel , anno dom . 1239. [ I. U5 - ] war against the infidel of Prussia , and ordain another master also in Prussia to be his deputy in the same region . in the year 1239. they knight of the sword , who travel into Livonia to convert the inhabitant thereof unto Christ , see they be not of sufficient force to perform that enterprise , and that their enemy increase on all side , they unite themselves unto the famous order of the dutch knight in Prussia , that their worthy attempt may be defend and promote by the aid and assistance of the say dutch knight . at the very same time the ensign of the cross be exalt throughout all Germany against the Prussians , and a great army of soldier be gather together , the burgrave of Meidenburg be general of the army , who combine themselves unto the dutch knight , join battle with the infidel , and slay about five hundred gentile , who beforetime have make horrible invasion and inroad into the dominion of Christians , waste all with fire and sword , but especial the land of Colm , and Lubonia , which be the province of Conradus duke of Massovia . now , the foresay knight have make so huge a slaughter , build the castle of Reden , between Pomerania and the land of Colm , and so by degree they get foot in the land , and daily erect more castle , as namely , Crutzburg , Wissenburg , Resil , Bartenstein , Brunsburg , and Heilsburg , and furnish they all with garrison . the five master of the order be Conradus Landgravius , the brother of lodo-vick , which be husband unto lady Elizabeth . This Conradus , by his father inheritance , give great riches and possession unto the order , and cause lady Elizabeth to be inter at Marpurg , within the religious house of his say order . under the government of this master , Aeon in the land of Palestina be subdue unto the Saracen . Moreover , in the year 1254. there be another great army of soldier prepare against Prussia , by the prince of Germany . for Octacer , alias Odoacer king of Bohemia , Otto Marques of Brandeburg , the duke of Austria , the mark of Moravia , the bishop of Colen and of Olmutz come march on with great strength of their noble and common soldier , and invade the land of Prussia in the winter season , they constrain the inhabitant thereof to receive the christian faith , and to become obedient unto the knight . after which exploit , by the advice and assistance of king Odoacer , there be a castle build upon a certain hill of Samogitia , which immediate after grow to be a great city , be at this day the seat of the prince of Prussia : and it be call by Odoacer Kunigsberg , that be to say , king mount , or mount royal , be finish in the year 1255. out of this fort the knight do bridle and restrain the fury of the infidel on all side , and compel they to obedience . the sixth master be call boppo ab osterna , under who the city of Kunigsberg be build . at the very same instant the knight be occupy about the war of Curland , the Prussians conspire together , and abandon the christian faith , in furious manner arm themselves against you Christians , deface and burn down church , slay priest , and to the utmost of their ability , banish all faithful people . the report of which misdemeanour be publish throughout all Germany , a huge army be levy and send for the defence and succour of the knight , which march into the land of Natan , make many slaughter , and through the inconstancy of fortune sometime win , and sometime lose the victory . also the infidel besiege these three castle , namely , barsten-stein , Crutzberg and Kunigsberg , and bring extreme famine upon the christian contain within the say fort . again , in the year of our lord 1262. the earl of Juliers , with other prince and great chivalry come down , and give charge upon the Prussians , put three thousand of they to the edge of the sword . afterwards the Prussians band themselves together , be determine to spoil the castle of Kunigsberg , but the Prussians abandon Christianity . A.D. 1262. the english voyage their confederacy be disclose , they have the repulse . and when the knight have prevail against they , they lay in pledge , and yet for all that be not afraid to break their fidelity . for upon a certain time , after they have give diverse pledge , they slay two noble knight of the order , and so by that mean incense the principali of the say order , insomuch that they cause two pair of galloue to be set up beside the castle , and thirty of the Prussians pledge to be hang thereupon . which severity so vex and provoke the Prussians , that in revenge of the say injury , they renew bloody and cruel war , slay many Christians , yea , and put 40. knight with the master of the order , and the marshal , unto the edge of the sword . there be at the same instant in Pomerania a duke call Suandepolcus , profess the christian faith , but be join in league with the Prussians , he endeavour for many year , not only to expel the knight , but all Christians whatsoever out of the land of Prussia , in which war the foresay knight of the order suffer many abuse . for they lose almost all their castle , and a great number of themselves also be slay . This Suandepolcus put in practice many lewd attempt against religion . for albeit he be baptize , he do more mischief than the very infidel themselves , until such time as the knight be assist by the prince of Germany , bring the say duke and the Prussians also into such straight , that ( maugre their head ) they be constrain to sue for peace . afterwards Swandepolcus lie at the point of death , admonish his son that they shall not do any injury unto the knight of the order , affirm that himself never prosper so long as he urge war against they . howbeit his son for a certain time observe not their father counsel , until at length one of they name Warteslaus , be create one of the order , and the other call Samborus bestow by legacy his good and possession upon the say order , receive maintenance and exhibition from the say order , during the term of his life . it fortune also under the government of the foresay master boppo , that one sir Martine a Golin be accompany with another knight , go into the country to see how the Prussians be employ . And meet with three Prussians , they slay two , and the third they reserve to guide they the direct way . but this guide betray they into their enemy hand . which when they perceive , they slay the traitor . than five prussian horseman come ride and take [ i . 14-6 . } they , deliver they bind to the custody of two . and the other three pursue the horse of the two , which break loose in the time of the fray . and they tarry somewhat long , the other two will have behead the two knight in the mean season . and memorable as one of they be strike with his draw sword , strata&me-at the neck of sir Martine , he say unto they : sir , you do unwise in that you take not off my garment before it be defile with blood . they therefore loose the cord wherewith he be bind , to take off his garment , set his arm more at liberty . which sir Martine well perceive reach his keeper such a box , that his sword fall to the ground . which he with all speed take up , slay both the keeper and unbind his fellow knight . Moreover , see the other three Prussians come furious upon they , with stout courageous heart they make toward the say Prussians , and slay they , and so escape the danger of death . the seven great master be Hanno the sangershusen , who decease in the year one thousand two hundred seventie five . the eight be Hartmannus ab Heldringen who decease in the year 1282. the nine be Burckardus a Schuvenden be afterward make knight of the order of saint Johns . the ten be Conradus a feuchtuvang : under this man the city of Aeon in Palestina be sack by the sultan , and many people be slay . the templar which be therein return home out of France , where they have great revenue . the knight of saint John , who also have a hospitali at Aeon , change their place , and go into the isle of Cyprus , and from thence depart unto Rhodes , they subdue that island unto themselves . now the dutch knight abound with wealth and possession throughout all Germany , be lord of a good part of Prussia , Livonia , and Curland , who chief house be then at Marpurg , till such time as it be remove unto Marieburg , a town of Prussia . the eleven great master be Godfrey earl of Hohenloe . under this man the knight sustain a great overthrow in Livonia : but have strengthen 4000 their army , they slay near unto rye four thousand of their enemy . the twelve master be Sifridus a feuchtuvang . under this man , the principali house of the order be translate from Martpurg to Marieburg , which in the beginning be establish at Aeon , and from thence be remove unto Venice , and from Venice unto Martpurg . This Sifridus decease in the year 1341. the thirteenth master be call Charles Beflart of trier . this man build a fort upon the river of Mimmel , and it be name Christmimmel . the fourteenth be Warnerus ab Orsele , who a certain knight of the order slay with his sword . the 15. be Ludolphus duke of Brunswick , who build the town of Ylgenburg , and decease 1352. the sixteenth be Theodoricus earl of Aldenborg , and he build the town of Bartenstein . the seventeenth be Ludolphus sir name king . the eighteenth be Henry a Tusimer . the nineteenth Winricus a Knoppenrodt . in this man time the knight take the king of the lithuanians name Kinstut captive , and keep he prisoner in Marieburg half a year , but by the help of a servant , have break out of the castle , he escape away by night . but fear that he be lay wait for in all place , he leave his horse , and go on foot through unknown path . in the day time he hide himself in secret place , and in the night he continue his journey until he come unto Massovia . but all the knight joy be turn into sorrow , after they have lose so great a enemy . the twenty grand master be Conradus Zolner of Rotenstein . the one and twenty Conradus Walenrod . the two and twenty this man send Conradus a Jungingen , who decease in the year one hard^tke thousand four hundred and seven . the three and se : tnd . twenty Ulricus a Jungingen . this man die in battle in the year one thousand four hundred and ten : which battle be fight against Vladislaus father of Casimire . both part have levy mighty and huge force : unto the polonians the lithuanians and the Tartar have join themselves , over who one vitol-dus be captain : the dutch knight have take up soldier out of all Germany . and when each army have encamp themselves one within twenty furlong of another , ( hope for victory and impatient of delay ) the great master of the Prussians send a herald to denounce war unto the king , and immediate ( alarm be give ) it be report that there be in both army fourty thousand horseman in a readiness . Vladislaus command the lithuanians and the Tartar to give the first onset , and place the polonians in the rearward of the battle : on the contrary side , the Prussians regard least of all to reserve any strong troop behind , which may rescue such as be weary , and renew the fight , if need shall require , but set forward the flower and chivalry of all his soldier in the very forefront of the battle . the charge be give certain unarm Tartar and lithuanians be slay [ i . 147. ] handsmooth : howbeit the multitude press on , neither dare the fearful polonians turn ’ their back , and so a cruel battle be fight upon the heap of dead carcase . the combat continue a long time , terrible slaughter be commit , and the lithuanians and Tartars be slay like sheep . but when new and fresh enemy continual issue forth , the dutch knight be weary , begin to fight more faint . which Vladislavs no soon perceive , but in all haste he send forward his mighty and well arm band of polonians , who sudden break in renew the skirmish . the dutch be not able to withstand the fury of the fresh troop ( great odds there be between the weary soldy and he that come in a fresh ) insomuch that the knight with their people be constrain to flee . the master of the order see his soldier give way unto the enemy , gather a company together , and withstand he in the face , howbeit himself be slay for his labour , the flight of his people prove great and more dishonourable , neither do the dutch cease to flee , so long as the polonian continue the chase . there fall on the knight party many thousand of man , and the polonians get not the victory without great spoil and damage . this battle be fight in regard of the bound of region in the year 1410. all Prussia follow the happy success of the polonian king ( except Marieburg only ) yield themselves unto he be conqueror . howbeit the emperor Sigismond take up the quarrel , peace be ordain between the knight and Polonia , and a league conclude , certain sum of money also be pay unto the polonian , Prussia be restore unto the knight , neither be the say order disturb in the possession of their land until the time of Friderick . the 24. master be Henry earl of Plaen . this man be depose by the chapter , be 7. year hold prisoner at Dantzik . the 25. master be Michael Kuchenmeister , that be , master of the cook of Sternberg . the 26. be Paulus a Russdorff . the 27. Conradus ab ellerichshausen . this man , after diverse and sundry conflict between the dutch knight , and the king of Polonia , conclude a perpetuali league with the say king . howbeit the citizen of Dantzig secret go about to obtain their freedom , that the foresay order may have no dominion over they , make suit unto the polonian king to be their protector . this 8 Conradus die in the year 1450. the 28. be Lewis ab Ellerichshausen . under this man there arise a dangerous sedition in Prussia between the chief city and the knight of the order . the citizen demand liberty , complain that they be oppress with diverse molestation . whereupon they privy make suit unto Casimir then king of Polonia . the master of the order see what will come to pass begin to expostulate with the king , that he keep not the peace which have be conclude between they to last for ever . also Frederick the emperor commanded the Prussians to return unto the obedience of the knight , who by the dint of their sword have release that province out of the hand of infidel , and have buy it with the shed of much blood . notwithstanding the popular sort persist still in their stubborn determination , proceed at length to open war . the city adhere unto the king usurp diverse castle belong to the master , take certain commander and knight , yea , and some they slay also . fifty and five town conspire together in that rebellion : but think their estate and strength not sure enough against their own governor without foreign aid , they choose king Casimir to be their lord . hereupon the polonian king march into Prussia with a great army , take possession of such city as yield themselves unto he , and proceed forward against Marieburg , besiege the castle and the town . in the mean season the master have hire a army of germane soldier , sudden surprise the king at unaware in his tent , and slay about 300. polonians , take prisoner 136. nobleman , spoil their tent , take away their horse , victual , and armour , insomuch that the king himself hardly escape upon one horse . Theise thing come to pass in the year 1455. the master have thus obtain the victory , send his army into the country , and recover the castle and city which he have lose , to the number of 80. put many 9 the great master overcome the king of Polonia . the king by treason overthroweth the master . [ I. 148. ] the english voyage of his enemy also unto the sword . Moreover , he recover Kunigsberg be one of the four principali city , which be by name thorn , Elburg , Kunigsberg , and gdanum , that be to say , Dantzig . and when the war be long protract than the master can well bear , and a whole year wage be unpay unto his captain , those captain which be in the garrison of Marieburg conspire against the master , and for a great sum of money betray the castle of Marieburg unto the king . which practice be know , the master flee to Kunigsberg , and new war be begin , and great spoil and desolation be wrought on both side : until at length , after composition make , the king retain Pomerella , and all the castle and town therein , together with Marieburg and Elburg : and the master enjoy Samaitia , Kunigsberg , etc this composition be conclude in the year 1466. the 29. master be Henry Reuss , first being deputy , and afterward master of Prussia . the 30. be Henry a Richtenberg , who decease in the year 1477. the 31. call Martine Truchses die in the year 1489. the 32. John a Tieflen die in the year 1500. the 33. be duke of Saxony , and mark of misn , decease in the year 1510. this man begin to call in question , whether the foresay composition conclude between the king of Polonia , and the order , be to be observe or no ? especial sithence it contain certain article against equity and reason . whereupon he appeal unto the bishop of Rome , unto the emperor , unto the prince and elector of Germany , and prevail with they so far forth , that there be a day of hear appoint at Posna in Polonia . and the legate of both part meet hear complaint and excuse , and dispatch no other business . in the mean time prince Frederick decease in the ten year of his government . the 34. master be Albertus mark of Brandenburg , who the king of Polonia do so grievous molest with war , and oppress all Prussia with such extreme rigour , that the prince of the country be constrain to make a league of four year with he , and to yield unto such condition , as turn to the utter overthrow of the whole order . and among other condition be these which follow . since that the originali of all discord between Polonia and the order do from hence arise , for that hitherto in Prussia , no lawful heir and successor have bear rule and authority , but diverse and sundry have have the government thereof , by who mean the nation have be provoke one against another , much christian blood have be shed , the land and inhabitant grievous spoil , and many widow and orphan make : the pope , emperor , and prince be often solicit for the establish of that perpetual league , which Casimir have heretofore conclude etc since also that the truce which have be agree upon of both party be in short time to be expire , and that it be to be fear , that bloody war will then be renew , and that all thing will prove worse and worse , unless some lawful composition be make , and some good and wholesome devise be put in practice , as well for the benefit of the king and of his posterity , as for the commodity of the whole common weal of Prussia , especial consider that Albertus the Marques refuse not to submit himself to the council of the king , etc A.D. 1525 - 