now concern the livonians who be subject unto the great master of Prussia . inprimis , that the master of Prussia demand of the say english ambassador , at their be in Prussia , on the behalf of they of Livonia , who be the say master his liege people , to have restitution of their loss , unjust ( as he say ) offer unto they by the english , namely , for the rob and rifle of three ship . the value of which ship and of the good contain in they , accord to the computation of the livonian merchant , do amount unto the sum of 8037. pound , 12. shilling 7. penny . howbeit afterward the truth be inquire by the say ambassador of England , the loss of the livonians exceed not the sum of 7498. pound , 13. shilling , 10. penny halfpenny farthing . item , forasmuch as in the say ship , on the behalf of the say master , and of certain city of the Hans , there be allege above 250. man very barbarous to be drown , of who some be noble , and other honourable personage , and the rest common merchant and mariner , there be demand , in the first diet or convention hold at dordract , a recompense at the hand of the say english ambassador : albeit this complaint be exhibit in the very latter end of all the negotiation , in form of a schedule , the tenor whereof be in write at this present , and begin in manner follow : cum vita hominum etc howbeit in the last convention hold at Hage , as be aforesaid , it be conclude between in 33 c A.D. I4O7 . Theise ship be take by the english the 20. of July 1404. the ambassador of England , and the messenger and commissioner of the land of Prussia , and of the city of the Hans ; that our say sovereign lord the king , shall , of his great piety , vouchsafe effectual to devise some convenient and wholesome remedy for the soul of such person as be drown . item , that our say sovereign lord the king will signify in write his full purpose and intention as touch this matter , unto the aiderman of the Hans merchant reside at Bruges , upon the sixteenth day of march next follow . otherwise , that from henceforth all amity and friendship , between the realm of England and the land of Prussia shall be dissolve . neither be it to be doubt , but that a great part of the say good , for the which they of Livonia do demand restitution , namely wax and fur , redound unto the use and commodity of our sovereign lord the king . and also our say sovereign lord the king give commandment by his letter , that some of the say good shall be deliver unto other . and a great part of they be as yet reserve in the town of Newcastle . one benteld also have the best of they say three ship in possession . also it be report and think to be true , that certain furrier of London , which will be detect in the end , have have a great part of the say good , namely of the fur . 