to the right noble and valiant knight sir [ i - 176j William sturmy send at this present by the most sovereign king of England etc as his ambassador unto dordract , his most sincere friend . honourable sir , our most entire friend , we receive the royal letter of the most mighty prince and lord , our lord the king of England and France and lord of Ireland , send unto we under the date of the 14. day of February ( which we receive at our castle of marienburgh the n . of April ) contain , among other matter , that his majesty purpose be once again to send one of his ambassador , namely your self our very sincere friend unto dordract , give you in charge that you will make haste thither and there stay , until « 5 some of our subject might at our commandment , in convenient time repair unto the same place , there ( by God assistance ) to bring our matter unto a happy conclusion . and then he request that we shall without delay write our determination unto you , as the conclusion of the say letter import . howbeit ( our most dear friend ) the treaty and conference about the redress or reformation of unjust attempt commit by the subject of our say lord the king and our subject , one against another , be both on our behalf , and on the behalf of the common society of the Hans merchant , hitherto have , make , and continue common . and so our commissioner upon our full and absolute commandment , shall , for the manage of these and of other affair of the foresay society , many way urgent and difficult , upon the feast of our lord ascension next to come , meet with the say society at Lubec , there to give notice what they have determine to conclude in this present business and in other for their own behalf . for we will give our ambassador which be there to appear , straight in charge that accord to the king request aforesaid they do without delay procure a answer to be write unto your honour concern the determination of the foresay society . give at the place and upon the day above name , in the year of our lord 1407. Fr. Wernherus de Tettingen , commander in Elbing , general vice-master and lieutenant in the room of the master general of the dutch knight of the order of saint marry etc of late decease . the letter of Henry the 4. king of England etc unto Ulricus de Jungingen master general of Prussia , 1408. wherein he do ratify and accept the last agreement make at Hage in holland . HEnry etc unto the honourable and religious personage Fr. ulricus de Jungingen master general of the dutch knight of saint marry etc our most dear friend , greeting and daily increase of our accustom amity and friendship . we do by these present give your honour to understand , that our faithful and well-beloved William esturmy knight , and master John Kington clerk , our ambassador and messenger send of late on our behalf , unto the presence of your predecessor for the redress of certain grievance and damage be contrary to justice offer against we and our liege subject by the people and subject of your predecessor , and against they also by our subject as it be aforesaid , in friendly manner to be procure , of late return out of the part of Alemain make relation unto we and to our counsel , that have confer with your forename predecessor about the foresay affair , the particular follow be at length conclude : namely first of all , that at a certain day and place they shall meet in holland with his ambassador and messenger , to hold a friendly conference between they about the redress and reformation of the grievance and damage aforesaid : and that they shall by the equal weight of diligent examination ponder , and in the balance of justice discuss and define all and singular the foresay grievance and damage inflict on both part . howbeit at length after sundry prorogation then make and continue on this behalf , our ambassador and messenger aforesaid upon the 28. of August last pass , assemble themselves for our part at the town of Hage in holland , the hon . and 0f^ug^t2 discreet personage Arnold heket burgomaster of the 1407. town of Dantzik , and John crolowe , for the behalf of your subject of Prussia , and Tidman de meule , and John Epenscheid for the behalf of Livonia , be assemble as messenger and commissioner about the redress and reformation aforesaid , do then and there demand in certain article , of our ambassador and messenger abovenamed 25034. noble and half a noble , for the grievance and damage offer ( as it be then say ) to your subject of Prussia , and 24082. noble , 12. S. 8d . [ I. 177. ] in recompense of the damage offer unto those your subject of Livonia . and when the substance of those article about the grievance and loss aforesaid be by the say ambassador and messenger thorough examine and discuss , by their general consent it be final agree , that your subject , in consideration of all and singular the foresay grievance and damage offer unto they by our people , shall within three year after the feast of easter next ensue , at three equal payment receive from we , namely they of Prussia , 8957. noble , and they of Livonia 22496. noble , six penny , half penny , farthing , and no more , so that we our self think good to condescend thereunto . howbeit , forasmuch as certain other article of your subject of Prussia , and also certain article in the behalf of our subject contain grievous complaint in they , be propound before the ambassador and messenger aforesaid , for the attain of reformation in regard of the damage and grievance offer on both part , can not as then , for the great obscurity of diverse of the say article , and also for want of sufficient proof at the last meeting appoint and hold by the foresay ambassador at the town of Hage in holland , sufficient to be examine , discuss , and define , it be agree upon by the ambassador and messenger of both part , that from the 15. day of October then last expire unto the feast of easter now next ensue , and from thenceforth within one whole year immediate follow , the plaintiffs of both part shall thorough declare before our chancellor of England for the time be , the foresay obscurity concern the substance of their article , and that they shall , for the obtain of execution , and compliment of justice at our say chancelour hand , peremptory minister necessary probation , under pain of perpetuali exclusion from the petition of those thing which be contain in the article above mention . provide always , that if at the last it shall be by lawful proof make manifest concern the sum above write or any part or parcel thereof , that due satisfaction have be make to he or they unto who it be due , or that those good of and for the which complaint have be make on the behalf of your subject have pertain or do appertain unto other , or any other just , true , and reasonable cause may lawful be allege , why the payment of all the foresay sum or any of they ought not to be perform : that then so much only be to be cut off or deduct from the say sum as shall be find to be already pay or to pertain unto other , or else upon some true , just , and reasonable cause ( as be aforesaid ) not to be due . we therefore consider that the say friendly conference , and the final agreement ensue thereupon be agreeable unto reason and equity , do , for our part ratify and willing accept the very same conference and agreement . and forasmuch as it have be always our desire , and be as yet our intention , that the league of amity and the integrity of love , which have of old time be observe between our and your subject , may in time to come perpetual remain inviolable , and that your and our people may hereafter , not only for the good of our common weal but also for the commodity and peace of both part , accord to their wont manner , assemble themselves and enjoy the faithful and mutual ! conversation one of another : we will cause in our city of London , with the sum of 8957. noble satisfaction to be make unto the Prussians , and with the sum of 22496. noble , six penny , half penny , farthing , recom-89 pense to be perform unto the livonians , in regard of the damage and injury ( which in very deed proceed not of our consent ) by our subject offer unto they , as it be afore say , and within three year after the feast of easter next ensue the say sum of money to be pay at three payment , and by three equal portion . conditional that unto our subject which be endamage correspondent satisfaction be likewise on your part within the term of the foresay three year perform , with pay the sum of 766. noble and of 4535. noble , demand on our behalf , and also with the payment of such sum as within one year immediate ensue the feast of easter aforesaid , shall|be find by sufficient declaration and proof to be make on the behalf of our subject ( as be aforesaid ) to be due . even as we in like manner will make satisfaction unto your subject within our city aforesaid . now as touch the request of your ambassador and of the livonians , whereby we be require to procure some wholesome remedy for the soul of certain drown person , as conscience and religion seem to challenge ( in regard of who we be move with compassion , and do for their sake hearty condole their mishap ) you be ( our entire friend ) of a certainty to understand , that after we shall be by your letter advertise of the number , state , and condition of the say party drown , we will cause suffrage of prayer and diverse other wholesome remedy profitable for the soul of the decease and acceptable to God and man , religious to be ordain and provide : upon condition , that for the soul of our drown country man there be the like remedy provide by you . the almighty grant unto your self and unto your whole order , that you may prosperous triumph over the enemy of Christ his cross . give under our privy seal at our palace of Westminster the 26. of march , in the year of our lord 1408. and in the nine year of our reign . 