the oath minister to the master of the ship , etc ou shall swear by the holy content in that book , that you accord and to the uttermost of your knowledge , and good understanding in mariner science and craft , shall in your vocation do your best to conduct the good ship call the N. etc whereof you now be master under God , both unto and from the port of your discovery , and so use your endeavour and faithful diligence , in charge , discharge , lade again , and roomage of the same ship , as may be most for the benefit and profit of this right worshipful fellowship : and you shall not private bargein , buy , sell , exchange , barter , or distribute any good , ware , merchandise , or thing whatsoever ( necessary tackle and victual for the ship only except ) to or for your own lucre , gain or profit , neither to nor for the private lucre , gain , or profit of any other person or person whatsoever . and further , if you shall know any boatswain , mariner , or any other person or person whatsoever , to buy , sell , barter , truck , or exchange any good , ware , merchandize , or thing for private account , reckon , or behalf , you shall do your best to withstand and let the same : and if you can com-modiously so do , that then before the discharge of such good buy for private account , you shall give knowledge thereof to the cape merchant of this say fellowship for the time be . and you shall not receive nor take , nor suffer to be receive or take into your say ship during this voyage any manner person or person whatsoever , go or return , but only those mariner which without fraud or guile shall be hire to be of your company , and to serve in mariner craft and science only : so help you God , etc 2l6 these foresay ship be full furnish with their pinnace and boat , well appoint with all manner of artillery , and other thing necessary for their defence with all the man aforesaid , depart from Ratcliff , and vale unto Detford , the io . day of May , 1553. the 11. day about two of the clock , we depart from Detford , pass by Greenwich , salute the king majesty then be there , shoot off our ordinance , and so vale unto Blackwall , and there remain until the 17. day , and that day in the morning we go from Blackwall , and come to Woolwich by nine of the clock , and there remain one tide , and so the same night unto heyr . the 18. day from heyr unto Gravesend , and there remain until the twenty day : that day be saturday , from Gravesend unto tilberie hope , remain there until the two and twenty day . MaJ - the 22. day from Tilbery hope to holly haven . the 23. day from holly haven , till we come against lee , and there remain that night , by reason that the wind be contrary to we . the 24. day the wind be in the southwest in the morning , we sail along the coast over the spit , until we come against saint Osyth , about six of the clock at night , and there come to anchor , and abide there all that night . the 25. day about ten of the clock we depart from saint Osyth , and so sail forward unto the Nase , and there abide that night for wind and tide . the 26. day at five of the clock in the morning , we weigh our anchor , and sail over the Nase , the wind be at the southwest , until we come to Orwell wand , and there come to a anchor , and abide there until the 28. day . the same day be Trinity Sunday about 7. of the clock before noon we weigh our anchor , and sail till we come athwart walsursye , and there come to a anchor . the 29. day from thence to holmehead , where we 217 stay that day , where we consult which way , and what course be best to be hold for the discovery of our voyage , and there agree . the 30. day of may at five of the clock in the morning we set sail , and come against Yermouth about three league into the sea , ride there at anchor all that night . the last of may into the sea six league Northeast , and there tarry that night , where the wind blow very sore . June . the first of June the wind be at north contrary to we , we come back again to Orwell , and remain there until the 15. day , tarry for the wind , for all this time the wind be contrary to our purpose . [ I. 235. ] the 15 day be at orwel in the latitude of 52 degree , in the morning we weigh our anchor , and go forth into the wand about two mile from the town , and lie there that night . the 16 day at eight of the clock we set forward , and sail until we come athwart Alburrough , and there stay that night . the 17 day about five of the clock before noon we go back unto orfordnesse , and there remain until the 19 day . the 19 day at eight of the clock in the morning we go back to orwel , and abide there three day tarry for the wind . the 23 day of June the wind be fair in the southwest we hail into the sea to orfordnesse , and from thence into the sea ten league north-east : then be past the sand , we change our course six league northnortheast : about midnight we change our course again , and go due north , continue in the same unto the 27 day . the 27 day about seven of the clock northnorthwest 42 league to the end to fall with Shotland : then the wind vear to the west , so that we can lie but north and by west , continue in the same course 40 league , 218 1553-whereby we can not fetch Shotland : than we sail north 16 league by estimation , after that north and by west , and northnorthwest , than southeast , with diverse other course , traverse and trace the sea , by reason of sundry and manifold contrary wind , until the 14 day of July : and then the sun enter into Leo , we July . discover land eastward of we , unto the which we sail that night as much as we may : and after we go on shore with our pinnace , and find little house to the number of 30 , where we know that it be inhabit , but the people be flee away , as we judge , for fear of we . the land be all full of little island , and that innu - i ” t ! lie land merable , which be call ( as we learn afterward ) dwellt cthe ' it JEgeland and Halgeland , which lie from orfordnesse ‘ north and by east , be in the latitude of 66 degree . the distance between orfordnesse and ^Egeland 250 league . than we sail from thence 12 league northwest , and find many other island , and there come to anchor the 19 day , and man our pinnace , and go on shore to the island , and find people mow and make of hay , which come to the shore and welcome we . in which place be a innumerable sort of island , which be call the isle of Rost , be under the roast island . dominion of the king of Denmark : which place be in latitude 66 degree , and 30 minute . the wind be contrary , we remain there three day , and there be a innumerable sort of fowl of diverse kind , of which we take very many . the 22 day the wind come fair , we depart from Rost , sail northnortheast , keep the sea until the 27 day , and then we draw near unto the land , which be still east of we : then go forth our pinnace to seek harbour , and find many good harbour , of the which we enter into one with our ship , which be call stanfew , and the land be island , be call stanfew Lewfoot , or Lofoot , which be plentiful inhabit , and very gentle people , be also under the king of Denmark : but we can not learn how far it be from 219 the main land : and we remain there until the 30 day , be in latitude 68 degree , and from the foresay roast about 30 league northnortheast . the 30 day of July about noon we weigh our anchor , and go into the sea , and sail along these island Northnortheast , keep the land still in sight until the August . second day of August : then hail in close aboard the land , to the intent to know what land it be , there come a skiff of the island aboard of we , of who we ask many question , who show unto we , that the island be Seynam in 70 call Seynam , which be the latitude of seventy degree , degree . anj from stanfew thirty league , be also under the king of Denmark , and that there be no merchandise there , but only dry fish , and train oil . than we be purpose to go unto Finmarke , inquire of he , if we may have a pilot to bring we unto Finmarke , and he say , that if we can bear in , we shall have a good harbour , and on the next day a pilot to bring we to Finmarke , unto the wardhouse , which be the strong hold in Finmarke , and most resort to by report . but when we will have enter into a harbour , the land be very high on every side , there come such flaw of wind and terrible whirlwind , that we be not able to bear in , but by violence be constrain to take the sea again , our pinnace be unshipt : we sail north and by east , the wind increase so sore that we be not able to bear any sail , but take they in , and lie a drift , to the end to let the storm over pass . and that night by violence of wind , and thickness of mist , we be not able to keep together within sight , and then about midnight we lose our pinnace , which be a discomfort unto we . assoon as it be day , and the fog overpast , we look about , and at the last we descry one of our ship to leeward of we : than we spread a hullock of our foresail , and bare room with she , which be the confidence , but the Edward we can not see . then the flaw something abate , we and the confidence hoist [ i . 236. ] up our sail the four day , sail Northeast and by 220 north , to the end to fall with the Wardhouse , as we do consult to do before , in case we shall part company . thus run Northeast and by north , and Northeast fifty league , than we sound , and have 160 fathom , whereby we think to be far from land , and perceive that the land lay not as the globe make mention . wherefore we change our course the sixth day , and sail southeast and by south eight and forty league , think thereby to find the Wardhouse . the eight day much wind rise at the westnorthwest , we not know how the coast lie , strike our sail , and lie a drift , where we sound and find 160 fathom as afore . the nine day , the wind vear to the south southeast , we sail Northeast 25 league . the ten day we sound , and can get no ground , neither yet can see any land , whereat we wonder : then the wind come at the north-east , we run southeast about 48 league . the 11 day , the wind be at south , we sound , and find 40 fathom , and fair sand . the 12 day the wind be at south and by east , we lay with our sail east , and east and by north 30 league . the 14 day early in the morning we descry land , which land we bear with all , hoist out our boat to discover what land it may be : but the boat can not come to land the water be so shoal , where be very much ice also , but there be no similitude of habitation , and this land lie from Seynam east and by north 160 league , be in latitude 72 degree . than we ply to the northward the 15 , 16 and 17 day . the 18 day , the wind come at the north-east , and the confidence be trouble with bilge water , and stock , we think it good to seek harbour for her redress : than we bare room the 18 day southsoutheast , about 70 league . the 21 day we sound , and find 10 fathom , after that we sound again , and find but 7 fathom , so 221 A.D. I553 - Willoughbie his land , in " z degree . shoalder and shoald water , and yet can see no land , where we marvel great : to avoid this danger , we bare roomer into the sea all that night northwest and by west . the next day we sound , and have 20. fathom , then shape our course , and run west Southwest until the 23. day : than we descry low land , unto which we bear as nigh as we can , and it appear unto we unhabitable . than we ply westward along by that land , which lie west Southwest , and east Northeast , and much wind blow at the west , we hale into the sea north and by east 30. league . then the wind come about at the north-east , we sail west northwest : after that , the wind bear to the northwest , we lay with our sail west southwest , about 14. league , and then descry land , and bear in with it , be the 28. day , find shoal water , and bear it till we come to 3. fathom , then perceive it to be shoal water , and also see dry sand , we hale out again Northeast along that land until we come to the point thereof . that land turn to the westward , we run along 16. league northwest : then come into a fair bay , we go on land with our boat , which place be unhabit , but yet it appear unto we that the people have be there , by cross , and other sign : from thence we go all along the coast westward . September . the four day of September we lose sight of land , by reason of contrary wind , and the eight day we descry land again . within two day after we lose the sight of it : then run west and by south about 30. league , we get the sight of land again , and bear in with it until night : then perceive it to be a lee shore , we get we into the sea , to the end to have sea room . the 12. of September we hail to shoareward again , have then indifferent wind and weather : then be near unto the shore , and the tide almost spend , we come to a anchor in 30. fathom water . 222 the 13. day we come along the coast , which lie northwest and by west and southeast and by east . the 14. day we come to a anchor within two league of the shore , have 60. fathom . there we go a shore with our boat , and find two or three good harborough , the land be rocky , and high , but as for people can we see none . the 15 day we run still along the coast until the 17 day : then the wind be contrary unto we , we think it best to return unto the harbour which we have find before , and so we bear roomer with the same , howbeit we can not accomplish our desire that day . the next day be the 18 of September , we enter into the haven , and there come to a anchor at 6 fathom . this haven run into the main , about two league , this haven and be in breadth half a league , wherein be very they many seal fish , and other great fish , and upon the main we see bear , great deer , fox , with diverse strange beast , as two guloine , and such other which be | | or , elion . to we unknown , and also wonderful . thus remain in this haven the space of a week , see the year far spend , and also very evil wether , as frost , snow , and hail , as though it have be the deep of winter , we think best to winter there . wherefore we send out three man southsouthwest , to search if they can [ ! • 237 - ] find people , who go three day journey , but can find none : after that , we send other three westward willoughby four day journey , which also return without find his note , which any people . then send we three man southeast three be write day journey , who in like sort return without find of people , or any similitude of habitation . it these two note follow be write upon the outside of this pamphlet , or book . 1 the proceed of sir Hugh Willoughbie after he be separate from the Edward Bonaventure . 2 Oure ship be at a anchor in the harbour call sterfier in the island lofoote . 223 the river or haven wherein sir Hugh Willoughbie with the company of his two ship perish for cold , be call Arzina in Lapland , near unto Kegor . but it appear by a will find in the ship that sir Hugh Willoughbie and most of the company be alive in January 1554. 