exemplar epistolae seu literarum Missivarum , quas illustrissimus princeps eduardus ejus nominis Sextus , angliae , francia , and hiberniae rex , misit ad principe septentrionalem , ac orientalem mundi plagam inhabitant juxta mare glacial , nec non indiam orientalem ; anno domini 1553 Regni svi anno septimo , and ultimo . Duardus sextus , angliae , francia , and hiberniae rex , etc omnibus regibus and principibus ac dominis , and cunctis judicibus terrae , and ducibus ejus , quibuscunque est excellens aliqua dignitas in ea , cunctis in locis quae sunt sub universo coelo : pax , tranquillitas , and honour vobis , terris , and regionibus vestris quae imperio vestro subjacent , cuique vestrum quemadmodum convenit ei . propterea 206 qudd indidit deus Opt. Max. hominibus prae cunctis aliis viventibus , cor and desiderium tale , ut appetat cuique cum aliis societatem inire , amare , and vicissim amari , beneficiis afficere , and mutuam accipere beneficia studeat , id cuique pro facultate sva hoc desiderium in omnibus quidem hominibus beneficiis fovere and conservare convenit , in illis autem maxim , qui hoc desiderio adducti , a remotis etiam regionibus ad eos veniunt . quo enim longius iter ejus rei gratia ingressi sunt , eo ardentius in eis hoc desiderium fuisse declararunt . Insuper etiam ad hoc , nos patrum majorumque nostrorum exempla invitant , qui semper humanissime susceperunt and benignissime tractaverunt illos , qui tum a locis propinquis , tum a remotis , eos amice adibant , eorum se protectioni commendante . quod si omnibus id praestare aequum est , certain mercatoribus imprimis praestari debet , qui per universum orbem discurrunt , mare circumlustrante and aridam , ut res bonas and utiles , quae dei beneficio in region eorum inveniuntur , ad remotissimas regiones and regna adferant , atque inde vicissim referant , quod svae regioni utile ibi repeterint : ut and populi ad quos eunt , non destituantur commodis quae non profert illis terra eorum , and ipsi sint participe rerum quibus illi abundant . nam deus coeli and terrae , humano generi maxim consulens , noluit ut omnia in quavis region invenirentur , quo regio open alterius regionis indigeret , and gens ab alia gente commodum aliquod expectaret , ac ita stabiliretur amicitia inter omnes , singuli-que omnibus benefacere quaererent . hoc itaque ineundae ac stabiliendae amicitiae desiderio moti viri quidam regni nostri , iter in remotas maritimas regiones instituerunt , ut inter nostros and illos populos , viam mercibus inferendis and efferendis aperirent , nosque rogaverunt ut id illis concederemus . Qui petitioni illorum annuente , concessimus viro honorabili and forti , Hugoni Wilibeo , and aliis qui cum eo sunt servis nostris fidis and charis , ut pro sva voluntate , in regiones eis prius incognitas eant , quaesituri ea quibus nos caremus , and adducant illis ex nostris terris id quo illi carent . atque ita illis and nobis commodum inde accedat , 207 sitque amicitia perpetua , and foedus indissolubile inter illos and nos , dum permittent illi nos accipere de rebus , [ i - 231. ] quibus superabundant in regnis suis , and nos concedemus illis ex regnis nostris res , quibus destituuntur . Rogamus itaque vos Reges and principe , and omnes quibus aliqua est potestas in terra , ut viris istis nostris , transitum permittatis per regiones vestras . Non enim ex rebus vestris invitus vobis . cogitate ipsi sunt . et si qua re carverint , oramus pro vestra beneficentia , eam vos illis tribuatis , accipiente vicissim ab eis quod poterunt rependere vobis . ita vos gerite erga eos , quemadmodum cuperetis ut nos , and subditi nostri , nos gereremus erga servos vestros , si quando transierint per regiones nostras . atque promittimus vobis per deum omnium quae coelo , terra and mari continentur , perque vitam nostram , and tranquillitatem regnorum nostrorum , nos pari benignitate servos vestros accepturo , si ad regna nostra aliquando venerint . atque a nobis and subditis nostris , ac si nati fuissent in regnis nostris ita benigni tractabuntur , ut rependamus vobis benignitatem , quam nostris exhibueriti . Postquam vos Reges , principe , etc rogavimus , ut humanitate and beneficentia omni prosequamini servos nostros nobis charos , oramus omnipotentem deum nostrum , ut vobis diuturnam vitam largiatur , and pacem quae nullam habeat finem . Scriptum Londini , quae civitas est primaria regni nostri , anno 5515. a creato mundo , mense lair , 14. die mensis , anno septimo regni nostri . 208 king Edward vi present the charter of Bridewell to the citizen of London i Thomas Goodrich bishop of Ely 2 sir Robert Bowes master of the roll 3 earl of Pembroke 4 Hans Holbein 5 sir George Barnes lord m < the copy of the letter missive , which the right noble prince Edward the sixth send to the king , prince , and other potentate , inhabit the north-east part of the world , towards the mighty empire of Cathay , at such time as sir Hugh Willoughby knight , and Richard chancellor , with their company , attempt their voyage thither in the year of Christ 1553. and the seven and last year of his reign . Dward the sixth , by the grace of God , king of England , France , and Ireland , etc to all king , prince , ruler , judge , and governor of the earth , and all other have any excellent dignity on the same , in all place under the universali heaven : peace , tranquillity , and honour be unto you , and your land and region , which be under your dominion , and to every of you , as be convenient . forasmuch as the great and almighty God have give unto mankind , above all other live creature , such a heart and desire , that every man desire to join friendship with other , to love , and be love , also to give and receive mutual benefit : it be therefore the duty of all man , accord to their power , to maintain and increase this desire in every man , with well deserve to all man , and especial to show this good affection to such , as be move with this desire , come unto they from far country . for how much the long voyage they have attempt for this intent , so much the more doe they thereby declare that this desire have be ardent in they . Furthermore also , the example of our father and predecessor do invite we hereunto , forasmuch as they have ever gentle and love entreat such as of friendly mind come to they , aswell in 209 0 from country near hand , as far remote , commend themselves to their protection . and if it be right and equity to show such humanity towards all man , doubtless the same ought chief to be show to merchant , who wander about the world , search both the land and the sea , to carry such good and profitable thing , as be find in their country , to remote region and kingdom , and again to bring from the same , such thing as they find there commodious for their own country : both aswell that the people , to who they go , may not be destitute of such commodity as their country bring not forth to they , as that also they may be partaker of such thing , whereof they abound . for the god of heaven and earth great provide for mankind , will not that all thing shall be find in one region , to the end that one shall have need of another , that by this mean friendship may be establish among all man , and every one seek to gratify all . for the establish and furtherance of which universali amity , certain man of our realm , move hereunto by the say desire , have institute and take upon they a voyage by sea into far country , to the intent that between our people and they , a way may be open to bring in , and carry out merchandise , desire we to further their enterprise . who assent to their petition , have license the right valiant and worthy sir Hugh Willoughby , knight , and other our trusty and faithful servant , which be with he , accord to their desire , to go to country to they heretofore unknown , aswell to seek such thing as we lack , as also to carry unto they from our region , such thing as they lack . so that hereby not only commodity may ensue both to they and we , but also a indissoluble and perpetuali league of friendship be establish between we both , [ i . 232. ] while they permit we to take of their thing , such whereof they have abundance in their region , and we again grant they such thing of we , whereof they be destitute . we therefore desire you king and prince , 210 and all other , to who there be any power on the earth , to permit unto these our servant free passage by your region and dominion : for they shall not touch any thing of you unwilling unto you . Consider you that they also be man . if therefore they shall stand in need of any thing , we desire you of all humanity , and for the nobility which be in you , to aid and help they with such thing as they lack , receive again of they such thing as they shall be able to give you in recompense . show your self so towards they , as you will that we and our subject shall show ourselves towards your servant , if at any time they shall pass by our region . thus do , we promise you by the god of all thing that be contain in heaven , earth , and the sea , and by the life and tranquillity of our kingdom , that we will with like humanity accept your servant , if at any time they shall come to our kingdom , where they shall as friendly and gentle be entertain , as if they be bear in our dominion , that we may hereby recompense the favour and benignity which you have show to our man . thus after we have desire you king and prince , etc with all humanity and favour , to entertain our well-beloved servant , we will pray our almighty God , to grant you long life , and peace , which never shall have end . write in London , which be the chief city of our kingdom , in the year from the creation of the world , 5515. in the month of liar , the fourteenth day of the month , and seven year of our reign . this letter be write also in other language . 1553 - liar . i will read more , that be , in the sarasen lan - greek , and diverse gwge , mixtof turkish and egyptian , February , interpret by they the month to set ship to the [ the sea ' 