the testimony of m. Richard Eden in his decade , concern the book follow . nd whereas ( say he ) i have before make mention how Moscovie be in our time discover by Richard chancellor in his voyage towards Cathay , by the direction and information of m. Sebastian Cabota , who long before have this secret in his mind : i shall not need here to describe that voyage , forasmuch as the same be large and faithful write in the latin tongue , by that learned young man clement Adam , schoolmaster to the queen henshman , as he receive it at the mouth of the say Richard chancellor . the new navigation and discovery of the king - [ 1.243 . ] dome of Moscovia , by the north-east , in the year 1553 : enterprise by sir Hugh willoughby knight , and perform by Richard chancellor pilot major of the voyage : write in latin by Clement Adams . t what time our merchant perceive the commodity and ware of England to be in small request with the country and people about we , and near unto we , and that those merchandize which stranger in the time and memory of our ancestor do earnest seek and desire , upon what occasion , and by who this voyage be set out , and of the discovery of Moscovie by the north . be now neglect , and the price thereof abate , although by we carry to their own port , and all foreign merchandise in great account , and their prize wonderful raise : certain grave citizen of London , and man of great wisdom , and careful for the good of their country , begin to think with themselves , how this mischief may be remedy . neither be a 239 3 - ship furnishedfor the discoverle . the english voyage remedy ( as it then appear ) want to their desire , for the avoid of so great a inconvenience : for see that the wealth of the Spaniard and Portugal , by the discovery and search of new trade and country be marvellous increase , suppose the same to be a course and mean for they also to obtain the like , they thereupon resolve upon a new and strange navigation . and whereas at the same time one Sebastian Cabota , a man in those day very renown , happen to be in London , they begin first of all to deal and consult diligent with he , and after much speech and conference together , it be at last conclude that three ship shall be prepare and furnish out , for the search and discovery of the northern part of the world , to open a way and passage to our man for travail to new and unknown kingdom . and whereas many thing seem necessary to be regard in this so hard and difficult a matter , they first make choice of certain grave and wise person in manner of a senate or company , which shall lay their head together , and give their judgement , and provide thing requisite and profitable for all occasion : by this company it be think expedient , that a certain sum of money shall public be collect to serve for the furnish of so many ship . and lest any private man shall be too much oppress and charge , a course be take , that every man willing to be of the society , shall disburse the portion of twenty and five pound a piece : so that in short time by this mean the sum of six thousand pound be gather , the three ship be buy , the most part whereof they provide to be new build and trim . but in this action , i wot not whether i may more admire the care of the merchant , or the diligence of the shipwright : for the merchant , they get very strong and well season plank for the building , the shippewright , they with daily travail , and their great skill do fit they for the dispatch of the ship : they calk they , pitch they , and among the 240 rest , they make one most staunch and firm , by a excellent and ingenious invention . for they have hear that in certain part of the ocean , a kind of worm be breed , which many time pierce and eat through the strong oak that be : and therefore that the mariner , and the rest to be employ in this voyage may be free and safe from this danger , they cover a piece of the keel of the ship with thin sheet of lead : and have thus build the ship , and furnish they with armour and artillery , then follow a second care no less troublesome and necessary than the former , namely , the provision of victual , which be to be make provision of accord to the time and length of the voyage . and whereas they afore determine to have the east part of 1 ' ” s‘ the world sail unto , and yet that the sea towards the same be not open , except they keep the northern tract , whereas yet it be doubtful whether there be any passage yea or no , they resolve to victuali the ship for eighteen month , which they do for this reason . for our man be to pass that huge and cold part of the world , they wise foresee it , allow they six month victuali to sail to the place , so much more to remain there if the extremity of the winter hinder their return , and so much more also for the time of their come home . now this provision be make and carry aboard , chaise of with armour and munition of all sort , sufficient captain captmne and governor of so great a enterprise be as yet want : to which office and place , although many man , ( and some void of experience ) offer themselves , yet one sir Hugh Willoughbie a most valiant gentleman , sir Hugh and well bear , very earnest request to have that care and charge commit unto he : of who before all other , both by reason of his goodly personage ( for he be of a tall stature ) as also for his singular skill in the service of war , the company of the merchant make great account : so that at the last they conclude and make choice of he fo / the general of this voyage , in 241 q and appoint to he the admiral with authority and command over all the rest . and for the government of other ship although diverse man seem willing , and make offer of themselves thereunto , yet by a common consent one Richard Chanceler , a man of great estimation for many good part of wit in he , be elect , in who alone great hope for the performance of this business rest . this man be bring up by one master Henry Sidney , a noble young gentleman and very much belove of king Edward , who at this time come to the place where the merchant be gather together , begin a very eloquent speech or oration , and speak to they after this manner follow . my very worshipful friend , i can but great commend your present godly and virtuous intention , in the serious enterprise ( for the singular love you bear to your country ) a matter , which ( i hope ) will prove profitable for this nation , and honourable to this our land . which intention of you we also of the nobili tie be ready to our power to help and further : neither do we hold any thing so dear and precious unto we , which we will not willing forgo , and lie out in so commendable a cause . but principal i rejoice in my self , that i have nourish and maintain that wit , which be like by some mean and in some measure , to profit and steed you in this worthy action . but yet i will not have you ignorant of this one thing , that i do now part with chancellor , not because 1 make little reckon of the man , or that his maintenance be burdenous and chargeable unto i , but that you may conceive and understand my good will and promptitude for the furtherance of this business , and that the authority and estimation which he deserve may be give he . you know the man by report , i by experience , you by word , i by deed , you by speech and company , but i by the daily trial of his life have a full and perfect knowledge of he . and you be also to remember , into how many peril 242 for your sake , and his country love , he be now to run : whereof it be requisite that we be not unmindful , if it please God to send he good success . we commit a little money to the chance and hazard of fortune : he commit his life ( a thing to a man of all thing most dear ) to the rage sea , and the uncertainty of many danger . we shall here live and rest at home quiet with our friend , and acquaintance : but he in the mean time labour to keep the ignorant and unruly mariner in good order and obedience , with how many care shall he trouble and vex himself ? with how many trouble shall he break himself ? and how many disquieting shall he be force to sustain ? we shall keep our own coast and country : he shall seek strange and unknown kingdom . he shall commit his safety to barbarous and cruel people , and shall hazard his life among the monstrous and terrible beast of the sea wherefore in respect of the greatness of the danger , and the excellency of his charge , you be to favour and love the man thus depart from we : and if it fall so happy out that he return again , it be your part and duty also , liberal to reward he . after that this noble young gentleman have deliver this or some such like speech , much more eloquent than i can possible report it , the company then present begin one to look upon another , one to question and confer with another : and some ( to who the virtue and sufficiency of the man be know ) begin secret to rejoice with themselves , and to conceive a speciali hope , that the man will prove in time very rare and excellent , and that his virtue already appear and shine to the world will grow to the great honour and advancement of this kingdom . after all this , the company grow to some silence , it seem good to they that be of great gravity among they , to inquire , search and seek what may be learned and know , concern the easterly part or 243 tract of the world . for which cause two tartarian , which be then of the king stable , be send for , and a interpreter be get to be present , by who they be demand touch their country and the manner of their nation . but they be able to answer nothing to the purpose : be in deed more acquaint ( as one there merry and open say ) to toss pot , than to learn the state and disposition of people . but after much ado and many thing pass about this matter , they grow at last to this issue , to set down and appoint a time for the departure of the ship : because diverse be of opinion , that a great part of the best time of the year be already spend , and if the delay grow long , the way will be stop and bar by the force of the ice , and the cold climate : and therefore it be think best by the opinion of they all , that by the twenty day of May , the captain they depart and mariner shall take ship , and depart from from Ratcliff Radcliffe upon the ebb , if it please God . they have salute their acquaintance , one his wife , another ’ his child , another his kinsfolk , and another his friend dear than his kinsfolk , be present and ready at the day appoint : and have weigh anchor , they depart with the turn of the water , and sail [ i . 245. ] easy , come first to Greenwich . the great ship be tow down with boat , and oar , and the mariner be all apparel in watchet or sky colour cloth , row amain , and make way with diligence . And be come near to Greenwich , ( where the court then lie ) present upon the news thereof , the courtier come run out , and the common people flock together , stand very thick upon the shore : the privy counsel , they look out at the window of the court , and the rest run up to the top of the tower : the ship hereupon discharge their ordinance , and shoot off their piece after the manner of war , and of the sea , insomuch that the top of the hill sound therewith , the valley and the water give a echo , and 244 the mariner , they shout in such sort , that the sky ring again with the noise thereof . one stand in the poop of the ship , and by his gesture bid farewell to his friend in the best manner he can . another walk upon the hatch , another climb the shrowd , another stand upon the main yard , and another in the top of the ship . to be short , it be a very triumph ( after a sort ) in all respect to the beholder . but ( alas ) the good king Edward ( in respect of who principal all this be prepare ) he only by reason of his sickness be absent from this show , and not long after the departure of these ship , the lamentable and most sorrowful accident of his death follow . but to proceed in the matter . the ship go down with the tide come at last to Woolwich , where they stay and cast anchor , with purpose to depart therehence again , as soon as the turn of the water , and a better wind shall draw they to set sail . after this they depart and come to Harwich , in which port they stay long , not without great loss and consume of time : yet at the last with a good wind they hoist up sail , and commit themselves to the sea , give their last adieu to their native country , which they know not whether they shall ever return to see again or not . many of they look oftentimes back , and can not refrain from tear , consider into what hazard they be to fall , and what uncertainty of the sea they be to make trial of . among the rest , Richard Chanceler the captain of the Edward Bonaventure , be not a little grieve with the fear of want victual , part whereof be find to be corrupt and putrify at Harwich , and the hogshead of wine also leak , and be not staunch : he natural and fatherly affection also somewhat trouble he , for he leave behind he his two little son , which be in the case of orphan if he speed not well : the estate also of his company move he to care , be in the former respect after a sort unhappy , and be to 245 abide with himself every good or bid accident : but in the mean time while his mind be thus torment with the multiplicity of sorrow and care , after many day sail , they ken land afar off , whereunto the pilot direct the ship : and be come to it , they land , and find it to be roast island , where they stay certain day , and afterward set sail again , and proceed towards the north , they espy certain other island , which be call the cross of island . from which place when they be a title depart , sir Hugh Willoughby the general , a man of good foresight and providence in all his action , erect and set out his flag , by which he call together the chief man of the other ship , that by the help and assistance of their counsel , the order of the government , and conduction of the ship in the whole voyage may be the better : who be come together accord , they conclude and agree , that if any great tempest shall arise at any time , and happen to disperse and scatter they , every ship shall endeavour his best to go to Wardhouse , a haven or castle of some name in the kingdom of Norway , and that they that arrive there first in safety shall stay and expect the come of the rest . the very same day in the afternoon , about four of the clock , so great a tempest sudden arise , and the sea be so outrageous , that the ship can not keep their intend course , but some be perforce drive one way , and some another way , to their great peril and hazard : the generail with his loud voice cry out to Richard chancellor , and earnest request he not to go far from he : but he neither will nor can keep company with he , if he sail still so fast : for the admiral be of better sail than his ship . but the say admiral ( i know not by what mean ) bear all his sail , be carry away with so great force and swiftness , that not long after he be quite out of sight , and the three ship also with the same storm and like rage be disperse and lose we . 246 the ship boat of the admiral ( strike against they they retume ship , ) be overwhelm in the sight and view of the the next year mariner of the Bonaventure : and as for they that be already return and arrive , they know nothing or the come the rest of the ship what be become of they . other 2. ship . but if it be so , that any miserable mishap have overtake they , if the rage and fury of the sea have [ i . 246. ] devour those good man , or if as yet they live , and wander up and down in strange country , encage must needs say they be man worthy of better fortune , and if they be live , let we wish they safety and a good return : but if the cruelty of death have take hold of they , God send they a christian grave and sepulchre . now Richard chancellor with his ship and company be thus leave alone , and become very pensive , heavy , and sorrowful , by this dispersion of the fleet , he ( accord to the order before take , ) shape his course for Wardhouse in Norway , there to expect and abide the arrival of the rest of the ship . And be come thither , and have stay there the space of 7. day , and look in vain for their come , he determine at length to proceed alone in the purpose voyage . and as he be prepare himself to depart , it happen that he fall in company and speech with certain scottishman : who have understanding of his intention , and wish well to his action , begin earnest to dissuade he from the further prosecution of the discovery , by amplify the danger which he be to fall into , and omit no reason that may serve to that purpose . but he hold nothing so ignominious and reproachful , as inconstancy and levity of mind , and persuade himself that a man of valour can not commit a more dishonourable part then for fear of danger to avoid and shun great attempt , be nothing at all change or discourage with the speech and word of the Scot , remain steadfast and immutable in his first resolution : determine either to bring that to pass which be intend , or else to die the death . 247 they arrive in the bay of saint Nicholas . the english voyage and as for they which be with master chancellor in his ship , although they have great cause of discomfort by the loss of their company ( who the foresay tempest have separate from they , ) and be not a little trouble with cogitation and perturbation of mind , in respect of their doubtful course : yet notwithstanding , they be of such consent and agreement of mind with master chancellor , that they be resolute , and prepare under his direction and government , to make proof and trial of all adventure , without all fear or mistrust of future danger . which constancy of mind in all the company do exceed increase their captain carefulness : for he be swallow up with like good will and love towards they , fear lest through any error of he , the safety of the company shall be endanger . to conclude , when they see their desire and hope of the arrival of the rest of the ship to be every day more and more frustrate , they provide to sea again , and master chancellor hold on his course towards that unknown part of the world , and sail so far , that he come at last to the place where he find no night at all , but a continual light and brightness of the sun shine clear upon the huge and mighty sea and have the benefit of this perpetuali light for certain day , at the length it please God to bring they into a certain great bay , which be of one hundred mile or thereabouts over . whereinto they enter , and somewhat far within it cast anchor , and look every way about they , it happen that they espy a far off a certain fisher boat , which master chancellor , accompany with a few of his man , go towards to common with the fisherman that be in it , and to know of they what country it be , and what people , and of what manner of live they be : but they be amaze with the strange greatness of his ship , ( for in those part before that time they have never see the like ) begin present to avoid and to flee : but he still follow they at last overtake they , and be come to they , 248 * 553-they ( be in great fear , as man half dead ) prostrate themselves before he , offer to kiss his foot : but he ( accord to his great and singular courtesy , ) look pleasant upon they , comfort they by sign and gesture , refuse those duty and reverence of they , and take they up in all love sort from the ground . and it be strange to consider how much favour afterward in that place , this humanity of he do purchase to himself . for they be dismiss spread by and by a report abroad of the arrival of a strange nation , of a singular gentleness and courtesy : whereupon the common people come together offer to these newcome guest victual free , and not refuse to traffic with they , except they have be bind by a certain religious use and custom , not to buy any foreign commodity , without the knowledge and consent of the king . by this time our man have learn that this country discovery be call Russia , or Moscovie , and that Ivan Vasiliwich ( which be at that time their king name ) rule and govern far and wide in those place . and the barbarous russes ask likewise of our man whence they be , and what they come for : whereunto answer be make , that they be Englishmen send into those coast , from the most excellent king Edward the sixth , have from he in commandment certain thing to deliver to their king , and seek nothing else but his amity and friendship , and traffic with his people , whereby they doubt not , but that great commodity and profit will grow to the subject of both kingdom . the barbarian herd these thing very glad , and [ i . 247. ] promise their aid and furtherance to acquaint their king out of hand with so honest and a reasonable request . in the mean time master Chanceler entreat victual for his money of the governor of that place ( who together with other come aboard he ) and require hostage of they likewise for the more assurance of safety to himself and his company . to who the governor answer , that they know not in that case 249 the will of their king , but yet be willing in such thing as they may lawful do , to pleasure he : which be as then to afford he the benefit of victual . now while these thing be a do , they secret send a messenger unto the emperor , to certify he of the arrival of a strange nation , and withal to know his pleasure concern they . which message be very welcome unto he , insomuch that voluntary he invite they to come to his court . but if by reason of the tediousness of so long a journey , they think it not best so to do , than he grant liberty to his subject to bargain , and to traffic with they : and further promise , that if it will please they to come to he , he himself will bear the whole charge of post horse . in the mean time the governor of the place differ the matter from day to day , pretend diverse excuse , and say one while that the consent of all the governor , and another while , that the great and weighty affair of the kingdom compel they to differ their answer : and this they do of purpose , so long to protract the time , until the messenger ( send before to the king ) do return with relation of his will and pleasure . but master chancellor , ( see himself hold in this suspense with long and vain expectation , and think that of intention to delude he , they post the matter off so often , ) be very instant with they to perform their promise : which if they will not do , he tell they that he will depart and proceed in his voyage . so that the moscovite ( although as yet they know not the mind of their king ) yet fear the departure in deed of our man who have such ware and commodity as they great desire , they at last resolve to furnish our people with all thing necessary , and to conduct they by land to the presence of their king . and so master Chanceler begin his journey , which be very long and most troublesome , wherein he have the use of certain sled , which in that country be very common , for they be carry themselves upon sled , and all their 250 carriage be in the same sort , the people almost not know any other manner of carriage , the cause whereof be the exceed hardness of the ground congeal in the winter time by the force of the cold , which in those place be very extreme and horrible , whereof hereafter we will say something . but now they have pass the great part of their journey , meet at last with the sleddeman ( of who i speak before ) send to the king secret from the justice or governor , who by some ill hap have lose his way , and have go to the sea side , which be near to the country of the Tartar , think there to have find our ship . but have long err and wander out of his way , at the last in his direct return , he meet ( as he be come ) our captain on the way . to who he the emper-by and by deliver the emperor letter , which be °urs c ( > urteous write to he with all courtesy and in the most love ' manner that can be : wherein express commandment be give , that post horse shall be get for he and the rest of his company without any money . which thing be of all the russes in the rest of their journey so willing do , that they begin to quarrel , yea , and to fight also in strive and contend which of they shall put their post horse to the sledde : so that after much ado and great pain take in this long and weary journey , ( for they have travail very near fifteen hundred mile ) master Chanceler come at last to Moscow the chief city of the kingdom , and the seat of the king : of which city , and of the emperor himself , and of the principali city of Moscovie , we will speak immediate more at large in this discourse . of Moscovie , which be also call Russia . MOscovie , which have the name also of Russia the white , be a very large and spacious country , every way bound with diverse nation . towards the south and the east , it be compass with Tartary : the northern side of it stretch to the scytian ocean : upon 251 the west part border the lappians , a rude and savage nation , live in wood , who language be not know to any other people : next unto these , more towards the south , be Swecia , than Finlandia , than Livonia , and last of all Lituania . this country of Moscovie , have also very many and great river in it , and be marish ground in many place : and as for the river , the great and [ i . 248. ] most famous among all the rest , be that , which the russes in their own tongue call Volga , but other know it by the name of Rha. next unto it in fame be Tanais , which they call don , and the three Boristhenes which at this day they call neper . two of these , to wit , Rha , and Boristhenes issue both out of one fountain , run very far through the land : Rha receive many other pleasant river into it , and run from the very head or spring of it towards the east , after many crooked turn and wind , discharge it self , and all the other water and river that fall into it by diverse passage into the caspian sea Tanais spring from a fountain of great name in those part , and grow great near to his head , spread it self at length very large , and make a great lake : and then grow narrow again , do so run for certain mile , until it fall into another lake , which they call Ivan : and therehence fetch a very crooked course , come very near to the river Volga : but disdain as it be the company of any other river , do there turn it self again from Volga , and run towards the south , and fall at last into the lake of Moeotis . Boristhenes , which come from the same head that Rha do , ( as we say before ) carry both it self , and other water that be near unto it , towards the south , not refuse the mixture of other small river : and run by many great and large country false at last into Pontus Euxinus . beside these river , be also in Moscovie certain lake , and the nightie poo^es ’ lake breed fish by the celestial influence : lake of and among they all , the chief and most principali be Bealozera . call Bealozera , which be very famous by reason of a 252 very strong tower build in it , wherein the king of Moscovie reserve and repose their treasure in all time of war and danger . touch the riphean mountain , whereupon the snow lie continual , and where hence in time past it be think that Tanais the river do spring , and that the rest of the wonder of nature , which the grecian feign and invent of old , be there to be see : our man which late come from thence , neither see they , nor yet have bring home any perfect relation of they , although they remain there for the space of three month , and have get in that time some intelligence of the language of Moscovie . the whole country be plain and champion , and few hill in it : and towards the north it have very large and spacious wood , wherein be great store of fir tree , a wood very necessary , and fit for the build of house : there be also wild beast breed in those wood , as buff , bear , and black wolf , and another kind of beast unknown to we , but call by they Rossomakka : and the nature of the same be very rare and wonderful : for when it be great with young , and ready to bring forth , it seek out some narrow place between two stake , and so go through they , press it self , and by that mean be ease of her burden , which otherwise can not be do . they hunt their buff for the most part a horseback , but their bear a foot , with wooden fork . the north part of the country be report to be so cold , that the very ice or water which distil out of the moist wood which they lie upon the fire be present congeal and freeze : the diversity grow sudden to be so great , that in one and the self same firebrand , a man shall see both fire and ice . when the winter do once begin there it do still more 8c more increase by a perpetuity of cold : neither do that cold slake , until the force of the sun beam do dissolve the cold , and make glad the earth , return to it again . our mariner which we leave in the ship in the mean time to keep it , in their go up 253 the sharpness of the winter in Moscovie . the english voyage only from their cabin to the hatch , have their breath oftentimes so sudden take away , that they eftsoon fall down as man very near dead , so great be the sharpness of that cold climate : but as for the south part of the country , they be somewhat more temperate . of Moscow the chief city of the kingdom , and of the emperor thereof . it remain that a large discourse be make of Moscow , the principali city of that country , and of the prince also , as before we have promise . the empire and government of the king be very large , and his wealth at this time exceed great . and because the city of Moscow be the chief of all the rest , it seem of it self to challenge the first place in this discourse . our man say , that in bigness it be as great as the city of London , with the suburb thereof . there be many and great building in it , but for beauty and fairness , nothing their manner comparable to we . there be many town and of building . village also , but build out of order , and with no handsomeness : their street and way be not pave with stone as we be : the wall of their house be of wood : the roof for the most part be cover with shingle board . there be hard by the city a very fair castle , strong , and furnish with artillery , whereunto [ i . 249. ] the city be join direct towards the north , with a brick wall : the wall also of the castle be build with brick , and be in breadth or thickness eighteen foot . this castle have on the one side a dry ditch , on the other side the river Moscua , whereby it be make almost inexpugnable . the same Moscua trending towards the east do admit into it the company of the river Occa . in the castle aforesaid , there be in number nine church , or chapel , not altogether unhandsome , which be use and keep by certain religious man , over who there be after a sort , a patriarch , or governor , and with he other reverend father , all which for the great part , dwell within the castle . as for the king 254 court and palace , it be not of the neat , only in form it be four square , and of low build , much surpass and excel by the beauty and elegancy of the house of the king of England . the window be very narrow build , and some of they by glass , some other by lettiss admit the light : and whereas the palace of our prince be deck , and adorn with hang of cloth of gold , there be none such there : they build and join to all their wall bench , and that not only in the court of the emperor , but in all private man house . now after that they have remain about twelve day in the city , there be then a messenger send unto they , to bring they to the king house : and they be after a sort weary with their long stay , be very ready , and will so to do : and be enter within the gate of the court , there sit a very honourable company of courtier , to the number of one hundred , all apparel in cloth of gold , down to their ankle : and therehence be conduct into the chamber of presence , our man begin to wonder at the majesty of the emperor : his seat be aloft , in a very royal throne , have on his head a diadem , or crown of gold , apparel with a robe all of goldsmith work , and in his hand he hold a sceptre garnish , and beset with precious stone : and beside all other note and appearances of honour , there be a majesty in his countenance proportionable with the excellency of his estate : on the one side of he stand his chief secretary , on the other side , the great commander of silence , both of they array also in cloth of gold : and then there sit the counsel of one hundred and fifty in number , all in like sort array , and of great state . This so honourable a assembly , so great a majesty of the emperor , and of the place may very well have amaze our man , and have dash they out of countenance : but notwithstanding master Chanceler be therewithal ! nothing dismay salute , and do his duty to the emperor , 255 after the manner of England , and withal , deliver unto king he the letter of our king , Edward the sixth . the etten^ emperor have take , and read the letter , begin a deliver to question with they , and to ask they of the welfare of our king : whereunto our man answer he direct , and in few word : hereupon our man present some thing to the emperor , by the chief secretary , which at the delivery of it , put of his hat , be before all the time cover : and so the emperor have invite they to dinner , dismiss they from his presence : and go into the chamber of he that be master of the request to the emperor , and have stay there the space of two hour , at the last , the messenger come , and call they to dinner : they go , and be conduct into the golden court , ( for so they call it , although not very fair ) they find the emperor sit upon a high and stately seat , apparel with a robe of silver , and with another diadem on his head : our man be place over against he , sit down : in the mid of the room stand a mighty cupboard upon a square foot , whereupon stand also a round board , in manner of a diamond , broad beneath , and towards the top narrow , and every step rise up more narrow than another . upon this cupboard be place the emperor plate , which be so much , that the very cupboard it self be scant able to sustain the weight of it : the better part of all the vessel , and goblet , be make of very fine gold : and among the rest , there be four pot of very large bigness , which do adorn the rest of the plate in great measure : for they be so high , that they think they at the least five foot long . there be also upon this cupboard certain silver cask , not much differ from the quantity of our fyrkin , wherein be reserve the emperor drink : on each side of the hall stand four table , each of they lay and cover with very clean table clothes , whereunto the company ascend by three step or degree : 256 all which be fill with the assembly present : the guest be all apparel with linen without , and with rich skin within , and so do notable set out this royal feast the emperor , when he take any bread or knife in his hand , do first of all cross himself upon his forehead : they that be in speciali favour with the emperor sit upon the same bench with he , but somewhat far from he : and before the come in of the meat , the emperor himself , accord to a ancient custom of the king of mos-covy , do first bestow a piece of bread upon every one of his guest , with a loud pronunciation of his title , and honour , in this manner : the great duke of Moscovie , and chief emperor of Russia , John Basiliwich ( and then the officer name the guest ) do give thou bread . whereupon all the guest rise up , [ i . 250. ] and by and by sit down again . this do , the gentleman usher of the hall come in , with a notable company of servant , carry the dish , and have do his reverence to the emperor , put a young swan in a golden platter upon the table , and immediately take it thence again , deliver it to the carver , and seven other of his fellow , to be cut up : which be perform , the meat be then distribute to the guest , with the like pomp , and ceremony . in the mean time , the gentleman usher receive his bread , and taste to the emperor , and afterward , have do his reverence , he depart . touch the rest of the dish , because they be bring in out of order , our man can report no certainty : but this be true , that all the furniture of dish , and drink vessel , which be then for the use of a hundred guest , be all of pure gold , and the table be so lade with vessel of gold , that there be no room for some to stand upon they . we may not forget , that there be 140. servitor array in cloth of gold , that in the dinner time , change thrice their habit and apparel , which servitor be in 11 257 r like sort serve with bread from the emperor , as the rest of the guest . last of all , dinner be end , and candle bring in , ( for by this time night be come ) the emperor call all his guest and noble man by their name , in such sort , that it seem miraculous , that a prince , otherwise occupy in great matter of estate , shall so well remember so many and sundry particular name . the russes tell our man , that the reason thereof , as also of the bestow of bread in that manner , be to the end that the emperor may keep the knowledge of his own household : and withal , that such as be under his displeasure , may by this mean be know . of the discipline of war among the russes . whensoever the injure of their neighbour do call the king forth to battle , he never arm a less number against the enemy , than 300. thousand soldier , 100 thousand whereof he carry out into the field with he , and leave the rest in garrison in some fit place , for the better safety of his empire . he press no husbandman , nor merchant : for the country be so populous , that these be leave at home , the youth of the realm be sufficient for all his war . as many as go out to warfare do provide all thing of their own cost : they fight not on foot , but altogether on horseback : their armour be a coat of make , and a helmet : the coat of mail w'out be gild , or else adorn with silk , although it pertain to a common soldier : they have a great pride in show their wealth : they use bow , and arrow , as the turk do : they carry lance also into the field . they ride with a short stirrup , after the manner of the turk : they be a kind of people most spare in diet , and most patient in extremity of cold , above all other . for when the ground be cover with snow , and be grow terrible and hard with the frost , this ruff hang up his mantle , or soldier coat , against that part from whence the wind and snow drive , and so make 258 of little fire , lie down with his back towards the weather : this mantle of he serve he for his bed , wall , house and all : he drink be cold water of the river , mingle with oatmeal , and this be all his good cheer , and he think himself well , and dainty feed therewith , and so sit down by his fire , and upon the hard ground , roast as it be his weary side thus dainty stuff : the hard ground be his feather bed , and some block or stone his pillow : and as for his horse , he be as it be a chamber-fellow with his master , fare both alike . how just may this barbarous , and rude Russe condemn the daintiness and niceness of our captain , who live in a soil and air much more temperate , yet common use fur boot , and cloak ? but thus much of the furniture of their common soldier . but those that be of high degree come into the field a little better provide . as for the furniture of the emperor himself , it be then above all other time , most notable . the cover of his tent for the most part , be all of gold , adorn with stone of great price , and with the curious workmanship of plumasier . as often as they be to skirmish with the enemy , they go forth without any order at all : they make no wing , nor military division of their man , as we do , but lie for the most part , in ambush , do sudden set upon the enemy . their horse can well abstain two whole day from any meat . they feed upon the bark of tree , and the most tender branch , in all the time of war . and this scant and miserable manner of live , both the horse and his master can well endure , sometime for the space of two month , lusty , and in good state of body . if any man behave himself valiant in the field , to the contentation of the emperor , he bestow upon he in recompense of his service , some farm , or so much ground as he and he may live upon , which notwithstanding after his death , return again to the emperor , if he die without a male issue . for although his daughter be never so many , yet no part of that inheritance come to they , except peradventure the emperor of his good-259 A.D. * 553 - [ i . 251. ] nes , give some portion of the land among they , to bestow they withal . as for the man , whosoever he be , that be in this sort reward by the emperor liberality , he be bind in a great sum , to maintain so many soldier for the war , when need shall require , as that land , in the opinion of the emperor , be able to maintain . and all those , to who any land fall by inheritance , be in no better condition : for if they die without any male issue , all their land fall into the hand of the emperor . and moreover , if there be any rich man among they , who in his own person be unfit for the war , and yet have such wealth , that thereby many noble man and warrior may be maintain , if any of the courtier present his name to the emperor , the unhappy man be by and by send for , and in that instant , deprive of all his riches , which with great pain and travel all his life time he have get together : except perhaps some small portion thereof be leave he , to maintain his wife , child and family . but all this be do of all the people so willing at the emperor commandment , that a man will think , they rather make restitution of other man good , then give that which be their own to other man . now the emperor have take these good into his hand , bestow they among his courtier , accord to their desert : and often that a man be send to the war , the more the favour he think be bear to he by the emperor , although he go upon his own charge , as i say before . so great be the obedience of all man general to their prince . of the ambassador of the emperor of Moscovie . the Moscovite , with no less pomp , and magnificence , then that which we have speak of , send his ambassador to foreign prince , in the affair of estate . for while our man be abide in the city of Moscow , there be two ambassador send to the king of Poland , 260 accompany with 500 notable horse , and the great part of the man be array in cloth of gold , and of silk , and the worst apparel be of garment of blow colour , to speak nothing of the trappings of the horse , which be adorn with gold and silver , and very curious embroider : they have also with they one hundred white and fair spare horse , to use they at such time , as any weariness come upon they . but now the time require i to speak brief of other city of the moscovite , and of the ware and commodity that the country yield . Novogorode . next unto Moscow , the city of Novogorode be repute the chief of Russia : for although it be in majesty inferior to it , yet in greatness it go beyond it . it be the chief and great Marte town of all Moscovie : and albeit the emperor seat be not there , but at Moscow , yet the commodiousness of the river , fall into that gulf , which be call Sinus Finnicus , whereby it be well frequent by merchant , make it more famous than Moscow it self . this town excel all the rest in the commodity of flax and hemp : it yield also hide , honey , and wax . the Fleming there sometime have a house of merchandise , but by reason that they use the like ill deal there , which they do with we , they lose their privilege , a restitution whereof they earnest sue for at the time that our man be there . but those Flemings hear of the arrival of our man in those part , write their letter to the emperor against they , accuse they for pirate and rover , wish he to detain , and imprison they . which thing when they be know of our man , they conceive fear , that they shall never have return home . but the emperor believe rather the king letter , which our man bring , than the lie and false suggestion of the Fleming , use no ill intreaty towards they . [ yeraslave 261 the knavery of the Fleming against our man . yeraslave also be a town of some good fame , for the commodity of hide , tallow , and corn , which it yield in great abundance . cake of wax be there also to be sell , although other place have great store : this yeraslave be distant from Moscow , about two hundred mile : and betwixt they be many populous village . their field yield such store of corn , that in convey it towards Moscow , sometime in a forenoon , a man shall see seven hundred or eight hundred sled , go and come , lade with corn and salt fish : the people come a thousand mile to Moscow , to buy that corn , and then carry it away upon sled : and these be those people that dwell in the north part , where the cold be so terrible , that no corn do grow there , or if it spring up , it never come to ripeness . the commodity that they bring with they , be saltfish , skin , and hide . [ i . 252. ] five ologda . Vologda be from Moscow , 550. mile yield the commodity of hemp and flax also : although the great store of flax be sell at Novogrode . Plesco . the town of Plesco , be frequent of merchant for the good store of honey and wax that it yield . Colmagro . the north part of Russia yield very rare and precious skin : and among the rest , those principal , which we call Sables , wear about the neck of our noble woman and lady : it have also martins skin , white , black , and red fox skin , skin of hare , and ermyn , and other , which they call and term barbarous , as Bevers , minxes , and Miniver . the sea adjoin , breed a certain beast , which they call the mors , which seek his food upon the rock , 262 climb up with the help of his tooth . the russes use to take they , for the great virtue that be in their tooth , whereof they make as great account , as we do of the elephant tooth . Theise commodity they carry upon dear back to the town of Lampas : and from thence to Colmagro , and there in the winter time , be keep great fair for the sale of they . this city of Colmagro , serve all the country about it with salt , and salt fish . the russian also of the north part , send thither oil , which they call train , which they make in a river call two Una , although it be also make elsewhere : and here they use to boil the water of the sea , whereof they make very great store of salt . of controversy in law , and how they be end . or , Dwina have hitherto speak so much of the chief city of Russia , as the matter require : it remain that we speak somewhat of the law , that the moscovit do use , as far forth as the same be come to our knowledge . if any controversy arise among they , they first make their landlord judge in the matter , and if they can end it , than they prefer it to the magistrate . the plaintiff crave of the say magistrate , that he may have leave to enter law against his adversary : and have obtain it , the officer fetch the defendant , and beat he on the leg , till he bring forth a surety for he : but if he be not of such credit , as to procure a surety , then be his hand by a officer tie to his neck , and he be beat all the way , till he come before the judge . the judge then ask he ( as for example in the matter of debt ) whether he owe any thing to the plaintiff . if he deny it , then say the judge , how can thou deny it ? the defendant answer , by a other : thereupon the officer be command to cease from beat of he , until the matter be further try . they have no lawyer , but every man be his own advocate , and both the complaint of the accuser , 263 and the answer of the defendant , be in manner of petition deliver to the emperor , entreat justice at his hand . the emperor himself hear every great controversy , and upon the hear of it , give judgement , and that with great equity , which i take to be a thing worthy of speciali commendation , in the majesty of a prince . but although he do this with a good purpose of mind , yet the corrupt magistrate do wonderful pervert the same : but if the emperor take they in any fault , he do punish they most severe . now at the last , when each party have defend his cause with his best reason , the judge demand of the accuser , whether he have any more to say for himself : he answer , that he will try the matter in fight by his champion , or else intreat , that in fight betwixt themselves the matter may be end : which be grant , they both fight it out : or if both of they , or either of they seem unfit for that kind of trial , than they have public champion to be hire , which live by end of quarrel . Theise champion be arm with iron axe , and spear , and fight on foot , and he who champion be overcome , be by and by take , and imprison , and terrible handle , until he agree with his adversary . but if either of they be of any good call , and degree , and do challenge one another to fight , the judge grant it : in which case they may not use public champion . and he that be of any good birth , do contemn the other , if he be base bear , and will not fight with he . if a poor man happen to grow in debt , his creditor take he , and make he pay the debt , in work either to himself , or to some other man , who wage he take up . and there be some among they , that use willing to make themselves , their [ i . 253 ] wife , and child , bondslave unto rich man , to have a little money at the first into their hand , and so for ever after content themselves with meat and drink : so little account do they make of liberty . 264 if any man be take upon commit of theft , he be imprison , and often beat , but not hang for the first offence , as the manner be with we : and this they call the law of mercy . he that offend the second time have his nose cut off , and be burn in the forehead with a hot iron . the three time , he be hang . there be many cutpurse among they , and if the rigour of the prince do not cut they off , they can not be avoid . of their religion . they maintain the opinion of the greek church : they suffer no grave image of saint in their church , but their picture paint in table they have in great abundance , which they do adore and offer unto , and burn wax candle before they , and cast holy water upon they , without other honour . they say that our image which be set up in church , and carve , have no divinity in they . in their private house they have image for their household saint , and for the most part , they be put in the dark place of the house : he that come into his neighbour house do first salute his saint , although he see they not . if any foorme or stool stand in his way , he oftentimes beat his brow upon the same , and often duck down with his head , and body , worship the chief image . the habit , and attire of the priest , and of the lay man , do nothing at all differ : as for marriage , it be forbid to no man : only this be receive and hold among they for a rule , and custom , that if a priest wife do die , he may not marry again , nor take a second wife : and therefore they of secular priest , as they call they , be make monk , to who then chastity for ever be command . their divine service be all do and say in their own language , that every man may understand it : they receive the lord supper with leaven bread , 265 and after the consecration , they carry it about the church in a saucer , and prohibit no man from receive and take of it , that be willing so to do . they use both the oide and the new testament , and read both in their own language , but so confuse , that they themselves that do read , understand not what themselves do say : and while any part of either testament be read , there be liberty give by custom to prattle , talk , and make a noise : but in the time of the rest of the service they use very great silence and reverence and behave themselves very modest , and in good sort . as touch the lord prayer , the ten man among they know it not : and for the article of our raith , and the ten commandment , no man , or at the least very few of they do either know they or can say they : their opinion be , that such secret and holy thing as they be shall not rash and imprudent be communicate with the common people . they hold for a maxim among they , that the old law , and the commandment also be abolish by the death and blood of Christ : all study and letter of humanity they utter refuse : concern the latin , greek , and hebrew tongue , they be altogether ignorant in they . Every year they celebrate four several fast , which they call accord to the name of the saint : the first begin with they , at the time that our lent begin . the second be call among they the fast of saint Peter . the three be take from the day of the virgin marie . and the four and last begin upon saint Philips day . but as we begin our lent upon Wednesday , so they begin they upon the Sunday . upon the Saturday they eat flesh : whensoever any of those fast feast do draw near , look what week do immediate go before they , the same week they live altogether upon white meat , and in their common language they call those week , the fast of butter . in the time of their fast , the neighbour every 266 where go from one to another , and visit one another , and kiss one another with kiss of peace , in token of their mutual love and Christian concord : and then also they do more often then at any other time go to the holy communion . when seven day be past , from the begin of the fast , than they do often either go to their church , or keep themselves at home , and use often prayer : and for that sevennight they eat nothing but herb : but after that sevennight fast be once past , than they return to their old intemperancy of drink , for they be notable tosspot . as for the keep of their fast day , they do it very straight , neither do they eat any thing beside herb , and salt fish , as long as those fast day do endure : but upon every Wednesday and Friday , in every week throughout the year , they fast . there be very many monastery of the order of saint Benedict , among they , to which many great live , for their maintenance , do belong : for the friar and the monk do at the least possess the three part of the live , throughout the whole Moscovite empire . to those monk that be of this order , there be among they a perpetuali prohibition , that they may eat no flesh : and therefore their meat be only salt fish , milk , and butter : neither be it permit they by the law , and custom of their religion , to eat any fresh fish at all : and at those four fast time , whereof we speak before , they eat no fish at all : only they live with herb , and cucumber , which they do continual for that purpose cause and take order to grow and spring , for their use and diet . as for their drink , it be very weak , and small . for the discharge of their office , they do every day say service , and that early in the morning before day : and they do in such sort , and with such observation begin their service , that they will be sure to make a end of it , before day : and about nine of the clock in the morning they celebrate the communion . when 267 [ i . 254. ] they have so do , they go to dinner , and after dinner note . they go again to service , and the like also after supper : and in the mean time while they be at dinner there be some exposition or interpretation of the gospel use . whensoever any abbot of any monastery die , the emperor take all his household stuff , beast , flock of sheep , gold , silver , and all that he have : or else he that be to succeed he in his place and dignity do redeem all those thing , and buy they of the emperor for money . their church be build of timber , and the tower of their church for the most part be cover with shingle board . at the door of their church , they usual build some entrance or porch as we do , and in their churchyard they erect a certain house of wood , wherein they set up their bell , wherein sometime they have but one , in some two , and in some also three . there be one use and custom among they , which be strange and rare , but yet it be very ridiculous , and that be this : when any man die among they , they take the dead body and put it in a coffin or chest , and in the hand of the corpse they put a little scroll , and in the same there be these word write , that the same man die a ruff of russes , have receive the faith , and die in the same . This write or letter they say they send to saint Peter , who receive it ( as they affirm ) read it , and by and by admit he into heaven , and that his glory and place be high and great than the glory of the Christians of the latin church , repute themselves to be follower of a more sincere faith and religion then they : they hold opinion that we be but half Christians , and themselves only to be the true and perfect church : these be the foolish and childish dotage of such ignorant babarian . 268 of the moscovite that be idolater , dwell near to Tartary . there be a certain part of Moscovie border upon the country of the Tartar , wherein those moscovite that dwell be very great idolater : they have one famous idol among they , which they call the golden old wife : and they have a custom that whensoever any plague or any calamity do afflict the country , as hunger , war , or such like , than they go to consult with their idol , which they do after this manner : they fall down prostrate before the idol , and pray unto it , and put in the presence of the same , a cymbal : and about the same certain person stand , which be choose among they by lot : upon their cymbali they place a silver toad , and sound the cymbali , and to whosoever of those lot person that toad go , he be take , and by and by slay : and immediate , i know not by what illusion of the devil , or idol , he be again restore to life , and then do reveal and deliver the cause of the present calamity . and by this mean know how to pacific the idol , they be deliver from the imminent danger . of the form of their private house , and of the apparel of the people . the common house of the country be every where build of beam of fir tree : the low beam do so receive the round holownesse of the uppermost , that by the mean of the build thereupon , they resist , and expel all wind that blow , and where the timber be join together , there they stop the chink with moss . the form and fashion of their house in all place be four square , with strait and narrow window , whereby with a transparent casement make or cover with skin like to parchment , they aurea vetula , or Zelotibaba . receive the light . the roof of their house be make of board cover without with you bark of tree : [ i . 255. ] within their house they have bench or grieze hard by their wall , which common they sleep upon , for the common people know not the use of bed : they have stoove wherein in the morning they make a fire , and the same fire do either moderate warm , or make very hot the whole house . the apparel of the people for the most part be make of wool , their cap be pick like unto a rike or diamond , broad beneath , and sharp upward . in the manner of make whereof , there be a sign and representation of nobility : for the lofty or high their cap be , the great be their birth suppose to be , and the great reverence be give they by the common people . the conclusion to queen marie . these be the thing most excellent queen , which your subject new return from Russia have bring home concern the state of that country : wherefore if your majestic shall be favourable , and grant a continuance of the travel , there be no doubt but that the honour and renown of your name will be spread among those nation , whereunto three only noble personage from the very creation have have access , to who no man have be comparable . 