the name of the ship of the fleet , and of their burden , together with the name of the captain , and counselor , pilot Major , master of the ship , merchant , with other officer , and mariner , as hereafter follow . the first ship . the bona Esperanza , admiral of the fleet , of 120. ton , have with she a pinnace , and a boat . sir Hugh Willoughby , knight , captain general of the fleet . William Gefferson , master of the ship . Roger Wilson , his mate . William gitton , Charles Barret , Gabriel Willoughby , John Andrews , Alexander Woodfoord , Ralph Chatterton , merchant . mariner and officer , accord to the custom , and use of the sea , John brook , master gunner . Nicholas Anthony , boateswaine . John web , his mate . Christopher banbrucke , Thomas Davison , Robert Rosse , Thomas Simpson , quarter master . 212 William White , James smith , Thomas painter , John smith , their mate . Richard Gwinn e , George Goiswine , Carpenters . Robert gwinne , Purser . Laurence Edward , his mate , and Couper . Richard Morgan , cook . Thomas Nashe , his mate . William light , John brand , Cuthbert Chelsie , George Blage , Thomas Walker , Thomas Allen , Edward smith , Edward hunt , John falconer , Rowland brook . Alexander Gardiner , Richard Molton , surgeon , which two be take in at Harwich . Discharged at Harwich , by reason of sickness , George [ i . 233. ] Blake , Nicholas Anthony . for pickery duck at the yard arm , and so discharge Thomas Nash . the Edward Bonaventure , of 160. ton , with she a the second pinnace , and a boat . s^ ' Richard chancellor , captain , and pilot major of the fleet . Stephen Borowgh , master of the ship . John Buckland , his mate . George Burton , Arthur Edwards , merchant . John Stafford , minister . John Stafford James Dallaber , Nicholas Newborrow , John Segswike , minister . Thomas Francis , John Hasse , Richard Johnson , William Kempe . mariner and officer , accord to the custom and use of the sea . Robert Stanton , master gunner . John Walker , his mate . James long , John cock , Gunners . Thomas Walter , surgeon . Peter palmer , boateswaine . Richard strowde , his mate . John Robinson , John carowe , Thomas stone , Roger Lishbie , quarter master . 213 1553 - John Austen , steward : Patrick Stevens , his mate . Austen Jacks , cook . William every , Cowper . Griffin Wagham , carpenter . Thomas Stelston , Thomas town , John Robinson , John white , William Laurence , Miles butter , John m. William Burrough now comptroller of her majesty navy . Browne , William Morren , William Watson , Thomas handcock , Edward pacie , Thomas brown , Arthur Pet , George Phibarie , Edward Patterson , William bear , John potter , Nicholas Laurence , William Burrough , Roger Welford , John Williams . the three ship . the bona Confidentia of 90. ton , have with she a pinnace , and a boat . Cornelius durfoorth , master of the ship . Richard Ingram , his mate . Thomas langlie , Edward Kever , Henry Dorset , merchant . mariner and officer , accord to the use and custom of the sea Henry Tailer , master gunner . George Thurland , his mate . William hamane , boateswaine . John Edward , his mate . Thomas Kirbie , Henry Dickenson , John Haye , William Shepwash , quarter master . John rein , steward . Thomas hante , cook . William lass , his mate . Nicholas knight , carpenter . Peter lewike , Nicholas Wiggleworth , John Moore , William chapman , Brian Chester , William Barrie , Richard wood , clement Gibson , John Clarocke , Erasmus Bently , John Duriforth . 