the navigation and discovery towards the river of ob , make by master Steven Burrough , master of the pinnace call the serchthrift , with diverse thing worth the note , pass in the year 1556. April 23 27 e depart from Ratcliff to Blackewall the 23 of April . Satturday be saint mark day , we depart from Blackewall to Grays . the 27 be Monday , the right worshipful Sebastian Cabota come aboard our pinnace at Gravesende , accompany with diverse gentleman , and gentlewoman , who after that they have view our pinnace , and taste of such cheer as we can make they aboard , they go on shore , give to our mariner right liberali reward : and the good old gentleman master Cabota give to the poor most liberali alm , wish they to pray for the good fortune , and prosperous success of the serchthrift , our pinnace . and then at the sign of the Christopher , he and his friend banquet , and make i , and they that be in the company 322 1556. great cheer : and for very joy that he have to see the [ i . 275. ] towardness of our intend discovery , he enter into the dance himself , among the rest of the young and lusty company : which be end , he and his friend depart most gentle , commend we to the governance of almighty God . Tuesday we ride still at Gravesend , make provision 28 for such thing as we want . Wednesday in the morning we depart from grave - 29 end , the wind be at Southwest , that night we come to a anchor thwart our lady of holland . Thursday at three of the clock in the morning we 3° weigh , and by eight of the clock , we be at a anchor in Orwell wanness , and then incontinent i go aboard the Edward Bonaventure , where the worshipful company of merchant appoint i to be , until the say good ship arrive at Wardhouse . than i return again note . into the pinnace . Friday the 15 of may we be within 7 league may 15. of the shore , on the coast of Norway : the latitude at a south sun , 58 degree and a half , where we see three sail , beside our own company : and thus we follow the shore or land , which lie northnorthwest , north and by west , and northwest and by north , as it do appear by the plat . Saturday at a east sun we come to saint Dunstan 16 island , which island i so name . it be off we east two league and a half , the wind be at southeast : the latitude this day at a south sun 59 degree , 42 minute . also the high round mountain bare east of we , at a south sun : and when this hill be east of you , and be bind to the northward , the land lie north and half a point Westerly , from this say south sun , unto a north sun twenty league northwest alongst the shore . upon Sunday at six of the clock in the morning , the 17 far land that we can see that lie northnorthwest , be east of we three league , and then it trend to the 323 northward , and to the eastwards of the north , which headland i judge to be scoutsnesse . at seven of the clock we change our course and go north , the wind be at southsoutheast , and it wax very thick and misty , and when it clear , we go Northnortheast . at a south sun we lose sight of the serchthrift , because of the mist , make our way north . and when we lose sight of the shore and pinnace , we be within two league and a half of the shore : the last land that we see when this mist come upon we , which be to the northward of scowtsnesse , lie Northnortheast , and southsouthwest , and we make our way north until a west sun five league . 18 from that until Monday three a clock in the morning ten league northnortheast : and then we go north and by east , because the wind come at the westsouthwest with thick mist : the latitude this day at a south sun sixty three degree and a half true take : at this season we have sight of our pinnace again . 19 from that until Tuesday a south sun Northnortheast forty four league , and then Northeast . from a south sun until eight of the clock , fifteen league Northeast . 20 from that until Wednesday a south sun Northnortheast , except the first watch Northeast : then have we the latitude in sixty seven degree , thirty nine minute . from that unto a northwest sun eighteen league Northeast , and then we be within two league off the shore , and see the high land to the southward of low-foot break out through the mist , and then we go north and by east . 21 from the say northwest sun until four of the clock in the morning north and by east ten league and a half : and then Northnortheast until a south sun , the latitude be sixty nine degree , and a half . from that until half a hour past seven of the clock , Northnortheast eleven league and a half , and then we 22 go Northeast ten league . from that 3 league and a 324 1556. half eastnortheast , and then we see the land through the cloud and hazy thwart on the broad side of we the wind be then at Southsouthwest . from that until Saturday , at eight of the clock in 23 the morning Eastnortheast , and to the northward forty eight league , and then the wind come up at north , we be aboard the shore , and thwart of the chapel , which i suppose be call kedilwike : than we cast the Kedelwike ship head to the seaward , because the wind be very chapped-scant : and then i cause the pinnace to bear in with the shore , to see whether she may find a harbour for the ship or not , and that she find and see two reader ride in the sound : and also they see house . but notwithstanding , God be praise , the wind enlarge upon we , that we have not occasion to go into the harbour : and then the pinnace bear she Myssen mast over board with flag and all , and lose the flag : with the mast there fall two man over board , but God be praise , they be save : the flag be a token , whereby we may understand whether there be a good harbour there or not . at a north sun the north cape ( which i so name the north the first voyage ) be thwart of we , which be nine league c*pe 50 name to the eastwards of the foresay chapel from the g^^g eastermost point of it . June . [ I. 276. ] the Sunday we weigh in corpus christi bay , at a 7 north-east and by east sun : the bay be almost half a league deep : the headland which be corpus christi point , lie southeast and by east , one league from the head of the bay , where we have a great tide , like a race over the flood : the bay be at the least two league over : so do i imagine from the fair foreland to corpus christi point ten league southeast and by east : it flow in this bay , at a south and by west moon full sea . from that we go until seven a clock at after noon twenty league southeast and by south : 325 and then we take in all our sail , because it be then very misty , and also we meet with much ice that run out of the bay , and then we go southsoutheast with our foresail : at eight of the clock , we hear a piece of ordinance , which be out of the Edward , which bid we farewell , and then we shoot off another piece , and bid her farewell : we can not one see the other , because of the thick mist : at a northwest sun it begin somewhat to clear , and then we see a head land , and the shore trend to the southwestward , which i judge to be about cross island : it be off we at a northnorthwest sun , westsouthwest . 8 from this northnorthwest sun , until Monday , we go southeast , and this morning we come at anchor among the shoal that lie off of point look out , at a north-east and by east sun , the wind be at eastsoutheast . at this point look out , a south moon make a full sea . cape good fortune lie from the isle of cross southeast , and between they be ten league : point look out lie from cape good fortune eastsoutheast , and between they be six league . S. Edmonds point lie from point look out eastsoutheast , and half a point to the southward , and between they be six league . there be between these two point , a bay that be half a league deep , and be full of shoal and danger . at a southeast sun we weigh , and turn to the windward , the wind be at eastsoutheast : and at a southeast sun , we come to a anchor , be then a full sea , in five fathom and a half water . it hi at this place where we ride , and also 9 at point look out , four fathom water . at a westnorthwest sun we weigh , and drive to the windward , until Tuesday , a northnortheast sun , and then be a high water , we come to a anchor open of the river Cola , in eight fathom water . cape S. Bernard lie from saint Edmonds point , southeast and by south , and betwixt they be six league , and also betwixt they be the river Cola , into which river we go this evening . 326 Wednesday we ride still in the say river , the wind 10 being at the north : we send our skiff aland to be dress : the latitude of the mouth of the river Cola latitude be sixty five degree , forty and eight minute . of Cola. Thursday at 6 of the clock in the morning , there n come aboard of we one of the ruff lodiaes , row with a ruff twenty oar , and there be four and twenty man in lodta-h . the master of the boat present i with a great loaf of bread , and six ring of bread , which they call colache , and four dry pike , and a peck of fine otemeale , and i give unto the master of the boat , a comb , and a small glass : and he declare unto i , that he be bind to Pechora , and after that , i make they to drink , the tide be somewhat break , they gentle depart . the master name be Pheodor . whereas the ten day i send our pinnace on shore to be mend , because she be leak , and weak , with the carpenter and three man more to help he , the weather chance so , that it be Sunday before they can get aboard our ship . all that time they be without provision of victual , but only a little bread , which they spend by Thursday at night , think to have come aboard when they have list , but wind and weather deny they : insomuch that they be fain to eat grass , and such weed as they can find then above ground , but fresh water they have plenty , but the meat with some of they can scant frame by reason of their queasy stomach . from Thursday at afternoon , until Sunday in the 14. morning , our bark do ride such a road stead that it be to be marveil , without the help of God , how she be able to abide it . in the bite of the southeast shore of the river Cola , there be a good road in five fathom , or four fathom and a half , at a low water : but you shall have no land northnortheast of you then . i prove with our pinnace , that the depth go on the southeast shore . Thursday we weigh our anchor in the river Cola , and 18 327 from Cola to Pechora be but 7 or % day sail . 21 22 the courtesy of one Gabriel . 23 a good y necessary note . the english voyage go into the sea seven or eight league , where we meet with the wind far northerly , that of force it constrain we to go again back into the say river , where come aboard of we sundry of their boat , which declare unto i that they be also bind to the northward , a fish for Morse , and salmon , and give i liberal of their white and wheaten bread . as we ride in this river , we see daily come down the river many of their Lodias , and they that have least , have four and twenty man in they , and at the last they grow to thirty sail of they : and among the rest , there be one of they who name be Gabriel , who show i very much friendship , and he declare unto i , that all they be bind to Pechora , a fish for salmon , and morse : insomuch that he show i by demonstration , that with a fair wind we have seven or eight day sail to the river Pechora , so that i be glad of their company . This Gabriel promise to give i warning of shoal , as he do indeed . Sunday be the one and twenty day , Gabriel give i a barrel of Meade , and one of he speciali friend give i a barrel of beer , which be carry upon man back at least 2 mile . Monday we depart from the river Cola , with all the rest of the say Lodias , but sail before the wind , they be all too good for we : but accord to promise , this Gabriel and his friend do often strike their sail , and tarry for we forsake their own company . Tuesday at a eastnortheast sun we be thwart of cape S. John. it be to be understand , that from the cape S. John unto the river or bay that go to Mezen , it be all sink land , and full of shoal and danger , you shall have scant two fathom water , and see no land . and this present day we come to a anchor thwart of a creek , which be 4 or 5 league to the northward of the say cape , into which creek Gabriel and his fellow row , but we can not get in : and before night there be above 20 328 .. I556 , sail that go into the say creek , the wind be at the north-east . we have indifferent good landfang . this afternoon Gabriel come aboard with his skiff , and then i reward he for the good company that he keep with we over the shoal with two small ivory comb , and a steel glass , with two or three trifle more , for which he be not ungrateful . but notwithstanding , his first company have get further to the northward . Wednesday be midsummer day , we send our 24 skiff aland to sound the creek , where they find it almost dry at a low water . and all the Lodais within be on ground . although the harbour be evil , yet the stormy similitude of northerly wind tempt we to set our sail , and we let slip a cable and a anchor , and bear with the harbour , for it be then near a high water : and as always in such journey variety do chance , when we come upon the bar in the entrance of the creek , the wind do shrink so sudden upon we , that we be not able to lead it in , and before we can have flat the ship before the wind , we shall have be on ground on the lee shore , so that we be constrain to let fall a anchor under our sail , and ride in a very breach , think to have warp in . Gabriel come out with his skiff , and so do sundry other also , show their good will to help we , but all to no purpose , for they be likely to have be drown for their labour , in so much that i desire Gabriel to lend i his anchor , because our own anchor be two big for our skiff to lay out , who send i his own , and borrow another also and send it we . than we lay out one of those anchor , with a hawser which he have of 140 fathom long , think to have warp in , but it will not be : for as we short upon you say warp the anchor come home , so that we be fain to bear the end of the warp , that we rush in upon the 329 other small anchor that Gabriel send aboard , and lay that anchor to seawards : and then between these two anchor we traverse the ship head to seawards , and set our foresail and main sail , and when the bark have way , we cut the haws , and so gate the sea to our friend , and try out all that day with our main corpse . 25 than Thursday we go room with cape S. John , where we find indifferent good road for a northnortheast wind , and for a need , for a north and by west wind . 26 Friday at afternoon we weigh , and depart from thence , the wether be meet fair , and the wind at eastsoutheast , and ply for the place where we leave our cable and anchor , and our hawser : and as soon as we be at a anchor , the foresay Gabriel come aboard of we , with 3 or four more of their small boat , and bring with they of their aquavitae and mead , profess unto i very much friendship , and rejoice to see we again , declare that they earnest think that we have be lose . This Gabriel declare unto i , that they have save both the anchor and our hauser , and after we have thus commune , i cause 4 or 5 of they to go into my cabin , where i give they fig , and make they such cheer as i can . while i be thus banquet of they , there come another of their skiffe aboard with one who be a keril , who name afterward i learn , and that he dwell in Colmogro , and Gabriel dwell in the town of Cola , which be not far from the river mouth . this foresay keril say unto i that one of the anchor which i borrow be he , i give he thank for the loan of it , think it have be suffi - [ i - 278 - ] cient . and as i continue in one accustom manner , that if the present which they bring be worth entertainment , they have it accord , he bring nothing with he , and therefore i regard he but little . and thus we end , and they take their leave 330 and go a shore . at their come ashore , Gabriel and Keril be at unconvenient word , and by the ear , as i understand : the cause be because the one have better entertainment than the other : but you shall understand that Gabriel be not able to make his party good , because there be 17 lodias of the kerils company who take his part , and but 2 of gabriels company . the next high water Gabriel and his company depart from thence , and row to their former company and neighbour , which be in number 28 at the least , and all of they belong to the river Cola. twenty eight Lodias belong to Cola. and as i understand keril make reckon that the 27 hawser which be fast in his anchor shall have be his own , and at first will not deliver it to our boat , insomuch that i send he word that i will complain upon he , whereupon he deliver the haws to my company . the next day be Saturday , i send our boat on shore to fetch fresh water and wood , and at their come on shore this keril welcome our man most gentle , and also banquete they : and in the mean time cause some of his man to fill our baricoe with water , and to help our man to bear wood into their boat : and then he put on his best silk coat , and his collar of pearl , and come aboard again , and bring his present with he : and thus have more respect unto his present then to his person , because i perceive he to be vainglorious , i bid he welcome , and give he a dish of fig : and then he declare unto i that his father be a gentleman , and that he be able to show i pleasure , and not Gabriel , who be but a priest son . after their departure from we we weigh , and ply 28 all the ebb to the windward , the wind be northerly , and towards night it wax very stormy , so that of force we be constrain to go room 331 the latitude of cape S. John 66 degree 50 minute . earth swim above water like wood . the english voyage with cape S. John again , in which storm we lose our skiff at our stern , that we buy at Wardhouse , and there we ride until the four of July . the latitude of cape S. John be 66 degree 50 minute . and it be to be note , that the land of cape S. John be of height from the full sea mark , as i judge , 10 fathom , be clean without any tree grow , and also without stone or rock , and consist only of black earth , which be so rot , that if any fall into the sea , it will swim as though it be a piece of wood . in which place , about three league from the shore you shall not have above 9 fathom water , and clay ground . Julie . 4 OAturday at a north northwest sun the wind come oh at Eastnortheast , and then we weigh , and ply to the northward , and as we be two league shoot past the cape , we see a house stand in a valley , which be dainty to be see in those part , and by and by i see three man on the top of the hill . than i judge they , as it afterward prove , that they be man which come from some other place to set trap to take vermin for their fur , which trap we do perceive very thick alongst the shore as we go . 5 Sunday at a east sun we be thwart off the creek where the russes lie , and there come to a anchor , and perceive the most part of the Lodias to be go we think it not good to tarry any long there , but weigh and spend all the ebb , ply to the windward . 6 Monday at a south sun it be high water . all alongst the coast it flow little , only a south moon make a full sea : and as we be a weigh we espy the ruff Lodias , which we first lose . they come out of a creek among the sandy hill , which hill begin 15 league northnortheast from cape S. John. 332 the latitude 68 degree and a half . Stephen Burrough ply this ebb to a end , we come to a anchor 6 league northnortheast from the place where we see the russes come out : and there the russes harbour themselves within a sink bank , but there be not water enough for we . at a north sun we weigh and ply to the northward , the land lie northnortheast , and southsouthwest , until a south sun , and then we be in the latitude of 68 degree and a half : and in this latitude end those sandy hill , and the land begin to lie north and by west , south and by east , and north - northwest , and to the westwards , and there the water begin to wax deep . at a northwest sun we come to a anchor within half a league of the shore , where we have good plenty of fish , both haddock and cod , ride in io fathom water . Wednesday we weigh , and ply near the headland , 8 which be call Caninoz , the wind be at east and by north . Thursday the wind be scant we turn to windwards 9 the ebb , to get about Caninoz : the latitude this day at noon be 68 degree 40 minute . Friday we turn to the windward of the ebb , but to 10 no purpose : and as we ride at a anchor , we see the [ i . 279. ] similitude of a storm rise at northnorthwest , and can not tell where to get road nor succour for that wind , and harbour we know none : and that land which we ride under with that wind be a lee shore . and as i be muse what be best to be do , i see a sail come out of a creek under the foresay Caninoz , which be my friend Gabriel , who forsake his harbour and company , and come as near we as he may , and point we to the eastwards , and then we weigh and follow he , and go east and by south , the wind be at westnorthwest , and very misty . Saturday we go eastsoutheast and follow Gabriel , n and he bring we into a harbour call morgiovet , morgovet a which be 30 league from Caninoz , and we have upon the harbour . 333 bar go in two fathom and a four part : and after we be pass in over the bar , it wax deep , for we have 5 fathom , 4 and a half , and 3 fathom etc our bark be more , i send some of our man to shore to pro-drlft wood . vide wood , where they have plenty of drift wood , but none grow : and in this place we find plenty of young foul , as guile , seapy , and other , whereof the russes will eat none , whereof we be nothing sorry , for there come the more to our part . 12 Sunday our man cut wood on shore , and bring it aboard , and we ballast our ship with stone . this morning Gabriel see a smoke on you way , who row unto it with his skiff , which smoke be two league from the place where we ride : and at a northwest sun he come aboard again , and bring with he samoe . a samoe , which be but a young man : he apparel be then strange unto we , and he present i with three young wild goose , and one young barnacle . 13 Monday i send a man to the main in gabriels boat , and he bring we aboard 8 barricoe of fresh water : the latitude of the say morgiovet be sixty eight degree and a terce . it flow there at a southsouthwest moon full sea , and hy two fathom and a half water . 14 at a westnorthwest sun we depart from this place , and go east 2 5 league , and then see a island north and by west of we eight league , which dolgoieve a island be call dolgoieve : and from the eastermost island . par ( . o£ there lie a sand east and by south 7 league long . 15 Wednesday at a north and by east sun Swetinoz be south of we 5 league . this day at afternoon Pechora . we go in over the dangerous bar of Pechora , and have upon the bar but one fathom water . 16 Thursday we ride still . \7 Friday i go on shore and observe the variation ^theCmpas compass , which be three degree and a half a from the north to the west : the latitude this day be sixty nine degree ten minute . 334 from two or three league to the eastward of Swetinoz , until the enter of the river Pechora , it be all sandy hill , and towards Pechora the sandy hill be very low . it high on the bar of Pechora four foot water , and it flow there at a southwest moon a full sea . Monday at a north and by east sun , we weigh , and 20 come out over the say dangerous bar , where we have but five foot water , insomuch that we find a foot less water come out then we do go in . i think the reason be , because when we go in the wind be off the sea , which cause the sand to break on either side of we , and we keep in the smooth between the breach , which we dare not have do , except we have see the russes to have go in before we : and at our come out the wind be off the shore , and fair weather , and then the sand do not appear with breach as at our go in : we thank God that our ship do draw so little water . when we be a seaboord the bar the wind scant upon we , and be at eastsoutheast , insomuch that we stop the ebb , and ply all the flood to the windward , and make our way Eastnortheast . Tuesday at a northwest sun we think that we have 21 see land at east , or east and by north of we : which afterward prove to be a monstrous heap of ice . within a little more than half a hour after , we first ice . see this ice , we be enclose within it before we be aware of it , which be a fearful sight to see : for , for the space of six hour , it be as much as we can do to keep our ship aloof from one heap of ice , and bear roomer from another , with as much wind as we may bear a coarse . and when we have pass from the danger of this ice , we lay to the eastwards close by the wind . the next day we be again trouble with the ice . 22 Thursday be calm , we ply to the windward , 23 the wind be northerly . we have the latitude this thelat . ode-day at noon in 70 degree 11 minute . ees 11 min - 335 25 saint James island . 26 27 the variation of the gompas 7 degree and a half . 28 the relation of Loshak . the english voyage we have not run past two hour northwest , the wind be at northnortheast and Northeast and by north a good gale , but we meet again with another heap of ice : we wether the head of it , and lie a time to the seaward , and make way west 6 league . Friday at a southeast sun we cast about to the eastwards , the wind be at northnortheast : the latitude this day at noon be 70 degree 15 minute . on saint James his day bolt to the windewarde , we have the latitude at noon in seventy degree twenty minute . the same day at a southwest sun , there be a monstrous whale aboard of we , so near to our side that we may have thrust a sword or any other weapon in he , which we dare not do for fear he shall have overthrow our ship : and then i call my company together , and all of we shout , and with the cry that we make he depart from we : there be as much above water of his back as the breadth of our pinnace , and at his fall down , he make such a terrible noise in the water , that a man will great have marvel , except he have know the cause of it : but God be thank , we be quiet deliver of he . and a little after we spy certain island , with which we bear , and find good harbour in 15 or 18 fathom , and black oz : we come to a anchor at a north-east sun , and name the island S. James his island , where we find fresh water . Sunday , much wind blow we ride still . Monday i go on shore and take the latitude , which be 70 degree 42 minute : the variation of the compass be 7 degree and a half from the north to the west . Tuesday we ply to the westwards alongst the shore , the wind be at northwest , and as i be about to come to anchor , we see a sail come about the point , wherunder we think to have anchor . than i send a skiff aboard of he , and at their come aboard , they take acquaintance of they , and the chief man say he 336 have be in our company in the river Cola , and also declare unto they that we be past the way which the way to shall bring we to the Ob. this land , say he , be call thr^er Nova Zembla , that be to say , the new land : and than ' he come aboard himself with his skiff , and at his / mighty hill come aboard he tell i the like , and say further , that in this nova Zembla be the high mountain in the ’ world , as he think , and that come Boldshay , which be on the main of Pechora , be not to be compare to this mountain , but i see it not : he make i also certain demonstration of the way to the ob , and seem to make haste on his own way , be very loath to tarry , because the year be far pass , and his neighbour have fetch Pechora , and not he : so i give he a steel glass , two pewter spoon , and a pair of velvet sheathe knife : and then he seem somewhat the more willing to tarry , and show i as much as he know for our purpose : he also give i 17 wild goose , and show i that four of their lodias be drive perforce from caninoze to this nova Zembla . this man name be Loshak . Loshak . Wednesday , as we ply to the eastwards , we espy 29 another sail , which be one of this loshak company , and we bare room , and speak with he , who in like sort tell we of the ob , as the other have do . Thursday , we ply to the eastwards , the wind be 30 at eastnortheast . Friday , the gale of wind begin to increase , and come 31 westerly withal , so that by a northwest sun we be at a anchor among the island of vaigat , where we see the island two small lodias , the one of they come aboard of we , and °ftagaits . present i with a great loaf of bread : and they tell i that they be all of Colmogro , except one man that dwell at Pechora , who seem to be the chief among they in kill of the Morse . there be some of their company on shore , which do chase a white bear over the high cliff into the water , which bear the lodia that be aboard of we kill in our sight . n 337 y this day there be a great gale of wind at north , and we see so much ice drive a seaboord , that it be then no go to sea . August . i OAturday i go ashore , and there i see three morse oh that they have kill : they hold one tooth of a Morse , which be not great , at a roble , and one white bear skin at three roble and two roble : they further tell i , that samoeds . there be people call samoeds on the great island , and that they will not abide they nor we , who have no house , but only cover make of deersskin , set over they with stake : they be man expert in shoot , and have great plenty of deer . this night there fall a cruel storm , the wind be at west . 2 Sunday we have very much wind , with plenty of snow , and we ride with two anchor a head . 3 Monday we weigh and go room with another island , which be five league eastnortheast from we : and there i meet again with Loshak , and go on shore with [ i . 281. ] he , and he bring i to a heap of the samoed idol , mamr of which be in number above 300 , the worst and the most the samoed . ^artificiali work that ever i see : the eye and mouth of sundry of they be bloody , they have the shape of man , woman and child , very gross wrought , and that which they have make for other part , be also sprinkle with blood . some of their idol be a old stick with two or three notch , make with a knife in it . i see much of the foot of the say samoed , and of the sled that they ride in . there be one of their sled break , and lie by the heap of idol , and there i see a deer skin which the fowl have spoil : and before certain of their idol block be make as high as their mouth , be all bloody , i think that to be the table whereon they offer their sacrifice : i see also the instrument , whereupon they have roast flesh , and as far as i can perceive , they make their fire direct under the spit . 338 Loshak be there present tell i that these the samoed samoeds be not so hurtful as they of ob be , and that they have no house , as indeed i see none , but only tent make of deer skin , which they underprop with stake and pole : their boat be make of deer skin , and when they come on shore they carry their boat with they upon their back : for their carriage they have no other beast to serve they , but deer only . as for bread and corn they have none , except the russes bring it to they : their knowledge be very base , for they know no letter . Tuesday we turn for the harbour where Lo - . 4 shak bark lie , whereas before we ride under a island . and there he come aboard of we and say unto i : if God send wind and weather to serve , i will go to the ob with you , because the morse be scant at these island of vaigat , but if he can not get to the river of ob , than he say he will go to the river of naramzay , where the people be not altogether so savage naramzay . as the Samoyds of the ob be : he show i that they will shoot at all man to the uttermost of their power , that can speak their speech . Wednesday we see a terrible heap of ice approach 5 near unto we , and therefore we think good with all speed possible to depart from thence , and so i return to the westwards again , to the island where we be the 31. of July . Thursday i go a shore , and take the latitude , 6 which be 70 degree 2 5 minute : and the variation of latitude . the compass be 8 degree from the north to the west . Loshak and the two small Lodias of Pechora depart from this island , while i be on shore take the latitude , and go to the southward : i marvele why he depart so sudden , and go over the shoal among the island where it be impossible for we to follow they . but after i perceive they to be weatherwise . 339 7 Friday we ride still , the wind be at northnortheast , with a cruel storm . the ice come in so abundant about we at both end of the island that we ride under , that it be a fearful sight to behold : the storm continue with snow , rain , and hail plenty . 8 Saturday we ride still also , the storm be somewhat abate , but it be altogether misty , that we be not able to see a cable length about we , the wind be at north-east and by east . 9 Sunday at four of the clock in the morning we depart from this island , the wind be at southeast , and as we be clear a sea board the small island and shoal , it come so thick with mist , that we can not see a base shot from we . than we take in all our sail to make little way . at a southeast sun it wax clear , and then we set our sail , and lie close by the wind to the southward alongst the island of vaigat . at a west sun we take in our sail again because of the great mist and rain . we sound at this place , and have five and twenty fathom water , and soft black oz , be three league from the shore , the wind be at south and by east , but still misty . 10 Monday at a east sun we sound , and have 40 fathom , and oz , still misty : at noon we sound again , and have 36 fathom , still misty . 11 Tuesday at a eastnortheast sun we let fall our anchor in three and twenty fathom , the mist still continue . 12 Wednesday at three of the clock in the morning the mist break up , the wind be at north-east and by east , and then we see part of the island of vaigat , which we bear withal , and go eastsoutheast close by the wind : at a west sun we be at a anchor under the south-they land west part of the say vaigat , and then i send our skiff to upon Palgatz . shore with three man in she , to see if they may speak with any of the samoed , but can not : all that day be rainy , but not windy . 34° Thursday the wind come Westerly , so that we be fain to seek we another place to ride in , because the wind come a seaboord land , and although it be misty , yet we follow the shore by our lead : and as we bring land in the wind of we , we let fall our anchor . at a west sun the mist break up , so that we may see about we , and then we may perceive that we be enter into a sound . this afternoon we take in two or three skiff lade of stone to ballast our ship withal . it hy here four foot water , and flow by fit , uncertain to be judge . Friday we ride still in the sound , the wind at Southwest , with very much rain , and at the end of the rain it wax again misty . Saturday there be much wind at west , and much rain , and then again misty . Sunday be very misty , and much wind . Monday very misty , the wind at westnorthwest . Tuesday be also misty , except at noon : then the sun break out through the mist , so that we have the latitude in 70 degree encage oh minute : the afternoon be misty again , the wind be at westnorthwest . Wednesday at three of the clock afternoon the mist break up , and the wind come at Eastnortheast , and then we weigh , and go south and by east , until seven of the clock , eight league , think to have have sight of the sandy hill that be to the eastwards of the river A.D. i556-13 [ i . 282. ] the uncertainty of ebb wonderful flow . > 4 i5 16 17 18 19 Pechora . at a northwest sun we take in our main sail , because the wind increase , and go with a foresail westnorthwest , the wind be at eastnortheast : at night there grow so terrible a storm , that we see not the like , although we have endure many storm since we come out of England . it be wonderful that our bark be able to brook such monstrous and terrible sea , without the great help of God , who never fail they at need , that put their sure trust in he . Thursday at a southsouthwest sun , thank be to 20 341 they be within 15 league of Pechora . 21 22 they return the 22 of August . the english voyage God , the storm be at the high , and then the wind begin to slake , and come northerly withal , and then i reckon the westermost point of the river Pechora to be south of we 15 league . at a westsouthwest sun we set our main sail , and lie close by the wind , the wind be at northwest and by north , make but little way , because the billow go so high : at midnight we cast about , and the ship cape Northnortheast , make little way . Friday at noon we have the latitude in 70 degree 8 minute , and we sound , and have 29 fathom sand , and in manner stremy ground . at a west sun we cast about to the westwards , and a little after the wind come up at west . Saturday be calm : the latitude this day at noon be 70 degree and a terce , we sound here , and have nine and forty fathom and oz , which oz signify that we draw towards Nova Zembla . and thus we be out of all hope to discover any more to the eastward this year , we think it best to return , and that for three cause . the first , the continual north-east and northerly wind , which have more power after a man be pass to the eastwards of caninoze , then in any place that i do know in these northerly region . Second , because of great and terrible abundance of ice which we see with our eye , and we doubt great store abide that in those part : i adventure already somewhat too far in it , but i thank God for my safe deliverance from it . three , because the night wax dark , and the winter begin to draw on with his storm : and therefore i resolve to take the first best wind that God shall send , and ply towards the bay of saint Nicholas , and to see if we may do any good there , if God will permit it . this present Saturday we see very much ice , and be within two or three league of it : it show unto we as though it have be a firm land as far as we may see 342 from northwest off we to the eastwards : and this afternoon the lord send we a little gale of wind at south , so that we bear clear off the westermost part of it , thank be to God . and then against night it wax calm again , and the wind be at Southwest : we make our way until Sunday noon northwest and by west , and 24. then we have the latitude in 70 degree and a half , the wind at Southwest : there be a billow , so that we can not discern to take the latitude exact , but by a reasonable guess . Monday there be a pretty gale of wind at south , so 25 that we go west and by south , the latitude this day at noon be 70 degree 10 minute : we have little wind all day : at a westnorthwest sun we sound , and have 29 fathom black sandy oz , and then we be north-east 5 league from the north-east part of the island colgoieve . Tuesday the wind all westerly we ply to the wind 26 ward . Wednesday the wind be all Westerly , and calm : we 27 have the latitude this day in 70 degree 10 minute , we within three league of the north part of the island colgoieve . Thursday , we go room about the westermost part 28 of the island , seek where we may find a place to [ i - 283. ] ride in for a northwest wind , but can find none , and then we cast about again to the seaward , and the wind come at Westsouthwest , and this morning we have plenty of snow . Friday , the wind be at southwest and by west , we 29 ply to the windward . Saturday , the wind be at south , we ply to the westwards , and at afternoon the mist break up , and then we may see the land seven or eight league to the eastwards of Caninoz : we sound a little before and have 35. fathom and oz . and a while after we sound again , and have 19 fathom and sand : than we be within three league and a half of the shore , and towards night there come down so much wind , that we be 343 fain to bring our ship a try , and lay her head to the westwards . 3° Sunday , the wind become more calm , and then it wax very misty : at noon we cast about to the eastwards , the wind be at south , and run eight hour on that board , and then we cast about and cape west southwest : we sound and have 32. fathom , and tough oaze like clay . 31 Monday , we double about caninoze , and come at a anchor there , to the intent that we may kill some fish if God will permit it , and there our gate a great Nuse , which nuse be there so plenty , that they will scarce suffer any other fish to come near the hook : the say nuse carry away sundry of our hook and lead . a little after at a west sun , the wind begin to blow stormy at west southwest , so that we be fain to weigh and forsake our fish ground , and go close by the wind Southwest , and Southwest and by west , make our way south southwest . September . i r i ' Uesday at a west sun we sound and have 20. a fathom , and break wilkeshel : i reckon canonize to be 24. league northnortheast from we . 11 the eleven day we arrive at Colmogro , and there we winter , expect the approach of the next summer to proceed far in our intend discovery for the ob : which ( by reason of our employment to Wardhouse the next spring for the search of some english ship ) be not accord perform . 