the manner of justice by lot in Russia , write by master Henry lane , and execute in a controversy between he and one Sheray Costromitskey in Moscow . 1560. after the come home into Russia of Joseph Napea the first ambassador to queen marie , i remain the agent there , sundry russian merchant by Josephs procurement obtain letter from the emperor to fraught good and pass in our ship for England : which thing upon good consideration i answer and refuse . they be then drive to credit we and compound in value until the next return . at which time , notwithstanding good account in the value of 600 roble , there grow question by their double demand . so in April triallbycom-anno 1560. before my come from Moscovia , they hator^t-obtained trial by combat or letter to have their sum double , or as i proffer 600 roble . for combat i be provide of a strong willing Englishman , Robert best , one of the company servant : who the russes with their champion refuse . so that we have the word of our privilege put in effect , which be to draw lot . the day and manner of trial appoint by the emperor at his castle in his palace and high court of Moscovia be thus . the emperor two treasurer , be also chancelour and chief judge , sit in court . they appoint officer to bring i , my interpreter , and the other , through the great press within the rail or bar , and permit i to sit down some distance from they : the adverse party be without at the bar . both party be first persuade with great courtesy , to wit , i to enlarge my offer , and the russes to mitigate their challenge . notwithstanding that i protest my conscience to be clear , and their gain by account to be sufficient , yet of gentleness at the magistrate request i make proffer of 100 roble more : which be open commend , but of the plaintiff not accept . than 411 sentence pass with our name in two equal ball of wax make and hold up by the judge , their sleeve strip up . then with stand up and wish well to the truth attribute to he that shall be first draw , by both consent among the multitude they call a tall gentleman , say : thou with such a coat or cap , come up : where room with speed be make . he be command to hold his cap , wherein they put the ball , by the crown upright in sight , his arm not abase . with like circumspection , they call at adventure another tall gentleman , command he to strip up his right sleeve , and will he with his bare arm to reach up , and in God name several to take out the two ball : which he do , deliver to either judge one . then with great admiration the lot in ball first take out be i : which be by open sentence so pronounce before all the people , and to be the right and true part . the chief plaintiff name be Sheray Costromitsky . i be will forthwith to pay the plaintiff the sum by i appoint . out of which for their wrong or sin , as it be term , they pay ten in the hundred to the emperor . many day after , as their manner be , the people take our nation to be true and upright dealer , and talk of this judgement to our great credit . note . the former letter date 1558 , 1559 , and 1560 , t1 - 31 ° ] shall all follow m. Jenkinsons voyage to Boghar . 