the voyage , wherein Osep Napea the Moscovite ambassador return home into his country , with his entertainment at his arrival , at colmogro : and a large description of the manner of the country . he twelve of Maye , in the year of our lord 1557 there depart from Gravesend , four good ship well appoint for merchant , which be present bind into the bay of saint Nicholas in Russia : with which ship be transport , or carry home , one Osep gre - goriwich Napea , who be send messenger from the emperor and great duke of Moscovia . the four ship be these , who name follow , viz. the primerose admiral . the John Evangelist vice-admiral . the anne and the Trinity attendant . [ I. 315-1 the 13 of July , the foresay four ship come to a anchor in the bay of saint Nicholas , before a abbey , call 425 present use in Russia be all for the most part of victual . the city of Boghar . the english voyage the abbey of S. Nicholas , whereas the say messenger , Osep Gregoriwich Napea go a shore , and as many english man as come to serve the emperor remain with he at the abbey for the space of six day , until he have get all his thing a shore , and lade the same in bark , to go up the river Dwina , unto Vologhda , which be by water 1000 verstes , and every verste be about three quarter of a english mile . the 20 of July , we depart from saint Nicholas , and the 24 of the same , we come to Colmogro , where we remain eight day : and the say messenger be there of all his acquaintance welcome home , and have present innumerable send unto he , but it be nothing but meat and drink .. some send white bread , some rye bread , and some butter bread and pancake , beef , mutton , bacon , egg , butter , fish , swan , goose , duck , hen , and all manner of victual , both fish and flesh , in the best manner , that the rude people can devise : for among they , these present be high esteem . the 29 of July , we depart from Colmogro , and the 14 of August we come to ustiug , where we remain one day , and change our bark or boat . the 27 of August , we come to Vologhda , where we remain 4 day unlade the bark , and lade our chest and thing in small wagon , with one horse in a piece , which in their tongue be call Telegos , and with these telegoe they carry our stuff from Vologhda unto the Moscow , which be 500 verstes : and we be upon the same way 14 day : for we go no fast than the telegoe . there be three great town between the Moscow and Vologhda , that be to say , yeraslave , rostave , and pereslave . upon one side of yeraslave run a famous river , which be call Volga . it run into the caspian sea , and it divide it self before it come into the mare Caspium , in 50 part or more , and near unto the same sea there stand a great city , call Boghar , the inhabitant of the which be call by the same name . 426 the people of the say city do traffic unto the city of Moscow : their commodity be spice , musk , ambergreese , rhubarb , with other drug . they bring also many fur which they buy in Siberia come towards the Moscow : the say people be of the sect of Mahomet . the 12 of September we come unto the ci tie of Moscow , where we be bring by Napea , and two of the emperor gentleman unto a large house , where every one of we have his chamber appoint . the 14 of September we be command to come they arrive unto the emperor , and immediate after our come at Masco . we be bring into his presence , unto who each of we do his duty accord , and kiss his right hand , his majesty sit in his chair of estate , with his crown on his head , and a staff of goldsmith work in his left hand well garnish with rich and costly stone : and when we have all kiss his hand and do our duty , his majesty do declare by his interpreter that we be all welcome unto he , and into his country , and thereupon will we to dine with he : that day we give thank unto his majesty , and so depart until the dinner be ready . when dinner time approach , we be bring again into the emperor dine chamber , where we be set on one side of a table that stand over against the emperor table , to the end that he may well behold we all : and when we come into the foresay chamber , we find there ready set these table follow . first at the upper end of one table be set the emperor his majesty , his brother , and the emperor of Cazan , which be prisoner . about two yard low sit the emperor of Cazan his son , be a child of five year of age , and beneath he sit the most part of the emperor noble man . and at another table near unto the emperor table , there be set a monk all alone , which be in all point as well serve as the emperor . at another table sit another kind of people call chirkass , which the emperor entertain for man of war to serve against 427 his enemy . of which people and of their country , i will hereafter make mention .. all the table aforesay be cover only with salt and bread , and after that we have sit a while , the emperor send unto every one of we a piece of bread , which be give and deliver unto every man several by these word : the emperor and great duke give the bread this day , and in like manner three or four time before dinner be end , he send unto every man drink , which be give by these word , the emperor and great duke give thou to drink . all the table aforesaid be serve in vessel of pure and fine gold , as well bason and ewer , platter , dish and saucer , as also of great pot , with a innumerable sort of small drink pot of diverse fashion , whereof a great [ i . 316 ] number be set with stone . as for costly meat i have many time see better : but for change of wine , and diverse sort of mead , it be wonderful : for there be not leave at any time so much void room on the table , that one cup more may have be set , and as far as i can perceive , all the rest be in the like manner serve . in the dinner time there come in six singer which stand in the midst of the chamber , and their face towards the emperor , who sing there before dinner be end three several time , who song or voice delight our ear little or nothing . the emperor never put morsel of meat in his mouth , but he first bless it himself , 8c in like manner as often as he drink : for after his manner he be very religious , 8c he esteem his religious man above his noble man . this dinner continue about the space of five hour , which be end , and the table take up , we come into the midst of the chamber , where we do reverence unto the emperor majesty , and then he deliver unto every one of we with his own hand a cup of mead , which when every man have receive and drink a 428 quantity thereof , we be licence to depart , and so end that dinner . and because the emperor will have we to be merry , he send to our lodging the same evening three barrel of mead of sundry sort , of the quantity in all of one hogshead . the 16 day of September the emperor send home unto our lodging for every of we a Tartary horse to ride from place to place as we have occasion , for that the street of Moscow be very foul and miry in the summer . the 18 of September there be give unto master Standish doctor in physic , and the rest of our man of our occupation , certain fur gown of branch velvet and gold , and some of red damask , of which master doctor gown be fur with sable , and the rest be fur some with white ermine , and some with grey Squirel , and all face and edge round about with black beaver . the i of October in the morning we be command to come unto the emperor court , and when we come thither , we be bring unto the emperor unto who we do our duty accord : whereupon he will we to dine with he that day , and so with thank unto his majesty , we depart until dinner time , at which time we come and find the table cover with bread and salt as at the first : and after that we be all set upon one side of the table , the emperor majesty accord to his accustom manner send unto every man a piece of bread by some of the duke which attend on his highness . and whereas the 14 of September we be serve in vessel of gold , we be now serve in vessel of silver , and yet not so abundant as be the first of gold : they bring drink unto the table in silver bole which contain at the least six gallon a piece , and every man have a small silver cup to drink in , and another to dip or to take his drink out of the great bowl withal : the dinner be end , the emperor 429 m. Standish doctor of physic . a yearly triumph . the english voyage give unto every one of we a cup with mead , which when we have receive , we give thank and depart . Moreover , whensoever the emperor pleasure be that any stranger shall dine with he , he do send for they in the morning , and when they come before he , he with his own mouth bid they to dinner , and this order he always observe . the io of October the emperor give unto m. Standish 70 ruble in money , and to the rest of our man of occupation 30 ruble apiece . the 3 of November we dine again with the emperor , where we be serve as before .. the 6 of December be saint Nicholas day , we dine again at the emperor , for that be one of the principali feast which the moscovite hold : we be serve in silver vessel and order in all point as before , and it be past 7 of the clock at night before dinner be end . the emperor majesty use every year in the month of December , to have all his ordinance that be in the city of Moscow carry into the field which be without the suburb of the city , and there to have it plant and bend upon two house of wood fill within with earth : against which two house there be two fair white mark set up , at which mark they discharge all their ordinance , to the end the emperor may see what his gunner can do . they have fair ordinance of brass of all sort , base , falcon , minion , saker , culverin , cannon double and royal , basilisk long and large , they have six great piece who shot be a yard of height , which shoot a man may easy discern as they flee : they have also a great many of mortar piece or potgun , out of which piece they shoot wild fire . the 12 of December the emperor majesty and all his nobility come into the field on horseback , in most goodly order , have very fine jennet and turquoise horse garnish with gold and silver abundant . the emperor 430 majesty have on he a gown of rich tissue , and a cap of scarlet on his head , set not only with pearl , but also with a great number of rich and costly stone : his noble man be all in gown of cloth of gold , which do ride before he in good order by 3. and 3. and before they [ i - 317 - ] there go 5000 harquebusier , which go by 5 and 5 in a rank in very good order , every of they carry his gun upon his left shoulder , and his match in his right hand , and in this order they march into the field where as the foresay ordinance be plant . and before the emperor majesty come into the field , there be a certain stage make of small pole which be a quarter of a mile long , and about threescore yard off from the stage of pole be certain piece of ice of two foot thick , and six foot high set up , which rank of ice be as long as the stage of pole , and as soon as the emperor majesty come into the field , the harquebusier go upon the stage of pole where they settle themselves in order . and when the emperor majesty be settle where he will be , and where he may see all the ordinance discharge and shoot off , the harquebusier begin to shoot off at the bank of ice , as though it have be in any skirmish or battle , who cease not shoot , until they have beat all the ice flat on the ground . after the handgun , they shoot off their wild fire up into the air , which be a goodly sight to behold . and after this , they begin to discharge the small piece of brass , begin with the small and so orderly big and big , until the last and big . when they have shoot they all off , they begin to charge they again , and so shoot they all off 3 time after the first order , begin with the small , and end with the great . and note that before they have end their shoot , the 2 house that they shoot unto be beat in piece , and yet they be very strong make of wood and fill with earth , be at the least 30 foot thick . this triumph be end , the emperor depart and ride home in the same order that he come forth into the field . the 431 ordinance be discharge every year in the month of December , accord to the order before mention . on Christmas day we be all will to dine with the emperor majesty , where for bread , meat and drink , we be serve as at other time before : but for goodly and rich plate , we never see the like or so much before . there dine that day in the emperor presence above 500 stranger , and two hundred russes , and all they be serve in vessel of gold , and that as much as can stand one by another upon the table . beside this there be four cupboard garnish with goodly plate both of gold and silver . among the which there be 12 barrel of silver , contain above 12 gallon a piece , and at each end of every barrel be 6 hoop of fine gold : this dinner continue about six hour . the hallow every year upon the 12 day they use to bless or the nver of sanctify the river Moscua , which run through the ’ city of Moscow , after this manner . first , they make a square hole in the ice about 3 fathom large every way , which be trim about the side and edge with white board . then about 9 of the clock they come out of the church with procession towards the river in this wise . First and foremost there go certain young man with wax taper burn , and one carry a great lantern : then follow certain banner , than the cross , than the image of our lady , of saint Nicholas , and of other saint , which image man carry upon their shoulder : after the image follow certain priest to the number of 100 or moor : after they the metropolitan who be lead between two priest , and after the metropolitan come the emperor with his crown upon his head , and after his majesty all his noble man orderly . thus they follow the procession unto the water , and when they come unto the hole that be make , the priest set themselves in order round about it . and at one side of the same pool there be a scaffold of board make , upon which stand a fair chair in which the Metro - 432 politan be set , but the emperor majesty stand upon the ice . after this the priest begin to sing , to bless and to sense , and do their service , and so by that time that they have do , the water be holy , which be sanctify , the metropolitan take a little thereof in his hand , and cast it on the emperor , likewise upon certain of the duke , 8c than they return again to the church with the priest that sit about the water : but that press that there be about the water when the emperor be go , be wonderful to behold , for there come above 5000 pot to be fill of that water : for that Moscovite which have no part of that water , think himself unhappy . and very many go naked into the water , both man and woman and child : after the press be a little go , the emperor jennet and horse be bring to drink of the same water , and likewise many other man bring their horse thither to drink , and by that mean they make their horse as holy as themselves . all these ceremony be end , we go to the emperor to dinner , where we be serve in vessel of silver , and in all other point as we have be beforetime . the russes begin their lent always 8 week before the russes easter : the first week they eat egg , milk , cheese 8c lent-butter , and make great cheer with pancake and such other thing , one friend visit another , and from the same Sunday until our Shrofesunday there be but few russes sober , but they be drink day by day , and it be account for no reproach or shame among they . the next week be our first week of Lent , or [ i . 318. ] our cleanse week , begin our Shrofesunday , they make and keep a great fast . it be report , and the people do very believe that the metropolitan neither eat nor drink any manner of thing for the space of seven day , and they say that there be many religious man which do the like . two 433 2 e the emperor majesty eat but one morsel of bread , and drink but one draught of drink once in the day during that week , and all man that be of any reputation come not out of their house during that time , so that the street be almost void of company , save a few poor folk which wander to and fro . the other six week they keep as we do we , but not one of they will eat either butter , cheese , egg or milk . on palm Sunday they have a very solemn procession in this manner follow . first , they have a tree of a good bigness which be make fast upon two sled , as though it be grow there , and it be hang with apple , raisin , fig and date , and with many other fruit abundant . in the midst of you same tree stand 5 boy in white vesture , which sing in the tree before the procession : after this there follow certain young man with wax taper in their hand burn , and a great lantern that all the light shall not go out : after they follow two with long banner , and six with round plate set upon long staff : the plate be of copper very full of hole and thin : then follow 6 carry paint image upon their shoulder , after the image follow certain priest to the number of 100 or moor , with goodly vesture , whereof 10 or 12 be of white damask , set and embroidered round about with fair and orient pearl , as great as pease , and among they certain sapphire and other stone . after they follow the one half of the emperor noble man : then come the emperor majesty and the metropolitan , after this manner . first , there be a horse cover with white linen cloth down to you ground , his ear be make long with the same cloth like to a ass ear . upon this horse the metropolitan sit sidelong like a woman : in his lap lie a fair book , with a crucifix of goldsmith work upon the cover , which he hold fast with his left hand , and in his right hand he have a cross of gold , with 434 which cross he cease not to bless the people as he ride . there be to the number of 30 man which spread abroad their garment before the horse , and as soon as the horse be pass over any of they , they take they up again and run before , and spread they again , so that the horse do always go on some of they . they which spread the garment be all priest son , and for their labour the emperor give unto they new garment . one of the emperor noble man lead the horse by the head , but the emperor himself go on foot lead the horse by the end of the rein of his bridle with one of his hand , and in the other of his hand he have a branch of a palm tree : after this follow the rest of the emperor noble man and gentleman , with a great number of other people . in this order they go from one church to another within the castle , about the distance of two flight shoot : and so return again to the emperor church , where they make a end of their service . which be do , the emperor majesty and certain of his noble man go to the metropolitan his house to dinner , where of delicate fish and good drink there be no lack . the rest of this week until Easter day they keep very solemn , continue in their house for the most part , and upon Monday or Thursday the emperor do always use to receive the sacrament , and so do most of his noble . upon good Friday they continue all the day in contemplation and prayer , and they use every year on good Friday to let loose a prisoner in the stead of bar-rabas . the night follow they go to the church where they sleep until the next morning , and at easter they have the resurrection , and after every of the Lents they eat flesh the next week follow , Friday , Saturday and all . they have a order at easter which they always observe , and that be this : every year against easter to die or colour red with Brazell a great number of 435 the emperor lead the metropolitans horse in procession . kiss use in the greek church . [ i - 319 ] with these letter m. Jenkinson take his voyage the same April to Boghar . the english voyage egg , of which every man and woman give one unto the priest of their parish upon Easter day in the morning . and moreover the common people use to carry in their hand one of their red egg , not only upon easter day , but also three or four day after , and gentleman and gentlewoman have egg gild which they carry in like manner . they use it as they say for a great love , and in token of the resurrection , whereof they rejoice . for when two friend meet during the easter holy day , they come and take one another by the hand : the one of they say , the lord or Christ be rise , the other answer , it be so of a truth , and then they kiss and exchange their egg both man and woman , continue in kiss 4 day together . the 12 of April be Tuesday in the easter week , master Jenkinson and master grey , and certain other of we English man dine with the emperor , where we be serve as we have be before time . and after dinner the emperor majesty give unto master Jenkinson and unto m. grey , and so orderly unto every one of we a cup of mead , accord to his accustom manner which when every man have receive and give thank , m. Jenkinson step into the midst of the chamber before the emperor majesty , and give thanks to his highness for his goodness unto he extend , desire his grace to licence he to depart , and in like manner do master grey . his majesty do not only licence they to depart , but also grant unto master Jenkinson his letter under his great seal , unto all prince through who dominion master Jenkinson shall have occasion to pass , that he may the soon and quiet pass by mean thereof . which be grant , master Jenkinson and Gray low submit themselves , thank his majesty . So the emperor give unto either of they a cup of mead to drink , and will they to depart at their pleasure in god peace . the 14. of April in the morning when m. grey and i be ready to depart towards Enggland , the 436 chancellor send unto we and will we to come to their office in the chancery , where at our come they show we a great number of the emperor jewel , and rich robe , will we to mark and behold they well , to the end that at our arrival into England , we may make report what we have see there . the chief be his majesty crown , be close under the top very fair wrought : in my opinion , the workmanship of so much gold few man can amend . it be adorn and deck with rich and precious stone abundant , among the which one be a ruby , which stand a handful high than the top of the crown upon a small wier , it be as big as a good bean : the same crown be line with a fair black sable , worth by report 40. roble . we see all his majesty robe which be very rich set with stone , they show we many other great stone of diverse kind , but the most part of they be uneven , in manner as they come out of the work , for they do more esteem the greatness of stone , than the proportion of they . we see two goodly gown which be as heavy as a man can easy carry , all set with pearl over and over : the guard or border round about they be garnish with saphire and other good stone abundant . one of the same gown be very rich , for the pearl be very large , round and orient : as for the rest of his gown and garment , they be of rich tissue and cloth of gold and all fur with very black sable . when we have sufficient peruse all these thing , they will master grey at his arrival in England , to provide if he can , such jewel and rich clothes as he have see there , and better if he can , declare that the emperor will glad bestow his money upon such thing . so we take our leave the same time , and depart towards Vologda immediate . 437 the emper-ourswardrobe . the manner , usage , and ceremony of the russes . of the emperor . he emperor name in their tongue be Ivan Vasilivich , that be as much to say , as John the son of “ vasilie and by his princely state he be call Otesara , as his predecessor have be before , which to interpret , be a king , that give not tribute to any man . and this word Otesara his majesty interpreter have of late day interpret to be emperor , so that now he be call emperor and great duke of all Russia , etc before his father they be neither call emperor nor king but only Ruese velike , that be to say , great duke . and as this emperor which now be Ivan Vasilivich , do exceed his predecessor in name , that be , from a duke to a emperor , even so much by report he do exceed they in stoutness of courage and valiantness , and a great deal more : for he be no more afraid of his enemy which be not few , than the hobby of the lark . his enemy with who he have war for the most part be these : Litto , Poland , Sweden , Denmark , Lifland , the crimme , nagaians , and the whole nation of the tartarian , which be a stout and a hardy people as any under the sun . this emperor use great familiarity , as well unto all his noble and subject , as also unto stranger which serve he either in his war , or in occupation : for his pleasure be that they shall dine oftentimes in the year in his presence , and beside that he be oftentimes abroad , either at one church or another , and walk with his noble man abroad . and by this mean he be not only belove of his noble and commons , but also have in great dread and fear through all his dominion , 438 a large description of Russia a.d. ..... 15581 so that i think no prince in Christendom be more fear of his own then he be , nor yet better belove . for if he bid any of his duke go , they will run , if he give any evil or angry word to any of they , the party will not come into his majesty presence again of a long time if he be not send for , but will feign he [ i . 320. ] to be very sick , and will let the hair of his head grow very long , without either cut or shave , which be a evident token that he be in the emperor displeasure : for when they be in their prosperity , they account it a shame to wear long hair , in consideration whereof , they use to have their head shave . his majesty hear all complaint himself , and with note . his owqe mouth give sentence , and judgement of all matter , and that with expedition : but religious matter he meddle not withal , but refer they whole unto the metropolitan . his majesty retain and well reward all stranger that come to serve he , and especial man of war . he delight not great in hawk , hunt , or any other pastime , nor in hear instrument or music , but set all his whole delight upon two thing : first , to serve God , as undoubted he be very devout in his religion , and the second , how to subdue and conquer his enemy . he have abundance of gold and silver in his own hand or treasury : but the most part of his know not a crown from a counter , nor gold from copper , they be so much cumber therewithal ! , and he that be worth 2. 3. or 4. groat , be a rich man . of their religious man . the metropolitan be next unto God , our lady and S. Nicholas except : for the emperor majesty judge and affirm he to be of high dignity than himself ; for that , say he , he be god spiritual officer , and i the emperor be his temporali officer , and therefore his majesty submit himself unto he in many 439 the english voyage thing concern religious matter , as in lead the metropolitans horse upon palm Sunday , and give he leave to sit on a chair upon the 12. day , when the river Moscow be in blessing , his majesty stand on the ice . all matter of religion be reform by the metropolitan , he hear the cause and give sentence as himself list , and be authorize so to do , whether it be to whip , hang or burn , his will must needs be fulfil . they have both monk , friar and nun , with a great number of great and rich monastery : they keep great hospitality , and do relieve much poor people day by day . i have be in one of the monastery call Troietes , which be wall about with brick very strong like a castle , and much ordinance of brass upon the wall of the same . they tell i themselves that there be seven hundred brethren of they which belong unto that house . the most part of the land , town , and village which be within 40. mile of it , belong unto the same . they show i the church , wherein be as many image as can hang about , or upon the wall of the church round about , and even the roof of the church be paint full of image . the chief image be of our lady , which be garnish with gold , ruby , saphir and other rich stone abun - . dandy . in the midst of the church stand 12. wax taper of two yard long , and a fathom about in bigness , and there stand a ketde full of wax with about 100 weight , wherein there be always the wick of a candle burn , as it be a lamp which go not out day nor night . • they show i a coffin cover with cloth of gold which stand upon one side within their church , in which they tell i lay a holy man , who never eat or drink , and yet that he live . and they tell i ( suppose that i have believe they ) that he heal many disease , and give the blind their sight , with many other 440 a large description of Russia a.d. 1558. miracle , but i be hard of belief because i see he work no miracle while i be there . after this they bring i into their seller , and make i taste of diverse kind of drink , both wine and beer , mead and quassie , of sundry colour and kind . such abundance or drink as they have in their seller , i do suppose few prince have more , or so much at once . their barrel or vessel be of a unmeasurable bigness and size : some of they be 3. yard long and more , and 2. yard and more broad in their head : they contain 6. or 7. ton a piece : they have none in their seller of their own make that be less than a ton . they have 9 or 10. great vault which be full of those barrel which be seidome remove : for they have trunk which come down through the roof of the vault in sundry place , through which they power drink down , have the cask right under it to receive the same , for it shall be a great trouble to bring it all down the stair . they give bread , meat and drink unto all man that the hospltall-come to they , not only while they be at their abbey , but also when they depart , to serve they by the way . mmastery - there be a great number of such monastery in the realm , and the emperor majesty ride oftentimes from one to another of they , and lie at they 3. or 4. day together . the same monk be as great merchant as any in [ i . 32l-l the land of Russia , and do occupy buy and sell as much as any other man , and have boat which pass too and fro in the river with merchandise from place to place where any of their country do traffic . they eat no flesh during their life as it be report : but upon Sunday , Monday , Tuesday , Thursday and Saturday it be lawful for they to eat egg , butter , cheese and milk , and at all time to eat fish , and after this sort they lead their life . they wear all black garment , and so do none other in all the land , but at that abbey only . 441 want of preacher cause of great ignorance and idolatry . the english voyage they have no preacher no not one in all the land to instruct the people , so that there be many , and the most part of the poor in the country , who if one ask they how many god there be , they will say a great many , mean that every image which they have be a god : for all the country and the emperor majesty himself will bless and bow , and knock their head before their image , in so much that they will cry earnest unto their image to help they to the thing which they need . all man be bind by their law to have those image in their house , and over every gate in all their town and city be image set up , unto which the people bow and bend , and knock their head against the ground before they : as often as they come by any church or cross they do in like manner . and when they come to any house , they bless themselves 3. or 4. time before they will salute any man in the house . they reckon and hold it for great sin to touch or handle any of their image within the circle of the board where the paint be , but they keep they very dainty , and rich man deck they over and about with gold , silver and stone , and hang they over and about with cloth of gold . the priest be marry as other man be , and wear all their garment as other man do , except their nightcap , which be cloth of some sad colour , be round , and reach unto the ear : their crown be shave , but the rest of their hair they let grow , as long as nature will permit , so that it hang beneath their ear upon their shoulder : their beard they never shave : if his wife happen to die , it be not lawful for he to marry again during his life . they minister the communion with bread and wine after our order , but he break the bread and put it into the cup unto the wine , and common some be partaker with they : and they take the bread out again with a spoon together with part of the wine , 442 a large description of Russia a.d. . 1558. and so take it themselves , and give it to other that receive with they after the same manner . their ceremony be all as they say , accord to the greek church use at this present day , and they allow no other religion but the Greeks , and their own : and will not permit any nation but the Greeks to be bury in their sacred burial , or churchyard . all their church be full of image , unto the which the people when they assemble , do bow and knock their head , as i have before say , that some will have knob upon their forehead with knock , as great as egg . all their service be in the ruff tongue , and they all their ser-and the common people have no other prayer but this , vice be in their ghospodi Jesus christos esine voze ponuloi nash . mother tongue . that be to say , oh lord Jesus Christ , son of God have mercy upon we : and this be their prayer , so that the most part of the unlearned know neither pater noster , nor the belief , nor ten commandment , nor scarce understand the one half of their service which be read in their church . of their baptism . when any child be bear , it be not baptize until the next Sunday , and if it chance that it be not baptize then , it must tarry until the second Sunday after the birth , and it be lawful for they to take as many godfather and godmother as they will , the more the better . when they go to the church , the midwife go foremost , carry the child , and the godfather and godmother follow into the midst of the church , where there be a small table ready set , and on it a earthen pot full of warm water , about the which the godfather and godmother , with the child , settle themselves : than the clerk give unto every of they a small wax candle burn , then come the priest , and begin to say certain word , which the godfather and godmother 443 must answer word for word , among which one be , that the child shall forsake the devil , and as that name be pronounce , they must all spit at the word as often as it be repeat . than he bless the water which be in the pot , and do breathe over it : than he take all the candle which the gossip have , and hold they all in one hand let part of they drop into the water , and then give every one his candle again , and when the water be sanctify , he take the child and hold it in a small tub , and one of the godfather take the pot with warm water , and pour it all upon the child head . [ I. 322. i after this he have many more ceremony , as anoint ear and eye with spittle , and make certain cross with oil upon the back , head , and breast of the child : then take the child in his arm , carry it to the image of saint Nicholas , and our lady , 8cc . and speak unto the image , desire they to take charge of the child , that he may live , and believe as a christian man or woman ought to do , with many other word . then come back from the image , he take a pair of shears and clip the young and tender hair of the child head , in three or four place , and then deliver the child , whereunto every of the godfather and godmother lay a hand : then the priest charge they , that the child be bring up in the faith and fear of God or Christ , and that it be instruct to clinege and bow to the image , and so they make a end : then one of the godfather must hang a cross about the neck of the child , which he must always wear , for that Russe which have not a cross about his neck they esteem as no christian man , and thereupon they say that we be not Christians , because we do not wear cross as they do . of their matrimony . their matrimony be nothing solemnize , but rather in most point abominable , and as near as i can learn , in this wise follow . 444 first , when there be love between the party , the man send unto the woman a small chest or box , wherein be a whip , needle , thread , silk , linen cloth , shears , and such necessary as she shall occupy when she be a wife , and perhaps send therewithal raisin , fig or some such thing , give she to understand , that if she do offend , she must be beat with the whip , and by the needle , thread , cloth , etc that she shall apply her self diligent to sow , and do such thing as she can best do , and by the raisin or fruit he mean if she do well , no good thing shall|be withdraw from she , nor be too dear for she : and she send unto he a shirt , handkerchief , and some such thing of her own make . and now to the effect . when they be agree , and the day of marriage appoint , when they shall go towards the church , the bride will in no wise consent to go out of the house , but resist and strive with they that will have she out , and feign her self to weep , yet in the end , two woman get she out , and lead she towards the church , her face be cover close , because of her dissimulation , that it shall not be open perceive : for she make a great noise , as though she be sob and weep , until she come at the church , and then her face be uncover . the man come after among other of his friend , and they carry with they to the church a great pot with wine or mead : then the priest couple they together much after our order , one promise to love and serve the other during their life together , etc which be do , they begin to drink , and first the woman drink to the man , and when he have drink he let the cup fall to the ground , haste immediately to tread upon it , and so do she , and whether of they tread first upon it must have the victory and be master at all time after , which common happen to the man , for he be ready to set his foot on it , because he let it fall himself , than they go home again , the woman face be uncover . the boy 445 in the street cry out and make a noise in the mean time , with very dishonest word . when they come home , the wife be set at the upper end of the table , and the husband next unto she : they fall then to drink till they be all drink , they perchance have a minstrel or two , and two naked man , which lead she from the church dance naked a long time before all the company . when they be weary of drink , the bride and the bridegroom get they to bed , for it be in the evening always when any of they be marry : and when they be go to bed , the bridegroom put certain money both gold and silver , if he have it , into one of his boot , and then sit down in the chamber , cross his leg , and then the bride must pluck off one of his boot , which she will , and if she happen on the boot wherein the money be , she have not only the money for her labour , but be also at such choice , as she need not ever from that day forth to pull off his boot , but if she miss the boot wherein the money be , she do not only loose the money , but be also bind from that day forward to pull off his boot continual . than they continue in drink and make good cheer three day follow , be accompany with certain of their friend , and during the same three day he be call a duke , and she a duchess , although they be very poor person , and this be as much as i have learn of their matrimony : but one common rule be among they , if the woman be not beat with the whip once a week , she will not be good , and therefore they look for it orderly , and the woman say , that if their husband do not beat they , they shall not love they . they use to marry there very young , their son at 16. and 18. year old , and the daughter at 12. or 13. year or young : they use to keep their wife very close , i mean those that be of any reputation , so that a man shall not see one of they but at a chance , 446 a large description of Russia a.d. 1558. when she go to church at Christmas or at easter , or else go to visit some of her friend . the most part of the woman use to ride a stride in saddle with styrrop , as man do , and some of they on sled , which in summer be not commendable . the husband be bind to find the wife colour to the woman oj paint she withal , for they use ordinary to paint Russia paint themselves : it be such a common practice among they , faces-that it be count for no shame : they grease their face with such colour , that a man may discern they hang on their face almost a flight shoot off : i can so well liken they as to a miller wife , for they look as though they be beat about the face with a bag of meal , but their eye brow they colour as black as jet . the best property that the woman have , be that they can sow well , and imbrode with silk and gold excellent . of their burial . when any man or woman die , they stretch he out , and put a new pair of shoe on his foot , because he have a great journey to go : then do they wind he in a sheet , as we do , but they forget not to put a testimony in his right hand , which the priest give he , to testify unto saint Nicholas that he die a christian man or woman . and they put the coarse always in a coffin of wood , although the party be very poor : and when they go towards the church , the friend and kinsman of the party depart carry in their hand small wax candle , and they weep and howl , and make much lamentation . they that be hang or behead , or such like , have no testimony with they : how they be receive into heaven , it be a wonder , without their passport . there be a great number of poor people among they which die daily for lack of sustenance , which be a pitiful case to behold : for there have be bury 447 in a small time , within these two year , above 80. person young and old , which have die only for lack of sustenance : for if they have have straw and water enough , they will make shift to live : for a great many be force in the winter to dry straw and bread make stamp it , and to make bread thereof , or at the least of straw . they eat - t jn steaj of bread . in the summer they make good shift with grass , herb and root : bark the unmerd - of tree be good meat with they at all time . there finesse of the nQ people jn the world , as i suppose , that live so the poor . miserable as do the poverty in those part : and the most part of they that have sufficient for themselves , and also to relieve other that need , be so unmerciful that they care not how many they see die of famine or hunger in the street . stow or it be a country full of disease , diverse , and evil , bath usual and the best remedy be for any of they , as they hold with the opinion , to go often unto the hot house , as in a manner every man have one or his own , which he heat common twice every week , and all the household sweat , and wash themselves therein . report by Thomas bulky . the name of certain sort of drink use in Russia , and common drink in the emperor court . the first and principali mead be make of the juice or liccour take from a berry call in Russia , Malieno , which be of a marvelous sweet taste , and of a carmosant colour , which berry i have see in Paris . the second mead be call Visnova , because it be make of a berry so call , and be like a black gooseberry : but it be like in colour and taste to the red wine of France . the three mead be call Amarodina or Smorodina , short , of a small berry much like to the small rezin , and grow in great plenty in Russia . the four mead be call Cherevnikyna , which be make of the wild black cherry . 448 the five mead be make of honey and water , with other mixture . there be also a delicate drink draw from the root of the birch tree , call in the ruff tongue Berozevites , which drink the noble man and other use in April , may , and June , which be the three month of the spring time : for after those month , the sap of the tree dry , and then they can have it . 