a compendious and brief declaration of the journey of m. Anth. Jenkinson , from the famous city of London into the land of Persia , pass in this same journey through Russia , Moscovia , and mare Caspium , alias Hircanum , send and employ therein by the right worshipful society of the merchant adventurer , for discovery of land , island , etc be begin the fourteen day of May , anno 1561 , and in the three year of 1561. the reign of the queen majestic that now be : this present declaration be direct and write to the foresay society . Irst embark my self in a good ship of you , name the swallow , at Gravesend , have a fair and good wind , our anchor then weigh , and commit all to the protection of our god , have in our sail diversi tie of wind , and thereby force to direct and observe sundry course ( not here rehearse , because you have be thereof heretofore ample inform ) on the fourteenth day of July , the year aforesaid i arrive in the bay of saint Nicholas in Russia : and the six and twenty day of the same month , after conference then have with your agent there , concern your worship affair , i depart from thence , pass through the country of Vago , and on the eight day of August then follow , i come to Vologda , which be distant from colmogro , seven hundred mile , where i remain four day , attend the arrival of one of your boat , wherein be [ i . 344. ] lade a chest of jewel with the present , by your worship appoint for the emperor majesty : which be arrive , and the chest receive , i therewith depart towards the city of Moscow , and come thither the twenty the queen letter to the emperor of Russia . the english voyage day of the same month , where i immediate cause my come to be signify unto the secretary of the Imperiali majesty , with the queen highness letter address unto the same his majesty , who inform the emperor thereof . but his highness have great affair , and be at that present ready to be marry unto a lady of Chircassi , of the mahometicall law , command that no stranger , ambassador , nor other , shall come before he for a time , with further strait charge , that during the space of three day that the same solemn feast be celebrate , the gate of the city shall be shut , and that no person , stranger or native ( certain of his household reserve ) shall come out of their say house during the say triumph , the cause thereof unto this day not be know . the sixth of September follow , the emperor make a great feast , whereunto be call all ambassador and stranger be of reputation , and have affair : among who i be one , but be will by the secretary first to come , and to show he the queen majesty letter , i refuse so to do , say i will deliver the same unto the emperor own hand , and not otherwise : which hear , the secretary answer , that unless he may first peruse the say letter , i shall not come into the emperor presence , so that i be not at the feast . nevertheless , i be advertise by a noble man that i be inquire for by the emperor majesty , although the cause of my absence be to his majesty unknown . the next day follow , i cause a supplication to be make , and present it to his highness own hand , and thereby declare the cause of my come , signify by the queen majesty letter , and the answer of his say secretary , most humble beseech his grace that he will receive and accept the same her highness letter , with such honour and friendship , as his letter send by Osep Napea be receive by the hand of our late sovereign lady queen mary , or else that it will please his highness to dismiss i , say that i will not deliver the say letter but unto his own hand , for that it be so use in our country . thus the matter be ponder , and the effect of my supplication well digest , i be forthwith command to come with the say letter before his majesty , and so deliver the same into his own hand ( with such present as by you be appoint ) accord to my request , which be grateful accept , and the same day i dine in his grace presence , with great entertainment . Shortly after , i desire to know whether i shall be licence to pass through his highness dominion into the land of Persia , accord to the queen majesty request : hereunto it be answer , that i shall not pass thither , for that his majesty mean to send a army of man that way into the land of Chircassi , whereby my journey shall be both dangerous and troublesome , and that if i shall perish therein , it will be much to his grace dishonour , but he doubt other matter , although they be not express . thus have receive his answer , neither to my expectation , nor yet contentation , and there remain a good part of the year , have in that time sell the most part of your kersy and other ware appoint for Persia , when the time of the year require to return for England , i desire passport , and post horse for money , which be grant : but have receive my passport , ready to depart , there come unto our house there Osep Napea , who persuade i that i shall not depart that day , say that the emperor be not true inform , impute great fault to the forwardness of the secretary , who be not my friend : before who come again the next day , and find the same secretary and Osep Napea together , after many allegation and objection of thing , and perceive that i will depart , i be will to remain until the emperor majesty be speak with again touch my passage : wherewith i be content , and within three day after send for i , he declare that the emperor pleasure be , that i shall in 17 b request to pass into Persia through Moscovie . Osep Napea ambassador from the emperor of Russia to Q. mary . not only pass through his dominion into Persia , but also have his grace letter of commendation to foreign prince , with certain his affair commit to my charge , too long here to rehearse : whereupon i appoint my self for the voyage , and the 15 day of march , the year aforesaid , i dine again in his majesty presence in a ambassa - company of a ambassador of Persia and other , and dor of Persia , receive a cup of drink at his majesty hand , i take my leave of his highness , who do not only give i letter , as aforesaid , but also commit matter of importance and charge unto i , to be do when i shall arrive in those country whither i intend to go , and have all thing in readiness for the same voyage , i depart from the city of Moscow the 27 day of April 1562 , down by the great river of Volga , in company of the say ambassador of Persia , with who i have great friendship and conference all the way down the same astracan . river unto astracan , where we arrive all in health the 10 day of June . and as touch the situation of the city , town , castle and country , aswell of Mahometans as also of gentile adjoin to the same , whereby i pass from [ i . 345. ] Moscow unto astracan , i omit in this breviate to rehearse , for that i heretofore have declare the same most ample m. Jenkinsons unto you in my voyage to Boghar . thus be arrive voyage to bog - at astracan , as be aforesaid , i repair unto the captain ’ there , unto who i be commend from the emperor majesty , with great charge that he not only shall aid and succour i with all thing needful during my abode there , but also to safeconduct i with 50 gunner well appoint in two stroog or brigantine into the caspian sea , until i have pass certain dangerous place which pirate and rover do accustom to haunt , and have prepare my bark for the sea , the ambassador of Persia be before depart in a bark of his own the 15 day of July , the year aforesaid , i and my company take hepass then our voyage from the say astracan , and the next day Caspian sea . at a west sun , pass the mouth of the say river 18 being twenty mile distant , lie next southeast . the 18 at a southwest sun , we pass by three island be distant nine mile from the say mouth of Volga , and southsouthwest from thence , sail south southwest the next day , at a west 8c by north sun we fall with the land call Challica Ostriva , be four round island together , distant from the say three island forty mile . from thence sail the say course the next day , we have sight of a land call take , in the country of the country Tumen , where pirate and rover do use : for fear of who we hale off into the sea due east forty mile , and fall upon shallows out of the sight of land , and there be like to have perish , escape most hardly : then the 22 day we have sight of a goodly island call the island of Chatalet , distant from the say Challica Ostriva a hundred chatakt . mile , the wind be contrary , and a stiff gale , we be not able to seize it : but be force to come to a anchor to the leeward of the same six mile off in three or four fathom water , be distant from the main land to the westward of we , which be call skafcayl or Connyk a country of Mahometans , about mile , and so ride at two anchor a head , have no other provision , we lose one of they , the storm and sea be grow very sore , and thereby our bark be so full of leak , that with continual pump we have much ado to keep she above water , although we throw much of our good overboard , with loss of our boat , and our self thereby in great danger like to have perish either in the sea or else upon the lee shore , where we shall have fall into the hand of those wicked infidel , who attend our shipwreck : and sure it be very unlike that we shall have escape both the extremity , but only by the power and mercy of God , for the storm continue seven day , to wit , until the thirty day of the same month : and then the wind come up at the west with fair weather , our anchor weigh , and our sail display , lie south , the next day hale to the shore with a west sun , we be nigh a land a mighty wall . or Tiphlis . forty one degree . Shabran . Alcan Murcy the gpvemour . the english voyage call by the inhabitant Shyrvansha , and there we come again to a anchor , have the wind contrary , be distant from the say Chatalet 150 mile , and there we continue until the three day of August , then have a fair wind , wind southsoutheast , and sail threescore mile , the next day at a southeast sun we arrive at a city call derbent in the king of hircans dominion , where come to land , and salute the captain there with a present , he make to i and my company a dinner , and there take fresh water i depart . this city of Derbent be a ancient town have a old castle therein , be situate upon a hill call Castow , build all of free stone much after our building , the wall very high and thick , and be first erect by king Alexander the great , when he war against the persian and median , and then he make a wall of a wonder height and thickness , extend from the same city to the Georgians , yea unto the principali city thereof name tewflish , which wall though it be now raze , or otherwise decay , yet the foundation remain , and the wall be make to the intent that the inhabitant of that country then new conquer by the say Alexander shall not light flee , nor his enemy easy invade . this city of Derbent be now under the power of the sophy of Persia , border upon the sea , adjoin to the foresay land of shalfcall , in the latitude of 41 degree . from thence sail southeast and southsoutheast about 80 mile , the sixth day of August , the year aforesaid , we arrive at our land place call Shabran , where my bark discharge : the good lay on shore , and there be in my tent keep great watch for fear of rover , whereof there be great plenty , be field people , the governor of the say country name Alcan Murcy , come unto i , entertain i very gentle , unto who give a present , he appoint for my safeguard forty arm man to watch and ward i , until he may have news from the king of Shirvan . the 12 day of the same month news do come from the king , with order that i shall repair unto he with all speed : and for expedition , aswell camel to the number of five and forty to carry my good , as also horse for i and my company be in readiness , so that the good lade , and take my journey from thence the say twelve day , on the 18 of the same month i come to a city call shamaky , in the say country of hircan , otherwise call Shirvan , and there the king have a fair place , where my lodging be appoint , the good be discharge : the next day be the 19 day , i be send for to come to the [ i . 346 - ] king , name Obdolowcan , who keep his court at that kingobdo-time in the high mountain in tent , distant from the lowcan-said Shamaki twenty mile , to avoid the injury of the heat : and the 20 day i come before his presence , who gentle entertain i , and have kiss his hand , he bid i to dinner , and command i to sit down not far from he . this king do sit in a very rich majesty pavilion , wrought with silk and gold , place very i ? at&re °f pleasant , upon a hill side , of sixteen fathom long , ° and six fathom broad , have before he a goodly fountain of fair water : whereof he and his nobility do drink , he be a prince of a mean stature , and of a fierce countenance , rich apparel with long garment of silk , and cloth of gold , embroider with pearl and stone : upon his head be a tolipane with a sharp end stand upward half a yard long , of rich cloth of gold , wrap about with a piece of India silk of twenty yard long , wrought with gold , and on the left side of his tolipane stand a plume of feather , set in a trunk of gold rich enamel , and set with precious stone : his earring have pendant of gold a handful long , with two great ruby of great value , set in the end thereof : all the ground within his pavilion be cover with rich carpet , and under himself be spread a square carpet wrought with silver and gold , and thereupon be lay two suitable cushion . thus the king with his nobility sit in his pavilion with his leg a cross , and perceive that it be painful for i so to sit , his highness cause a stool to be bring in , and do will i to sit thereupon , after my fashion . dinner time then approach , diverse clothes be spread upon the ground , and sundry dish serve , and set in a rank with diverse kind of meat , to the number of 140 dish , as i number they , which be take away with the table clothes , and other spread , a banquet of fruit of sundry kind , with other banquete meat , to the number of 150 dish , be bring in : so that two service occupy 290 dish , and at the end of the say dinner and banquet , the king say unto i , Quoshe quelde , that be to say , welcome : and call for a cup of water to be draw at a fountain , and taste thereof , do deliver i the rest , demand how i do like the same , and whether there be so good in our country or not : unto who i answer in such sort , that he be therewith content : than he propon unto i sundry question , both touch religion , and also the state of our country , and further question whether the emperor of almain , the emperor of Russia , or the great Turk , be off most power , with many other thing too long here to rehearse , to who i answer as i think most meet . than he demand whether i intend to go any further , and the cause of my come : unto that i answer , that i be send with letter from the queen most excellent majesty of England unto the great sophy , to entreat friendship and free passage , and for his safeconduct to be grant unto english merchant to trade into his seignory , with the like also to be grant to his subject , when they shall come into our country , to the honour and wealth of both realm , and commodity of both their subject , with diverse other word , which i omit to rehearse . This say king much allow this declaration say , that he will not only give i passage , but also man to safeconduct i unto the say sophy , lie from the foresay city of Shamaki thirty day journey , up into the land of Persia , at a castle call Casbin : so depart from the king at that time , within Casbin . three day after , be the four and twenty day of August the year aforesaid , he send for i again : unto who i repair in the morning , and the king not be rise out of his bed ( for his manner be , that multitude of watch in the night , and then banquete with his ctncu^ines-women , be a hundred and forty in number , he sleep most in the day ) do give one commandment that i shall ride on hawk with many gentleman of his court , and that they shall show i so much game and pastime as may be : which be do , and many crane kill . we return from hawk about three of the clock at the afternoon : the king then rise , and ready to dinner , i be invite thereunto , and approaching nigh to the enter in of his tent , and be in his sight , two gentleman encounter i with two garment of that country fashion , side , down to the ground , the one of silk , and the other of silk and gold , send unto i from the king , and after that they cause i to put off my upper garment , be a gown of black velvet fur with sable , they put the say two garment upon my back , and so conduct i unto the king , before who do reverence , and kiss his hand , he command i to sit not far from he , and so i dine in his presence , he at that time be very merry , and demand of i many question , and among other , how i like the manner of their hawk . dinner so end , i require his highness safeconduct for to depart towards the sophy , who dismiss i with great favour , and appoint his ambassador ( which return out of Russia ) and other , to safeconduct i , he give i at my departure a fair horse with all furniture , and custom free from thence with all my good . so i return to Shamaki again , where i remain until the sixth of October , to provide camel , horse , and other necessary for my say intend journey . danger by diversity in religion . barbarous cruelty . the ci tie of arrash or erex . the commodity of this country . the english voyage but now before i proceed further , i purpose to write something of this country of hircan , now call Shirvan , with the town and commodity of the same . this country of hircan in time past be of great renown , have many city , town , and castle in it : and the king thereof in time of antiquity be of great power , able to make war with the sophy of Persia : but now it be not only otherwise ( for that the city , town , and castle be decay ) but also the king be subject to the say sophy ( although they have their proper king ) and be at the commandment of the say sophy , who conquer they not many year pass , for their diversity in religion , and cause not only all the nobility and gentleman of that country to be put to death , but also over and beside , raze the wall of the city , town , and castle of the say realm , to the intent that there shall be no rebellion , and for their great terror , cause a turret of free stone and flint to be erect in the say city call Shamaki , and in a rank of flint of the say turret , do set the head of the say nobility and gentleman , then execute . this city be distant from the sea side , with camel , seven day journey , but now the same be much decay , and chief inhabit with Armenians , another city call arrash , border upon the Georgians , be the chief and most opulent in the trade of merchandise , and thereabouts be nourish the most abundant growth of raw silk , and thither the turk , Syrians , and other stranger do resort and traffic . there be also diverse good and necessary commodity to be provide and have in this say realm : viz. gall rough and smooth , cotton wool , allome , and raw silk of the natural growth of that country : beside , near all kind of spice and drug , and some other commodity , which be bring thither from out of east India , but in the less quantity , for that they be not assure to have vent or utterance of the same : but the chief commodity be there , raw silk of all sort , whereof there be great plenty . not far from the say 1562. city of Shamaki , there be a old castle call Gulli - the strong stone , now beat down by this sophy , which be c “ stle esteem to be one of the strong castle in the world , u e^ace ’ and be besiege by Alexander the great , long time before he can win it . and not far from the say castle be a nunnery of sumptuous build , wherein be bury a king daughter , name Ameleck Channa , who slay herself with a knife , for that her father will have force she ( she profess chastity ) to have marry with a king of Tartary : upon which occasion the maiden of that country do resort thither once every year to lament her death . also in the say country there be a high hill call quiquif , upon the top whereof ( as it be common report ) do dwell a great giant , name arneoste , have upon his head two great home , and ear , and eye like a horse , and a tail like a cow . it be further say , that this monster keep a passage thereby , until there come a holy man , term Haucoir hamshe , a kinsman to one of the sophy , who mount the say hill , and combat with the say giant , do bind not only he in chain , but also his woman call lami-sache with his son name after : for which victory they of that country have this holy man in great reputation , and the hill at this day ( as it be bruit ) savour so ill , that no person may come nigh unto it : but whether it be true or not , i refer it to further knowledge . now to return to the discourse of the proceed in my voyage towards the great sophy . the 6 of October in the year aforesaid , i with my company depart from Shamachi aforesaid , and have journey threescore mile , come to a town call yavate , wherein the town of the king have a fair house , with orchard and garden yavate . well replenish with fruit of all sort . by this town pass a great river call Cor , which spring in the mountain of the Georgians , and pass through the country of Hyrcania aforesaid , fall into the case - pian or hircan sea , at a place between two ancient town call Shabran and Bachu , situate within the realm of hircane , and from thence issue further , pass through a fruitful country , inhabit with pasture people , which dwell in the summer season upon mountain , and in winter they remove into the valley without resort to town or any other habitation : and when they remove , they do journey in caravans or troop of people and cattle , carry all their wife , child and baggage upon bullock . now pass this wild people ten day journey , come into no town or house , the sixteenth day of October we arrive the city of at a city call Ardouill , where we be lodge in a Ardouil . hospitali build with fair stone , and erect by this sophy father name Ishmael , only for the succour and lodging of stranger and other traveller , wherein all man have victual and feed for man and horse , for three day and no long . this foresay late prince Ishmael lie bury in a fair Meskit , with a sumptuous sepulchre in the same , which he cause to be make in his life time . this town Ardouill be in the latitude of eight and thirty degree , a ancient city in the province of Aderravgan , wherein the prince of Persia be common bury : and there Alexander the great do keep his court when he invade the persian . the city four day journey to the westward be the city tebris ^aur ' °1 ' * n °^e t’me ca^e < ^ Tauris , the great ci tie in Persia , auns ' but not of such trade of merchandise as it have be , or as other be at this time , by mean of the great invasion of the Turk , who have conquer from the sophy almost to the say city of Tauris , which the say Turk once sack , and thereby cause the sophy [ i . 348. ] to forsake the same , and to keep his court ten day journey from thence , at the say city of Casbin . the 21 day we depart from Ordowil aforesaid , travel for the most part over mountain all in the night season , and rest in the day , be destitute of wood , and therefore be force to use for fuel the dung of horse and camel , which we buy dear of the pasture people . thus pass ten day journey the m. Jenkinsons year aforesaid , the second day of November we arrive arrival at they at the foresay city of Casbin , where the say sophy number , keep his court , and be appoint to a lodging not 1562. far from the king palace , and within two day after the sophy command a prince call Shalli Murzey , son to obdolowcan king of Shirvan aforesaid , to send for i to his house , who ask i in the name of the say sophy how i do , and whether i be in health , and after do welcome i , and invite i to dinner , whereat i have great entertainment , and so from thence i return to my lodging . the next day after i send my interpreter unto the sophy secretary , declare that i have letter direct from our most gracious sovereign lady the queen most excellent majesty of the realm of England , unto the say sophy , and that the cause of my come be express in the same letter , desire that at convenient time i may come into his majesty presence , who advertise the sophy thereof , short after answer i that there be great affair in hand : which be finish , i shall come before his presence , will i in the mean time to make ready my present if i have any to deliver . at this time , the great Turk ambassador arrive the Turk four day before my come , who be send thither ardour to conclude a perpetuali peace betwixt the same great t0 f e you Turk and the sophy , and bring with he a present in gold , and fair horse with rich furniture , and other gift , esteem to be worth forty thousand pound . and thereupon a peace be conclude with joyful feast , triumph and solemnity , corroborate with strong oath , by their law of Alcoran , for either to observe the same , and to live always after as swear brethren , aid the one the other against all prince that shall war against they , or either of they . and upon this conclusion the sophy cause the great Turk son name baiset sultan , a valiant prince ( who be flee from his father unto the sophy , have remain in his court the space of four year ) to be put to death . in which time the say Turk son have cause mortal ! war betwixt the say prince , and much prevail therein : the Turk demand therefore his son to be send unto he , and the sophy refuse thereunto to consent . but now be slay accord to the turk will , the sophy send he his head for a present , not a little desire , and acceptable to the unnatural father . discourse at my first arrival with the king of Shirvan of sundry matter , and be entertain as have be before declare , the say king name Obdolocan , demanding whether that we of England have friendship with the turk or not : i answer , that we never have friendship with they , and that therefore they will not suffer we to pass through their country into the sophy his dominion , and that there be a nation name the venetian , not far distant from we , which be in great league with the say turk , who trade into his dominion with our commodity , chief to barter the same for raw silk , which ( as we understand ) come from thence : and that if it will please the say sophy and other prince of that country , to suffer our merchant to trade into those dominion , and to give we passport and safe conduct for the same , as the say Turk have grant to the say venetian , i doubt not but that it shall grow to such a trade to the profit of they as never before have be the like , and that they shall be both furnish with our commodity , and also have utterance of they , although there never come Turk into their land , persuade with many other word for a trade to be have . this king understand the matter like it marvellous , say , that he will write unto the sophy concern the same : as he do in very deed , assure i that the sophy will grant my request , and that at my return unto he he will give i letter of safe conduct , and privileges . the Turks ambassador be not then come 1562. into the land , neither any peace hope to be conclude , but great preparation be make for war , which be like much to have further my purpose , but it chance otherwise . for the Turks ambassador be arrive , the Turk and the peace conclude , the turkish merchant there me^^un^s at that time present , declare to the same ambassador , that my come thither ( name i by the name of Frank ) will in great part destroy their trade , and that it shall be good for he to persuade the sophy not to favour i , as his highness mean to observe the league and friendship with the great Turk his master , which request of the turkish merchant the same ambassador earnest prefer , and be afterward dismiss with great honour , he depart out of the realm with the turk son head as aforesaid , and other present . the 20 day of November aforesaid , i be send for Shaw Thomas to come before the say sophy , otherwise call Shaw sophy Thomas , and about three of the clock at afternoon i come to the court , and in light from my horse at the court gate , before my foot touch the ground , a pair of the sophy own shoe term in the per - [ i . 349. ] sian tongue basmacke , such as he himself wear when he arise in the night to pray ( as his manner be ) be put upon my foot , for without the same shoe i may not ge sufired to tread upon his holy ground , be a christian , and call among they Gower , that be , unbeliever , and unclean : esteem all to be infidel and pagan which do not believe as they do , in their false filthy prophet , Mahomet and Murtezalli . at the say court gate the thing that i bring to present his majesty with , be divide by sundry parcel to sundry servitor of the court , to carry before i , for none of my company or servant may ge suffer to enter into the court with i , my interpreter only except . thus the queen come before his majesty with such reverence as i think meet to be use , i deliver the queen ae wonderful re ' majesty letter with my present , which he accept , demand of i of what country of Franks i be , and what affair i have there to do ? unto who i answer that i be of the famous city of London within the noble realm of England , and that i be send thither from the most excellent and gracious sovereign lady Elizabeth queen of the say realm for to treat of friendship , and free passage of our merchant and people , to repair and traffic within his dominion , for to bring in our commodity , and to carry away they to the honour of both prince , the mutual commodity of both realm , and wealth of the subject , with other word here omit . he then demand i in what language the letter be write , i answer , in the latin , italian and hebrew : well say he , we have none within our realm that understand those tongue . whereupon i answer that such a famous and worthy prince ( as he be ) want not people of all nation within his large dominion to interpret the same . than he question with i of the state of our country , and of the power of the emperor of almain , king Philip , and the great Turk , and which of they be of most power : who i answer to his contentation , not dispraise the great Turk , their late conclude friendship consider . than he reason with i much of religion , demand whether i be a Gower , that be to say , a unbeliever , or a Muselman , that be , of Mahomet law . unto who i answer , that i be neither unbeliever nor mahometan , but a christian . what be that , say he unto the king of the Georgians son , who be a christian be flee unto the say sophy , and he answer that a christian be he that believe in Jesus christus , affirm he to be the son of God , and the great prophet . do thou believe so , say the sophy unto i ? yea that i do , say i : oh thou unbeliever , say he , we have no need to have friendship with the unbeliever , and so will i to depart . i be glad thereof do reverence and go my way , be accompany with many of his gentleman and other , and after i follow a man with a basanet of 1562. sand , sift all the way that i have go within the say palace , even from the say sophy sight unto the court gate ..... thus i repair again unto my lodging , and the say thecurtesieof night Shally Murzey son to the king of hircan afore - mur~ say , who favour i very much for that i be come - z^ ' mend unto he from his father , will i not to doubt of any thing , put i in hope that i shall have good success with the sophy , and good entertainment . thus i continue for a time , daily resort unto i diverse gentleman send by the sophy to confer with i , especial touch the affair of the emperor of Russia , and to know by what way i intend to return into my country , either by the way that i come , or by the way of ormus , and so with the Portugal ship . unto who i answer , that i dare not return by the way of ormus , the Portugal and we not be friend , full perceive their meaning : for i be advertise that the say sophy war inmeant to have war with the Portugal , and will have tend against charge i that i have be come for a spy to pass * e 01ttn^a • through his dominion unto the say Portugal , think they and we to be all one people , and call all by the name of Franks , but by the providence of God this be prevent . after this the say sophy confer with his nobility and counsel concern i , who persuade that he shall not entertain i well , neither dismiss i with letter or gift , consider that i be a Frank , and of that nation that be enemy to the great Turk his brother , persuading that if he do otherwise , and that the news thereof shall come to the knowledge of the Turk , it shall be a mean to break their new league and friendship late conclude : dissuade further because he have no need , neither that it be requisite for he to have friendship with unbeliever , who country lay far from he , and that it be best for he to send i with my letter unto the say great Turk for a present , which he be the king of hircans second letter in m. Jenkinsons behalf . [ i - 35o - ] conference with Indian merchant . m. Jenkinsons return . the english voyage full determine to have do at some meet time , mean to send his ambassador unto the say great Turk very short after . but the king of Hircanes son aforesaid , understand this deliberation , send a man in post unto his father , for to declare and impart the purpose unto he , who as a gracious prince , consider that i have pass through his dominion , and that i have journey for a good intent , do write to the sophy all that which he understand of his say determination , and that it shall not stand with his majesty honour to do i any harm or displeasure , but rather to give i good entertainment , see i be come into his land of my free will , and not by constraint , and that if he use i evil , there will few stranger resort into his country , which will be great unto his hindrance , with many other persuasion : which after that the say sophy have well and thorough ponder and digest ( much esteem the same king of hircane , be one of the valiant prince under he and his nigh kinsman ) change his determine purpose , and the twenty of march 1562. he send to i a rich garment of cloth of gold , and so dismiss i without any harm . during the time that i sojourn at the say city of Casbin , diverse merchant out of India come thither unto i , with who i confer for a trade of spice : whereunto they answer that they will bring of all sort so much as we will have , if they be sure of vent , whereof i do promise to assure they , so that i doubt not but that great abundance thereof may from time to time be there provide and have . the same twenty day of march i return from the say city of Casbin where i remain all the winter , have send away all my camel before , and the thirty day i come to the say city of Ardouil , and the fifteen of April unto Zavat aforesaid , where king Obdolowcan be at that present , who immediate send for i , and demand of i many question , declare that if it have 32 not be for he , i have be utter cast away , and send to the great Turk for a present by the sophy , through the evil persuasion of his wicked counsel ! , that the ziety and holy man be the chief and principal procurer and mover thereof : but the sophy himself mean i much good at the first , and think to have give i good entertainment , and so have do , have not the peace and league fortune to have be conclude between they and the great Turk . nevertheless , say he , the sophy have write unto i to entertain you well , and you be welcome into my country , and so he entreat i very gentle , in who court i remain seven day , and obtain of he letter of safe conduct privilege and privilege in your name to be free from pay custom , which i deliver unto your servant Thomas be ’ Alcocke and George wren , at their departure towards hereafter an-Persia for your affair : and his highness do give i nex . two garment of silk , ' and so dismiss i with great favour , send with i his ambassador again unto the emperor of Russia , and commit the chief secret of his affair unto i , to declare the same unto the emperor majesty at my return : and thus depart the ten day of April , i come to the city of Shamachi , and there remain certain day for provision of camel down to the sea side , i send from thence before man to repair my bark , and to make she in a readiness . and during my abode in Shammachi , a armenian there come unto i a armenian send from the king of MfuM . Jen-Georgia , who declare the lamentable estate of the same oj king , that be enclose betwixt those two cruel tyrant Georgia . and mighty prince , the say great Turk and the sophy , he have continual war with they , require for the love of Christ and as i be a christian , that i will send he comfort by the say armenian , and advise how he may send his ambassador to the say emperor of Russia , and whether i think that he will support he or not : and with many other word require i to declare his necessity unto the same emperor at my inn 33 c return : add further that the say king will have write unto i his mind , but that he doubt the safe passage of his messenger . unto who i do likewise answer by word of mouth , not only persuade he to send his ambassador to Russia , not doubt but that he shall find he most honourable and incline to help he , but also i direct he his way how the say king may send by the country of Chircassi , through teneruk king the favour of teneruk king of the say country , who of Chircassi . daughter the say king have late marry . and thus dismiss the say armenian , within two day after i send Edward clerk your servant unto the city of arrash , where the most store of silk be to be have , give he commission to have pass further into the say country of Georgia , and there to have repair unto the say king . and after my commendation premise , and my mind declare to have pursue for safeconduct of the same prince for our merchant to trade into his dominion , and that obtain to have return again with speed . the same your servant journey to the say city of arrash , and there find certain merchant Armenians , which promise to go to the say city of Georgia , come to the border thereof , be perceive by a captain there , that he be a christian , and thereupon demand whither he go , and understand that he can not pass further without great suspicion , answer that he come thither to buy silk , and show the king of Hircanes letter which he have with he , and so return back again , and the fifteen of April come to Shamachi : from whence i depart the sixteen of the same month , and the one and twenty thereof come to the seaside , and find my bark in a readiness , i cause your good to be lade , and there attend a fair wind . Lk 35 ’• ] but before i proceed any further to speak of my return , i intend with your favour somewhat to treat of the country of Persia , of the great sophy , and of his country , law and religion . this land of Persia be great and ample , divide into the descrip-many kingdom and province , as Gillan , Corasan , cion of Persia . Shirvan , and many other have diverse city , town and castle in the same . Every province have his several king , or sultan , all in obedience to the great sophy . the name of the chief city be these : teveris , the chief ci-casbin , Keshan , yesse , Meskit , Heirin , ardovill , Sham - tie °f Persia . achi , arrash with many other . the country for the most part towards the sea side be plain and full of pasture , but into the land , high , full of mountain , and sharp . to the south it border upon Arabia and the east ocean . to the north upon the caspian sea and the land of Tartary . to the east upon the province of India , and to the west upon the confine of Chaldea , Syria , and other the Turk land . all within these dominion be of the sophy , name Shaw Thamas , son to Ishmael Sophie . this sophy that now reign be nothing valiant , although his power be great , and his people martial : and through his pusillanimity the Turk have much invade his country , even nigh unto the city of Teveris , wherein he be wont to keep his chief court . and now have forsake the same , be chief resident at Casbin aforesaid , and always as the say Turk pursue he , he not be able to withstand the Turk in the field , trust rather to the mountain for his safeguard , then to his fort and castle , have cause the same to be raze within his dominion , and his ordinance to be melt , to the intent that his enemy pursue he , they shall not strengthen themselves with the same . this prince be of the age of fifty year , and of a reasonable stature , have five child . his elder son he keep captive in prison , for that he fear he for his valiantness and activity : he profess a kind of holiness , and say that he be descend of the blood of Mahomet and Murtezalli : and although these persian be Mahometans , as the Turk and Tartar bee , yet honour they this false feign Murtezalli , 35 saying that he be the chief disciple that Mahomet have , curse and chide daily three other disciple that Mahomet have call Ovear , Usiran , and Abebeck , the difference and these three do slay the say Murtezalli , for which tfreli^m . cause and other difference of holy man and law , they have have and have with the Turk and Tartar mortali war . to entreat of their religion at large , be moor or less Mahomet law and the Alcoran , i shall not need at this present . Theise person be comely and of good complexion , proud and of good courage , esteem themselves to be best of all nation , both for their religion and holiness , which be most erroneous , and also for all other their fashion . they be martial , delight in fair horse and good harness , soon angry , crafty and hard people . thus much i have think good to treat of this nation , and now i return to discourse the proceed of the rest of my voyage . my bark be ready at the caspian sea as aforesaid , have a fair wind , and commit our self the 30. off unto God the 30. day of May 1563. we arrive at 21 / 1563 . astracan , have pass no less danger upon the sea in our return , than we sustain in our go forth , and remain at the say astracan , until the ten day of June , one hundred gunner be there admit unto i for my safeguard up the river Volga , the fifteen of July i arrive at the city of Cazan , where the captain entertain i well , and so dismiss i , i be conduct from place to place unto the city of Moscow , where i arrive the twenty day of August 1563. inn safety , thanks be to God , with all such good , merchandize , and jewel , as i have provide as well for the emperor stock and account , as also of you , all which good i be command to bring into the emperor treasury before it be open , which i do , and deliver those parcel of ware which be for his majesty account , videlicet , precious stone , and wrought silk of sundry colour and sort , much to his high-36 ... i564 " ness contentation , and the residue belong to you , viz. Crasko , and raw silk , with other merchandize , ( as by account appear ) be bring unto your house , whereof part there remain , and the rest be lade in your ship late return . Shortly after my come to the Moscow , i come before the emperor majesty , and present unto he the apparel give unto i by the sophy , who highness confer with i touch the prince affair which he have commit to my charge : and my proceed therein it please he so to accept , that they be much to his contentation , say unto i , i have perceive your good service , for the which i do thank you , and will recompense you for the same , wish that i will travel again in such his other affair , wherein he be mind to employ i : to who i answer , that it be to my hearty rejoice that my service be so acceptable unto his highness , acknowledge all that i have do to be but of duty , humble beseech his grace to continue his goodness unto your worship , and even at that instant i humble request his majesty to vouchsafe to grant unto you a [ i . 352. ] new privilege more ample than the first , which imme - newfrivi-diately be grant , and so 1 depart . and afterward ^es have pen a brief note how i mean to have the iow^g i same privilege make , i repair daily to the secretary for the perfect of the same , and obtain it under his majesty broad seal , which at my departure from thence , i deliver unto the custody of Thomas Glover your agent there . the copy whereof , and also of the other privilege grant and give by the king of hircan , i have already deliver unto you . sojourn all that winter at Moscow , and in the mean time have bargain with the emperor majesty , i send away your servant Edward Clarke hither overland with advice , and also make preparation for send again into Persia in meet time of the year . And commit the charge thereof unto your servant Thomas Alcocke , George wren , and Richard cheinie , the 28. of June last , i depart in post from the say Moscow , and come to Colmogro and so down to the sea side , i find your ship lade and ready to depart , where i embark my self in your good ship call the swallow , the 9 of July , one thousand five hundred sixty four , and have pass the sea with great and extreme danger of loss 28. Septemb. of ship , good and life , the 28. day of September G6 ! - last ( God be praise ) we arrive here at London in safety . thus know that the courageous and valiant soldier , which adventure both fame , member and life , to serve faithful his sovereign , esteem not the peril and danger pass ( the victory once obtain ) neither for his guerdon desire any thing more , than that his service be well take of he for who he enterprise it : so i perceive your favourable benevolence to i extend in accept my travel in good part to your contentation , do think my self therewith in great part recompense : beseech almighty God so to prosper your adventure , from time to time hereafter to be make for reap the fruit of my travel ( at your great charge , and to my no small danger ) that you may plentiful gather in and enjoy the same , to the illustrate of the queen most excellent majesty , the honour and commodity of this her highness realm , and to the ample benefit and abundant enrich of you and your succession , and posterity for ever . 