[ l 353. i the second voyage into Persia make by Tho. Alcock , who be slay there , and by George wren , and Ric. cheinie servant to the worshipful company of Moscovie merchant in anno 1563. write by the say Richard cheinie . a rubble be a mark English . t may please your worship to understand , that in the year 1563. i be appoint by m. Antho. Jenkinson , and m. Thomas Glover your agent in Russia , to go for Persia in your worship affair , one Thomas Alcock have the charge of the voyage commit to he , and i one of your worship servant be join with he in your business , have with we , as they say 1500. rubble . and if it shall please you i can tell certain what sum of money we have then of the emperor : for i receive none , nor disburse any of it in ware for the voyage . also , God i take to record , i can not tell what stock your worship have there , for the book be keep so privy that a man can never see they . the 10. of 40 may anno 1563. we depart from a town call yeraslave upon our voyage towards Persia . the 24. of July we arrive at astracan : and the second of August we depart from astracan , and the 4. of the same month we come to the caspian sea , and the 11. day of the say month we arrive at our port in Media : and the 21. of the say August we arrive at Shammaki , whereas the king Obdolocan lie in the field . we be well entertain of heathen people , for the third day after our arrival at Shammaki we be call before the king : we give he a present , and he entertain we very well . at our come to the court we be command to come before the king , who sit in his tent upon the ground with his leg a cross , and all his duke round about his tent , the ground be cover with carpet : we be command to sit down , the king appoint every man his place to sit . and the king command the emperor of russelands merchant to rise up , and to give we the upper hand . the 20. of October Thomas Alcock depart from Shammaki towards Casbin , Casbin . leave i at Shammaki to recover such debt as the duke of Shammaki ought for ware which they take of he at his go to Casbin . in the time i lay there i can recover but little . and at Thomas alcock come from Casbin , who arrive at a town call Leuvacta , leuvacta . whereas the king Obdolocan lie , a day and a half journey from the town whereas i lay , i hear of his arrive there , depart from Shammaki , find he there in safety with all such good as he have with he . during his abode there for seven day he make suit to the king for such money as the duke ought he . but the king be displease for that the emperor of russelands merchant have slay a Boserman at his go to ABosermanis Casbin . Thomas Alcocke see the king will show a remgro-us no favour , and also hear from Shammaki , that the russes send their good to the sea side , for that they fear that the king of Persia shall have knowledge of Thomas Alcocke slay in the way between leuvacta and Shammaki . Keselbash , or jeselbash . the english voyage the death of the Boserman , will i to depart to Shammaki with all such good as he have bring with he from Casbin , i leave he at the court . the third day after my arrival at Shammaki , i have news that Thomas Alcocke be slay come on his way towards i . then the king Obdolocan understanding of his death , demand whether he have ever a brother . some say i be , some say i be not his brother . when this fall out , your worship have no other servant there but i among those heathen people . who have such a sum of good lie under my hand , and see how the russes send their good with as much haste as they may to the sea side , and have but four man to send our ware to the sea side , i use such diligence , that within two day after Thomas Alcocke be slay , i send in company with the russes good , all your worship good with a mariner , William August , and a swethen , for that they may the safe arrive at the seaside , be safe lay in . all which good afterward arrive in Russeland in good condition , master Glover have the receipt of all thing which i send then out of those party into Russeland . concern my self , i remain after 1 have send the good into Russeland six week in Shammaki , for the recovery of such debt as be owe , and at last with much trouble recover to the sum of fifteen hundred rubble or there about , which m. Glover receive of i at my come to Moscow , and all such good as i bring with i out of Keselbash , as by a note of my hand that he have shall appear . also he have the receipt of all such good as i send into Russeland by these two above name , he then have that voyage in venture of his own better then a hundred rubble , one Richard Johnson twenty ruble , one Thomas Pette fifty ruble , one Evan Chermisin a tartar seven tie ruble . all these have their return : m. Glover allow himself God know how , i then be in Persia in your worship affair . and whereas he say , the emperor have but for his part a dobble , as far as i can see , know what the ware cost in those part , he have treble . if they give he so much ware , all charge turn to your worship , as well of the emperor as of their own return . i have sow the seed , and other man have gather the harvest : i have travail both by land and by water full many a time with a sorrowful heart , aswell for the safeguard of their good as you , how to frame all thing to the best , and they have reap the fruit of my travail . but ever my prayer be to God , to deliver i out of those misery which i suffer for your service among those heathen people . therefore know my duty which i have do , as a true servant ought to do , i beseech your worship ( although i have but small recompense for my service , ) yet let i have no wrong , and God will prosper you the better . also , to inform your worship of your persian voyage what i judge : it be a voyage to be follow . the king of Gillan , whereas yet you have have no traffic , live all by merchandise : and it be near Casbin , and not past six week travail from ormus , whither all the spice be bring : and here , ( i mean at Gillan ) a trade may be establish : but your worship must send such man as be no riotous liver , nor drunkard . for if such man go , it will be to your dishonour and great hindrance , as appear by experience the year 1565. when as Richard Johnson go to Persia , who journey have be better stay than set forward . for whereas before we have the name among those heathen people to be such merchant as they think none like in all respect , his vicious live there have make we to be count worse than the russes . again , if such man travail in your affair in such a voyage , you shall never know what gain be to be get . for how can such man employ themselves to seek the trade , that be incline to such vice ? or how 43 A.D. 1565. [ i - 354-1 Gillan in per sia . can God prosper they in your affair ? but when a trade be establish by wise and discreet man , then will it be for your worship to traffic there , and not before : for a voyage or market make evil at the first , be the occasion that your worship shall never understand what gain be to be get thereby hereafter . 