Notes concern this four voyage into Persia , [ i . 392. ] begin in the month of July 1568. gather by m. Richard will from the mouth of master Arthur Edward , which be agent in the same . hen he come first to the sophy presence , at his court in Casbin , bring his interpreter with he , and stand far off , the sophy ( sit in a seat royal with a great number of his noble man about he ) bid he come near , and that thrice , until he come so near he that he may have touch he with his hand . then the first demand that he ask he be , from what country he come : he answer , that he come from England . then ask he of his noble man , who know any such country ? but when Edwards see that none of they have any intelligence of that name , he name it inghil-terra , as the italian call England . than one of the noble man say Londro , mean thereby London , Londro . which name be better know in far country out of Lon ( lon - Christendom , then be the name of England . when Edwards hear he name Londro , he say that that be the name of the chief city of England , as be Teveris of the chief city of Persia . he ask he many thing more , as of the realm of England , marvel that it shall be a island of so great riches and power , as Edward declare unto he : of the riches and abundance of our merchandise he further understand by our traffic in Moscovia and other country . he demand also many thing of the queen majesty , and of the custom and law of the realm : say oftentimes in his own language , Bara colla , ( that be to say ) well say . he ask also many thing of king Philip , and of his war against the Turk at Malta . than he demand of he what be the chief cause of his resort into his realm . And be certify that it be for the trade of merchandise , he ask what kind of merchandise he can bring thither . such ( say he ) as the venetian merchant do , which dwell in our country in the city of Londro send to Venice , and from thence into turquoise by Halepo and Tripoli in Syria , from whence , as by the second and three hand , with great charge of many custom and other thing thereunto pertain , they be at the length bring into your country and city of Persia . what merchandise be those ? say the sophy . Edwards answer , that they be great abundance of fine karsy , of broad clothes of all sort and colour , as scarlet , violet , and other of the fine cloth of all the world . the venetian also that the venetian bring out of England not traffic in only such clothes ready make , but furthermore great n^an * plenty of fine wool to mingle with their wool , of which they can not otherwise make fine cloth : affirm that there go out of England year that way , above two hundred thousand karsy , and as many broad clothes , beside fine wool and other merchandise , beside also the great abundance of like clothes , the which be carry into Spain , Barbary , and diverse other country . the sophy then ask he by what mean such merchandise may be bring into Persia . right well sir ( say he ) by the way of Moscovia , with more safety and in much short time ' then the venetian can bring they : first from England to Venice , and from thence into Persia by the way of turquoise . and therefore if it shall please your majesty to grant we free passage into all your dominion , with such privilege as may appertain to the safeguard of our life , good and merchandise , we will furnish your country with all such merchandise and other commodity , in short time , and better cheap than you may have the same at the turk hand . this talk and much more be between the sophy and Edward for the space of two hour : all which thing like he so well , that short after he grant to the say Arthur Edward other privilege for the trade of merchandise into Persia , 144 all write in azure and gold letter , and deliver unto the lord keeper of the sophy his great seal . the lord keeper be name coach Califay , who say that when the shaugh ( that be the king or prince ) do sit to seal any letter , that last privilege shall be seal and deliver to Laurence chapman . in this privilege be one principali article for servant or merchant : that if the agent do perceive that upon their naughty do , they will become busorman , that than the agent wheresoever he shall find any such servant or servant , to take they and put they in prison , and no person to keep they or maintain they . this article be grant in respect of a custom among the persian , be Mahumetans , who manner be friendly to receive and well entertain , both with gift and live , all such Christians , as forsake their religion , will become of the religion of the persian . insomuch that before this privilege be grant , there be great occasion of naughty servant to deceive and rob their master , that under the colour of profess that religion , they may live among they in such safety , that you may have no law against they , either to punish they or to recover your good at their hand , or elsewhere . for before the sophy ( who they say to be a marvelous wise and gracious prince ) seem to favour our nation , and to grant they such privilege , the people abuse they very much , and so hate they , that they will not touch they , but revile they , call they cafar and gawar , which be , infidel or misbeliever . [ I. 393. ] but after they see how great the prince favour they , they have they afterward in great reverence , and will kiss their hand and use they very friendly . for before they take it for no wrong to rob they , defraud they , bear false witness against they , and such merchandize as they have buy or sell , make they take it again , and change it as often as they list . and if any stranger by chance have kill one of they , they will have the life of two for one slay , and for the debt of any stranger will take the good of any other of they in t4s king same nation , with many other such like abuse , in manner unknown to the prince , before the complaint of our man make unto he for reformation of such abuse : which be the cause that no merchant stranger of contrary religion dare come into his dominion with their commodity , which may be great to the profit of he and his subject . the article of the second privilege deliver to Laurence chapman , which be to be annex unto the former privilege . 10 item , that the merchant have free liberty , as in their first privilege , to go unto Gilan , and all other place of his dominion , now or hereafter when occasion shall be give . 11 item , if by misfortune any of their ship shall break , or fall upon any part of his dominion on the sea coast , his subject to help with all speed to save the good and to be deliver to any of the say merchant that live : or otherwise to be keep in safety until any of they come to demand they . 12 item , if any of the say merchant depart this life in any city or town , or on the high way , his governor there to see their good safe keep , and to be deliver to any other of they that shall demand they . 13 item , the say merchant to take such camel-man as they themselves will , be country people , and that no Kissell Bash do let or hinder they . and the say owner of the camel to be bind to answer they such good as they shall receive at their hand , and the camel-man to stand to the loss of their camel or horse . 14 item more , that the say carrier do demand no more of they , than their agreement be to pay they . 15 item more , if they be at a price with any carrier , and have give earnest , the camel-man to see they keep their promise . 16 item , if any of the say merchant be in fear to travel , to give they one or more to go with they and see 146 they in safety with their good , to the place they will go unto . 17 item , in all place , to say , in all city , town or village on the high way , his subject to give they honest room , and victual for their money . 18 item , the say merchant may in any place , where they shall think best , build or buy any house or house to their own use . and no person to molest or trouble they , and to stand in any Caravan where they will , or shall think good . the commodity which the merchant may have by this trade into Persia be think to be great , and may in time perhaps be great than the Portugal trade into you east Indies , forasmuch as by the way of Persia into England , the return may be make every year once : whereas the Portugal make the return from Calecut but once in two year , by a long and dangerous voyage all by sea : for where as the city and island of ormus , lie in the gulf of Persia , be the most famous mart town of all east India , whither all you merchandise of India be bring , the same may in short time and more safe be bring by land and river through Persia , even unto the caspian sea , and from thence by the country of Russia or Moscovia by river , even unto the city of yeraslave , and from thence by land 180. mile to Vologda , and from thence again all by water even unto England . the merchandise which be have out of Persia for the return of ware be silk of all sort of colour , both raw and wrought . also all manner of spice and drug , pearl and precious stone , likewise carpet of diverse sort , with diverse other rich merchandise . it be tell i of they that come last from Persia , that there be more silk bring into some one city of Persia , then be of cloth bring into the city of London . also that one village of Armenia name Gilgat do carry yearly five hundred , and sometime a thousand mule lade with 147 silk to Halepo in Soria of turquoise , be 4. day journey from Tripoli , where the venetian have their continual ! abide , and send from thence silk which they return for english karsy and other clothes into all part of Christendom . [ i - 394-1 the manner how the Christians become busorman , and forsake their religion . i have note here before that if any Christian will become a busorman , that be , one that have forsake his faith , and be a mahometan of their religion , they give he many gift , and sometime also a live . the manner be , that when the devil be enter into his heart to forsake his faith , he resort to the sultan or governor of the town , to who he make protestation of his devilish purpose . the governor appoint he a horse , and one to ride before he on another horse , bear a sword in his hand , and the busorman bear a arrow in his hand , and ride in the city , curse his father and mother : and if ever after he return to his own religion , he be guilty of death , as be signify by the sword bear before he . a young man , a servant of one of our merchant , because he will not abide the correction of his master for his fault , be mind to forsake his faith . but ( as God will ) he fall sudden sick and die , before he give himself to the devil . if he have become a busorman , he have great trouble the merchant : for if he will then have say that half their good have be his , they will have give credit unto he . for the avoid of which inconvenience , it be grant in the privilege , that no busorman , etc as there appear . in Persia in diverse place ox and cow bear the tent and household stuff of the poor man of the country , which have neither camel nor horse . 148 of the tree which bear bombasin cotton , or Gossampine . in Persia be great abundance of bombasin cotton , and very fine : this grow on a certain little tree or brier , not past the height of a man waste or little moor : the tree have a slender stalk like unto a brier , or to a carnation gillifloure , with very many branch , bear on every branch a fruit or rather a cod , grow in round form , contain in it the cotton : and when this bud or cod come to the bigness of a walnut , it open and show forth the cotton , which grow still in bigness until it be like a fleece of wool as big as a man fist , and begin to be loose , and then they gather it as it be the ripe fruit . the seed of these tree be as big as peason , and be black , and somewhat flat , and not round ; they sow they in plow ground , where they grow in the field in great abundance in many country in Persia , and diverse other region . the write of the persian . ARthur Edwards show i a letter of the sophy , write in their letter backward , subsign with the hand both of the sophy and his secretary . the sophy subscription be only one word ( his name i suppose be shaugh ) write in golden letter upon red paper . the whole letter be also write on the same piece of red paper , be long and narrow , about the length of a foot , and not past three inch broad . the private signet of the sophy be a round print mark about the bigness of a royal , only print upon the same paper without any wax or other seal , the letter seem so mishapen and disorder , that a man will think it be somewhat scribble in manner at adventure . yet they say that almost every letter with his prick or circunflexe signify a whole word . insomuch that in a piece of paper as big as a man hand their writing do contain as much as do we almost in a sheet of paper . 