Notes in writing , beside more privy by mouth , that be give by m. Richard Hakluyt of Eiton in the county of Hereford , esquire , anno 1580 : to m. Arthur Pet , and to m. Charles Jackman , send by the merchant of the Moscovie company for the discovery of the north-east straight , not altogether unfit for some other enterprise of discovery , hereafter to be take in hand . what respect of island be to be have , and why . whereas the Portugal have in their course to their Indies in the southeast , certain port and fortification to thrust into by the way , to diverse great purpose : so you be to see what island , and what port you have need to have by the way in your course to the north-east . for which cause i wish you to enter into consideration of the matter , and to note all the island , and to set they down in plat , to two end : that be to say , that we may devise to take the benefit by they , and also foresee how by they the Savages or civil prince may in any sort annoy we in our purpose trade that way . and for that the people to the which we purpose in this voyage to go , be no Christians , it be good that the mass of our commodity be always in our own disposition , and not at the will of other . therefore it be good that we do seek out some small island in the scythian sea , where we may plant , fortify , and staple safe , from whence ( as time shall serve ) we may feed those heathen nation with our commodity without cloy they , or without venture our whole mass in the bowel of their country . [ I. 438. ] and to which island ( if need be , and if we shall think so good ) we may allure the north-east navy , 264 1580. the navy of Cambalu to resort with their commodity to we there plant , and staple there . and if such a island may be find so stand as may shorten our course , and so stand , as that the navy of Cambalu , or other those party may convenient sail unto without their dislike in respect of distance , then will it fall out well . for so , beside less danger and more safety , our ship may there unlade and lade again , and return the self same summer to the port of England or of Norway . and if such a island may be for the stapling of our commodity , to the which they of Cambalu will not sail , yet we may , have ship there , employ they in pass between Cambalu and that stapling place . respect of haven and harborowe . a nd if no such island may be find in the scythian sea towards the firm of Asia , then be you to search out the port that be about nova Zembla , all along the tract of that land , to the end you may winter there the first year , if you be let by contrary wind , and to the end that if we may in short time come unto Cambalu , and unlade and set sail again for return without venture there at Cambalu , that you may on your way come as far in return as a port about Nova Zembla : that the summer follow , you may the soon be in England for the more speedy vent of your east commodity , and for the speedy discharge of your mariner : if you can go forward and back in one self same summer . And touch the tract of the land of Nova Zembla , towards the east out of the circle arcticke in the more temperate zone , you be to have regard : for if you find the soil plant with people , it be like that in time a ample vent of our warm woollen clothes may be find . and if there be no people at all there to be a good confound , than you shall special note what plenty of sideration . whale , and of other fish be to be find there , to the 265 end we may turn our new find land fish or island fish , or our whalefish that way , for the aid and comfort of our new trade to the north-east to the coast of Asia . respect of fish and certain other thing . a nd if the air may be find upon that tract temperate , and the soil yield wood , water , land and grass , and the sea fish , than we may plant on that main the offal of our people , as the Portugal do in Brasill , and so they may in our fish in our passage , and diverse way yield commodity to England by harbour and victual we . and it may be , that the inland there may yield mast , pitch , tar , hemp , and all thing for the navy , as plentiful as Eastland do . the island to be note with their commodity and want . to note the island , whether they be high land or low land , mountain or flat , gravel , clay , chalky , or of what soil , woody or not woody , with spring and river or not , and what wild beast they have in the same . and whether there seem to be in the same apt matter to build withal , as stone free or rough , and stone to make lime withal , and wood or coal to burn the same withal . to note the goodness or the badness of the haven and harborowe in the island . if a strait be find , what be to be do , and what great importance it may be of . a nd if there be a straight in the passage into the scythian sea , the same be special and with great regard to be note , especial if the same straight be narrow and to be keep . i say it be to be note as a thing that do much import : for what prince soever shall be lord of the same , and shall possess the same , as 266 the king of Denmark do possess the strait of Denmark , he only shall have the trade out of these region into the north-east part of the world for himself , and for his private profit , or for his subject only , or to enjoy wonderful benefit of the toll of the same , like as the king of Denmark do enjoy of his straight , by suffer the merchant of other prince to pass that way . if any such straight be find , the elevation , the high or low land , the haven near , the length of the straight , and all other such circumstance be to be set down for many purpose : and all the mariner in the voyage be to be swear to keep close all such thing , that other prince prevent we not of the same , after our return upon the disclose of the mariner , if any such thing shall hap . which way the savage may be make able to [ i . 439-1 purchase our cloth and other their want . if you find any island or main land populous , and that the same people have need of cloth , then be you to devise what commodity they have to purchase the same withal . if they be poor , then be you to consider of the soil , and how by any possibility the same may be make to enrich they , that hereafter they may have something to purchase the cloth withal . if you enter into any main by portable river , and shall find any great wood , you be to note what kind of timber they be of , that we may know whether they be for pitch , tar , mast , dealeboord , clapboord , or for building of ship or house , for so , if the people have no use of they , they may be bring perhaps to use . not to venture the loss of any one man . you must have great care to preserve your people , since your number be so small , and not to venture any one man in any wise . 267 to bring home beside merchandise certain trifle . bring home with you ( if you may ) from Cambalu or other civil place , one or other young man , although you leave one for he . also the fruit of the country if they will not of themselves dure , dry they and so preserve they . and bring with you the kernel of pear and apple , and the stone of such stonefruit as you shall find there . also the seed of all strange herb and flower , for such seed of fruit and herb come from another part of the world , and so far off , will delight the fancy of many for the strangeness , and for that the same may grow , and continue the delight long time . if you arrive at Cambalu or Quinsay , to bring thence the map of that country , for so shall you have the perfect description , which be to great purpose . to bring thence some old print book , to see whether they have have print there before it be devise in Europe as some write . to note their force by sea and by land . if you arrive in Cambalu or Quinsay , to take a speciali view of their navy , and to note the force , greatness , manner of building of they , the sail , the tackle , the anchor , the furniture of they , with ordinance , armour , and munition . also , to note the force of the wall and bulwark of their city , their ordnance , and whether they have any caliver , and what powder and shot . to note what armour they have . what sword . what pike , halberd and bill . what horse of force , and what light horse they have . and so throughout to note the force of the country both by sea and by land . 268 thing to be mark to make conjecture by . to take speciali note of their building , and of the ornament of their house within . take a speciali note of their apparel and furniture , and of the substance that the same be make of , of which a merchant may make a guess as well of their commodity , as also of their want . to note their shop and warehouse , and with what commodity they abound , the price also . to see their shambles , and to view all such thing as be bring into the market , for so you shall soon see the commodity , and the manner of the people of the inland , and so give a guess of many thing . to note their field of grain , and their tree of fruit , and how they abound or not abound in one and other , and what plenty or scarcity of fish they have . thing to be carry with you , whereof moor or [ i - +40 ] less be to be carry for a show of our commodity to be make . karsy of all orient colour , special of stammel , broadcloth of orient colour also . frizadoe , motlies , Bristol frieze , spanish blanket , bay of all colour , special with stammel , worsted , carl , say , woadmol , flanel , rash , etc Felts of diverse colour . taffata hat . deep cap for mariner colour in stammel , whereof if ample vent may be find , it will turn to a infinite commodity of the common poor people by knit . quilt cap of Levant taffata of diverse colour , for the night . knit stock of silk of orient colour . knit stock of jerzie yarn of orient colour , whereof if ample vent may follow the poor multitude shall be set in work . 260 stock of kerchief of diverse colour for man and for woman . garter of silk of several kind , and of colour diverse . girdle of buff and all other leather , with gilt and ungilt buckle , special waste girdle , waste girdle of velvet . glove of all sort knit , and of leather . glove perfume . Points of all sort of silk , thread , and leather , of all manner of colour . shoe of spanish leather of diverse colour , of diverse length , cut and uncut . shoe of other leather . velvet shoe and pantofle . Theise shoe and pantofle to be send this time , rather for a show then for any other cause . purse knit , and of leather . nightcap knit , and other . a garnish of pewter for a show of a vent of that english commodity , bottle , flagon , spoon , etc of that mettle . glass of English make . Venice glass . look glass for woman , great and fair . small dial a few for proof , although there they will not hold the order they do here . spectacle of the common sort . other of crystal trim with silver , and otherwise . hour glass . ) i comb of box . comb of ivory . i [ comb of horn . linen of diverse sort . handkerchief with silk of several colour wrought . Glazen eye to ride with against dust . knife in sheath both single and double , of good edge . Needles great and small of every kind . button great and small , with mould of leather 270 1580. and not of wood , and such as be durable of double silk , and that of sundry colour . box with weight for gold , and of every kind of the coin of gold , good and bad , to show that the people here use weight and measure , which be a certain show of wisdom , and of certain government settle here . all the several silver coin of our english money , to be carry with you to be show to the governor at Cambalu , which be a thing that shall in silence speak to wise man more than you imagine . lock and key , hinge , bolt , hasp , etc great and small of excellent workmanship , whereof if vent may be , hereafter we shall set our subject in work , which you must have in great regard . for in find ample vent of any thing that be to be wrought in this realm , be more worth to our people beside the gain of the merchant , than Christchurch , Bridewell , the Savoy , and all the hospital of England . for banquete on shipboard person of credit . first , the sweet perfume to set under hatch to make you place sweet against their come aboard , if you arrive at Cambalu , Quinsey , or in any such great city , and not among savage . Marmelade . i i fig barrel . [ I. 441. i sucket . i ( raisin of the sun . comfets of diverse kind make of purpose by he that be most excellent , that shall not dissolve . prune damask . ) ( walnut . dry pear . j ( almond . smalnut . olive to make they taste their wine . the apple John that dure two year to make show of our fruit . hullock . } { sack . vial of good sweet water , and cast bottle of glass to besprinkle the guest withal , after their come aboard . 271 sugar to use with their wine if they will . the sweet oil of Zante , and excellent french vinegar , and a fine kind of biscuit stiep in the same do make a banquete dish , and a little sugar cast in it cool and comfort , and refresh the spirit of man . cinnamon water be to be have with you to make a i show of by taste , and also to comfort Imperiali water i your sick in the voyage . with these and such like , you may banquet where you arrive the great and best person . or with the gift of these Marmelades in small box , or small vial of sweet water you may gratify by way of gift , or you may make a merchandise of they . the map of England and of London . take with you the map of England set out in fair colour , one of the big sort i mean , to make show of your country from whence you come . and also the large map of London to make show of your city . and let the river be draw full of ship of all sort , to make the more show of your great trade and traffic in trade of merchandise . Ortelius book of map . if you take Ortelius book of map with you to mark all these region , it be not amiss : and if need be , to present the same to the great can , for it will be to a prince of marvellous account . the book of the attire of all nation . such a book carry with you and bestow in gift will be much esteem , as i persuade my self . book . if any man will lend you the new herbal and such book as make show of herb , plant , tree , fish , fowl and beast of these region , it may much delight 272 timdum dedit Ortons inortald^rGan Orbi / ^vbtanfumcjaic’iis oitdium . e^ Abraham ORTELIUS the great can , and the nobility , and also their merchant to have the view of they : for all thing in these part so much differ from the thing of those region , since they may not be here to see they , by mean of the distance , yet to see those thing in a shadow , by this mean will delight they . the book of rate . take with you the book of rate , to the end you may prick all those commodity there specify , that you shall chance to find in Cambalu , in quinsey , or in any part of the east , where you shall chance to be . parchment . Rowles of parchment , for that we may vent much without hurt to the realm , and it lie in small room . glue . to carry glue , for that we have plenty and want vent . Red ochre for painter . to seek vent because we have great mine of it , and have no vent . soap of both kind . to try what vent it may have , for that we make of both kind , and may perhaps make more . saffron . [ I. 442. ] to try what vent you may have of saffron , because this realm yield the best of the world , and for the e and other labour may set the poor great in work to their relief . aquavitae . by new devise wonderful quantity may be make here , and therefore to seek the vent . black cony skin . to try the vent at Cambalu , for that it lie towards the north , and for that we abound with the commodity , and may spare it . thread of all colour . the vent thereof may set our people in work . in 273 s to see the vent for it may set our people in work . a note and caveat for the merchant . that before you offer your commodity to sale , you endeavour to learn what commodity the country there have . for if you bring thither velvet , taffata , spice , or any such commodity that you your self desire to lade your self home with , you must not sell your deer , lest hereafter you purchase they not so cheap as you will . Seeds for sale . Carie with you for that purpose all sort of garden seed , as well of sweet straw herb and of flower , as also of pot herb and all sort for root , etc lead of the first melt . lead of the second melt of the slag . to make trial of the vent of lead of all kind . English iron , and wire of iron and copper . to try the sale of the same . Brimston . to try the vent of the same , because we abound with it make in the realm . antimony a Minerali . to see whether they have any ample use there for it , for that we may lade whole navy of it and have no use of it unless it be for some small portion in sound of bell , or a little that the alchemist use : of this you may have two sort at the apothecary . Tinder box with steel , flint and match and Tinder , the match to be make of juniper to avoid the offence of brimstone . to try and make the better sale of brimstone by show the use . candle of wax to light . a paint bellows . for that perhaps they have not the use of they . 274 to try the sale , for that it be a natural commodity of this realm . all manner of edge tool . to be sell there or to the less civil people by the way where you shall touch . what i will have you there to remember . to note special what excellent die they use in these region , and therefore to note their garment and ornament of house : and to see their die house and the material and simple that they use about the same , and to bring muster and show of the colour and of the material , for that it may serve this clothing realm to great purpose . to take with you for your own use . all manner of engine to take fish and foul . to take with you those thing that be in perfection of goodness . for as the goodness now at the first may make your commodity in credit in time to come : so false and sophisticate commodity shall draw you and all your commodity into contempt and ill opinion . 