Instructions and note very necessary and needful to be observe in the purpose voyage for discovery of Cathay eastwards , by Arthur Pet , and Charles Jackman : give by m. William Burrough . 1580. when you come to orfordnesse , if the wind do serve you to go a seaboard the sand , do you set off from thence , and note the time diligent of your be against the say ness , turn then your glass , whereby you intend to keep your continual watch , and appoint such course as you shall think good , accord as the wind serve you : and from that time forward continual ( if your ship be lose , under sail , a hull or try ) do you at the end of every 4. glass at the least ( except calm ) sound with your dipsin lead , and note diligent what depth you find , and also the ground . but if it happen by swiftness of the ship way , or otherwise , that you can get ground , yet note what depth you do prove , and can find no ground ( this note be to be observe all your voyage , as well outward as homeward . ) but when you come upon any coast , or do find any shall bank in the sea , you be then to use your lead often , as you shall think it requisite , note diligent the order of your depth , and the deep and shold . and so likewise do you note the depth into harborough , river , etc and in keep your dead reckon , it be very necessary that you do note at the end of every four glass , what way the ship have make ( by your best proof to be use ) and how her way have be through the water , consider withal for the sag of the sea , to leeward , accord as you shall find it grow : and also to note the depth , and what thing worth the note happen in that time , with also the wind upon what point you find it then , and of what force or strength it be , and what sail you bear . 259 [ i . 436. ] how to note down in his Jornall of the voyage , his dead reckon , and other observation . but if you shall omit to note those thing at the end of every four glass , i will not have you to let it slip any long time , then to note it diligent at the end of every watch , or eight glass at the far . do you diligent observe the latitude as often , and in as many place as you may possible , and also the variation of the compass ( especial when you may be at shore upon any land ) note the same observation true , and the place and place where , and the time and time when you do the same . when you come to have sight of any coast or land whatsoever , do you present set the same with your sail compass , how it bear off you , note your judgement how far you think it from you , draw also the form of it in your book , how it appear unto you , note diligent how the high or notable part thereof bear off you , and the extreme also in for note the sight of the same land at both end , distinguish they the^and^t etter > and ■ . c c - afterwards when you have / first discovery , sail 1. 2. 3. or 4. glass ( at the most ) note diligent yr . what way your bark have make , and upon what point of the compass , do you again set that first land see , or the part thereof , that you first observe , if you can well perceive or discern they , and likewise such other notable point or sign , upon the land that you may then see , and can not perceive at the first time , distinguish it also by letter from the other , and draw in your book the shape of the same land , as it appear unto you , and so the three time , etc and also in pass alongst by any and every coast , do you draw the manner of bite in of every bay , and entrance of every harbour or river mouth , with the lie out of every point , or headland , ( unto the which you may give apt name at your pleasure ) and make some mark in draw the form and border of the same , where the high cliff be , and where low land be , whether sand , hill , or wood , or whatsoever , not omit to note any thing that may be sensible 260 and apparent to you , which may serve to any good purpose . if you careful with great heed and diligence , note the observation in your book , as aforesaid , and afterward make demonstration thereof in your plat , you shall thereby perceive how far the land you first see , or the part thereof observe , be then from you , and consequent of all the rest : and also how far the one part be from the other , and upon what course or point of the compass the one lie from the other . and when you come upon any coast where you find flood and ebb , do you diligent note the time of the high and low water in every place , and the slake or still water of full sea , and low water , and also which way the flood do run , how the tide do set , how much water it hi , and what force the tide have to drive a ship in one hour , or in the whole tide , as near as you can judge it , and what difference in time you find between the run of the flood , and the ebb . and if you find upon any coast the currant to run always one way , do you also note the same due , how it set in every place , and observe what force it have to drive a ship in one hour , etc item , as often and when as you may convenient come upon any land , to make observation for the latitude and variation , etc do you also ( if you may ) with your instrument , for try of distance , observe the platform of the place , and of as many thing ( worth the note ) as you may then convenient see from time to time . Theise order if you diligent observe , you may thereby perfect set down in the plait , that i have give you your whole travel , and description of your discovery , which be a thing that will be chief expect at your hand . but withal you may not forget to note as much as you can learn , understand or perceive of the manner of the soil , or fruitfulness of every place and country you shall come in , and of the manner , shape , attire and disposition of the people , and of the commodity they have , and what they most 261 A.D. 1580. for observe of tide and currant . to take the platform of ■ place within compass of view upon land . covet and desire of the commodity you carry with you . it behoove you to give trifle thing unto such people as you shall happen to see , and to offer they all courtesy and friendship you may or can , to win their love and favour towards you , not do or offer they any wrong or hurt . and though you shall be offer wrong at their hand , yet not to revenge the same light , but by all mean possible seek to win they , yet always deal wise and with such circumspection that you keep your self out of their danger . thus i beseech God almighty to bless you , and prosper your voyage with good and happy success , and send you safe to return home again , to the great joy and rejoice of the adventurer with you , and all your friend , and our whole country , amen . 