a speciali note gather by the excellent venetian cosmographer m. John Baptista Ramusius out of the arabian geographic of Abilfada Ishmael , concern the trending of the ocean sea from China northward , along the coast of Tartaric and other unknown land , and then run westwards upon the northern coast of Russia , and so far to the northwest . descrivendo poi il predetto abilfada Ishmael i luoghi della terra habitabile , che circuendo il mar Oceano tocca , dice cosi . rivoltasi 1’Oceano da levante verso la region dell cine , and v& alia volta di Tramontana , et passata final-mente la detta region , see ne giunge a Gogi and Magogi , cio and alii confini de gli ultimi tartari , and di quivi ad 412 akune terre che sono incognite : et correndo sempre per ponente , passa sopra li confini settentrionali della Rossia , et va alia volta di maestro . the same in english . the aforesaid abilfada Ishmael describe afterward the habitable place of the earth , which the ocean sea in his circuit touch , say in this manner follow . the ocean sea turn from the east towards the country of the chinaes , and stretch towards the north , and at length have pass the say country , it reach unto the Gogi and Magogi , that be , to the confine of the uttermost Tartar , and from thence , unto certain unknown country : and run still westward it pass upon the northern coast of Russia , and from thence it run towards the northwest , ( which it do indeed upon the coast of Lappia . ) by this most notable testimony it appear , that the ocean sea compass and environ all the east , Northeast , and north part of Asia and Europe . the emperor private or household officer . the chief officer of the emperor household be these which follow . the first be the office of the Boiaren Conesheva , or master of the horse . which contain no more than be express by the name , that be , to be overseer of the horse , and not Magister equitum , or master of the horseman . for he appoint other for that service , as occasion do require , as before be say . he that bear that office at this time , be Boris pheodorowich Godonoe , brother to the empress . of horse for service in his war ( beside other for his ordinary use ) he have to the number of ten thousand which be keep about Moscow . the next be the lord steward of his household at this time , one Gregory Vasilowich Godonoe . the three be his treasurer , that keep all his monei , jewel , plate , etc now call Stephan Vasilowich Godonoe . the 413 A.D. 1588. Alcune terre incognite . Confini settentrionali della Rossia . the country of China . the coast of the uttermost Tartar . certain unknown country . the northern coast of Russia . the northwest . master of the horse . the lord steward . the lord treasurer . controller . four his controller , now Andreas petrowich clesinine . chamberlame the five his chamberlain . he that attend that office at this time , be call Estoma Bisabroza Pastelnischay . taster . the sixth his taster , now theodor Alexandrowich , and harbinger . Ivan Vasilowich Godonoe . the seven his harbinger , which be three noble man , and diverse other gentleman that do the office under they . these be his ordinary officer , and office of the chief account . Gentlemen of of gentleman , beside they that wait about his the chamber . chamber , and person ( call Shilsey Strapsey ) there be the Gard. two hundred , all nobleman son . his ordinary guard be two thousand hagbutter ready with their piece charge , and their match light , with other [ i . 496. ] necessary furniture continual day and night : which come not within the house , but wait without in the court or yard , where the emperor be abide . in the night time there lodge next to his bedchamber the chief chamberlain , with one or two more of best trust about he . a second chamber off , there lodge six other of like account for their trust and faithfulness . in the third chamber lie certain young gentleman , of these two hundred , call Shilsey Strapsey , that take their gnome . turn by forty every night . there be groom beside that watch in their course , and lie at every gate and door of the court , call Estopnick . the hagbutter or gunner , whereof there be two thousand ( as be say before ) watch about the emperors lodging , or bedchamber by course 250. every night , and 250. more in the court yard , and about the treasure house . his court or house at the Moscow be make case wise , wall about , with great store of fair ordinance plant upon the wall , and contain a great breadth of ground within it , with many dwell house : which be appoint for such as be know to be sure , and trusty to the emperor . 414 of the private behaviour , or quality of the ruff people . the private behaviour and quality of the ruff people , may partly be understand by that which have be say concern the public state and usage of the country . as touch the natural habit of constitution of their body , they be for the most part of a large size , thetr bo^es-and of very fleshly body : account it a grace to be somewhat gross and burley , and therefore they nourish and spread their beard , to have they long and broad . but for the most part they be very unwieldy and unactive withal . which may be think to come partly of the climate , and the numbness which they get by the cold in winter , and partly of their diet that stand most of root , onion , garlic , cabbage , and such like thing that breed gross humour , which they use to eat alone , and with their other meat . their diet be rather much then curious . at their their diet . meal they begin common with a Charke or small cup of aqua vitae , ( which they call Russe wine ) and then drink not till towards the end of their meal , take it in large , and all together , with kiss one another at every pledge . and therefore after dinner there be no talk with they , but every man go to his bench to take his afternoon sleep , which be as ordinary with they as their night rest . when they exceed , and have variety of dish , the first be their bake meat ( for roast meat they use little ) and then their broth or pottage . their common drink be mead , the poor sort use water , and a three drink call quasse , which be nothing else ( as we say ) but water turn out of his wit , with a little bran meash with it . this diet will breed in they many disease , but that they use bathstove , or hot house in stead of all physic , common twice or thrice every week . all the winter time , and almost the whole summer , they 415 a admirable endure of extreme heat , and cold at one and the same time . the noble man attire . the english voyage heat their peach , which be make like the germane bathstove , and their Poclads like oven , that so warm the house that a stranger at the first shall hardly like of it . Theise two extremity , special in the winter of heat within their house , and of extreme cold without , together with their diet , make they of a dark , and sallow complexion , their skin be tan and parch both with cold and with heat : special the woman , that for the great part be off far worse complexion , than the man . whereof the cause i take to be their keep within the hot house , and busy themselves about the heat , and use of their bathstove , and peach . the ruff because that he be use to both these extremity of heat and of cold , can bear they both a great deal more patient , than stranger can do . you shall see they sometime ( to season their body ) come out of their bathstove all on a froth , and fume as hot almost as a pig at a spit , and present to leap into the river stark naked , or to power cold water all over their body , and that in the cold of all the winter time . the woman to mend the bad hue of their skin , use to paint their face with white and red colour , so visible , that every man may perceive it . which be make no matter , because it be common and like well by their husband : who make their wife and daughter a ordinary allowance to buy they colour to paint their face withal , and delight themselves much to see they of foul woman to become such fair image . This parch the skin , and help to deform they when their paint be of . they apparel themselves after the greek manner . the nobleman attire be on this fashion . First a taffia , or little night cap on his head , that cover little more than his crown , common very rich wrought of silk and gold thread , and set with pearl and precious stone . his head he keep shave close to the very skin , except he be in some displeasure with the 416 emperor . than he suffer his hair to grow and hang down upon his shoulder , cover his face as ugly and deform as he can . over the taffia he wear a wide cap of black fox ( which they account for the best fur ) with a Tiara or long bonnet put within it , stand up like a persian or babylonian hat . about his neck ( which be see all bare ) be a collar set with pearl and precious stone , about three or four finger broad . next over his shirt , ( which be curious wrought , because he strip himself into it in the summer time , while he be within the house ) be a shepon , or light garment of silk , make down to the knee , button before : and then a caftan or a close coat button , and gird to he with a persian girdle , whereat he hang his knife and spoon . This common be of cloth of gold , and hang down as low as his ankle . over that he wear a lose garment of some rich silk , fur and face about with some gold lace , call a Ferris . another over that of camlet , or like stuff call a Alkaben , sleeve and hang low , and the cape common brooch , and set all with pearl . when he go abroad , he cast over all these ( which be but sleight , though they seem to be many ) a other garment call a honoratkey , like to the alkaben , save that it be make without a collar for the neck . and this be common of fine cloth , or camel hair . his buskin ( which he wear in stead of hose , with linen folle under they in stead of boot hose ) be make of a persian leather call saphian , embroider with pearl . his upper stock common be of cloth of gold . when he go abroad , he mount on horseback , though it be but to the next door : which be the manner also of the Boiarskey , or gentleman . the Boiarskey or gentleman attire be of the same fashion , but differ in stuff : and yet he will have his caftan or undercoat sometime of cloth of gold , the rest of cloth , or silk . ill 417 2 d the gentleman apparel . the noble woman ( call china Boiarshena ) wear on her head , first a caull of some soft silk ( which be common read ) and over it a fruntlet call Obrosa , of white colour . over that her cap ( make after the coif fashion of cloth of gold ) call Shapka Zempska , edge with some rich fur , and set with pearl and stone . though they have of late begin to disdain embroider with pearl above their cap , because the diack , and some merchant wife have take up the fashion . in their ear they wear earring ( which they call Sargee ) of two inch or more compass , the matter of gold set with ruby , or saphire , or some like precious stone . in summer they go often with ker-chieffes of fine white lawn , or cambric , fasten under the chin , with two long tassel pendent . the kerchief spot and set thick with rich pearl . when they ride or go abroad in rainy weather , they wear white hat with colour band , call Stapa Zemskoy . about their neck they wear collar of three or four finger broad , set with rich pearl and precious stone . their upper garment be a loose gown call Oposhen common of scarlet , with wide loose sleeve , hang down to the ground butten before with great gold button , or at least silver and guilt nigh as big as a walnut . which have hanging over it fasten under the cap , a large broad cape of some rich fur , that hang down almost to the mid of their back . next under the Oposken or upper garment , they wear another call a leitnick that be make close before with great wide sleeve , the cuff or half sleeve up to the elbow , common of cloth of gold : and under that a Ferris Zemskoy , which hang loose button throughout to the very foot . on the hand wrest they wear very fair bracelet , about two finger broad of pearl and precious stone . they go all in buskin of white , yellow , blue , or some other colour leather , embroider with pearl . this be the attire of the noblewoman of Russia , when she make the best show of her self . 418 the gentlewoman apparel may differ in the stuff , but be all one for the make or fashion . as for the poor mousick and his wife they go poor clothe . the man with his honoratkey , or loose gown to the small of the leg , tie together with a lace before , of course white or blue cloth , with some shube or long waistcoat of fur , or of sheepskin under it , and his fur cap , and buskin . the poor sort of they have their honoratkey , or upper garment , make of kowe hair . this be their winter habit . in the summer time , common they wear nothing but their shirt on their back , and buskin on their leg . the woman go in a red or blow gown , when she make the best show , and with some warm shube of fur under it in the winter time . but in the summer , nothing but her two shirt ( for so they call they ) one over the other , whether they be within door , or without . on their head , they wear cap of some colour stuff , many of velvet , or of cloth of gold : but for the most part kerchief . without earing of silver or some other mettle , and her cross about her neck , you shall see no ruff woman , be she wife , or maid . A.D. 1590. the mousicks or common man attire . 