the lord Boris Pheodorowich his letter to the [ i . 498. ] right honourable William Burghley lord high treasurer of England , etc y the grace of God the great lord emperor , and great duke Theodore ivano-wich , great lord , king , and great duke of all Russia , of volodemer , Moscow , and Novogorod , king of Cazan , and astracan , lord of Vobsko , and great duke of Smolensco , tver , ughori , Permi , viatsko , Bolgorie , and other place , lord and great duke of Novogrod in the low country , of Chernigo , rezan , the emperor Polotsky , Rostove , yeroslave , Bealozera , and Liefland , stile increase . 419 of Oudorski , Obdorski , Condinski , and commander of all Sibierland , and the north coast , great lord over the country of Iverski , Grisinski , emperor of kabar-dinski , and of the country Charchaski , and the country of Gorsky , and lord of many other region . from Boris Pheodorowich his majesty brother in law , master of his horse , governor of the territory of Cazan and astracan , to William lord Burghley , lord high treasurer to the most virtuous lady Elizabeth , queen of England , France , and Ireland , and other dominion : i receive your lordship letter , wherein you write that you have receive very joyful my letter send unto you , and advise read they , and impart the same unto her majesty : and that your merchant find themselves aggrieve , that when they approach these part , and be arrive here , they be not permit to enter into a free and liberali course of barter , traffic , and exchange of their commodity , as heretofore they have do , but be compel before they can enter into any traffic to accept the emperor wax , and other good , at high rate far above their value , to their great loss : and that they be by reason of this restraint long hold upon these coast to the danger of winter by the way . hereafter there shall no cause of offence give to the merchant of the queen majesty queen Elizabeth : they shall not be force to any thing , neither be there or shall be any demand make of custom or debt . such thing as have be heretofore demand , all such thing have be already upon their petition and supplication command to be discharge . i have solicit his majesty for they , that they be not trouble hereafter for those matter , and that a favourable hand be carry over they . And accord to your request i will be a mean to the emperor for they in all their occasion , and will my self show they my favourable countenance . and i pray you ( William Burghley ) to signify to her majesty merchant that i promise to have a care of 420 letter from Boris PHEODOROWICH a.d. 159° . they , and for the queen majesty of England sake , i will take her merchant into my protection , and will defend they as the emperor select people under the emperor commission : and by my appointment all his majesty officer and authorize people shall be careful over they . the emperor gracious favour towards they be never such as it be now . and where you write that at the port the emperor officer sell their wax by commission at a set rate give they , far above the value , and that they enforce your merchant to accept it , they deny that they take any such course , but say they barter their wax for other ware , and also put their wax to sale for ready money to your merchant , accord to the worth thereof , and as the price go in the custom house here . it have be heretofore dear , and now be sell as good cheap as in any other place , and as they can best agree : they enforce no man to buy it , but rather keep it : therefore your merchant have no just cause to make any such report . i have express give order , that there shall be no such course use to enforce they , but to buy accord to their own will , and to tarry at the port or to depart at their pleasure . and as touch the custom already past , and debt demand at your merchant hand , whereof you write : our lord great emperor and great duke Theodore Ivanowich of all Russia of famous memory have show his majesty especial favour and love , for the great love of his well-beloved sister queen of England , and by my petition and mediation , whereas there be commandment give to take marsh whole debt of your merchant and factor , it be moderate to the half , and for the other half , commandment give it shall not be take , and the merchant bill to be deliver they . and to the end hereafter that her majesty merchant move no contention betwixt our lord the emperor and great duke of Russia , and his well-beloved sister queen Elizabeth , his majesty desire order to be give , that english merchant in great favour with the emperor . half the debt of Antony Marsh remit . 421 your merchant do deal just in their traffic , and plain without fraud or guile . and i will be a favourer of they above all other , under his majesty authority : Ann. dam themselves shall see it . write in our great lord the I59O > emperor city of Moscow in the month of July , 7°99 - [ l 499 - ] 1590. 