a most gracious letter give to the english merchant sir John hart and his company , by Theodore Ivanowich , the king , lord , and great duke of all Russia , the only upholder thereof . he only God omnipotent before all eternity , his will be do without end : the father , son , and holy ghost we glorify in Trinity . our only God the maker of all thing and worker of all in all every where with plentiful increase : for which cause he have give life to man to love he , and to trust in he : our only God which inspire every one of we his holy child with his word to discern good through our lord Jesus Christ , and the holy quicken spirit of life now in these perilous time establish we to keep the right sceptre , and suffer we to reign of our self to the good profit of the land , and to the subdue of the people together with the enemy , and to the maintenance of virtue . we the great lord , king , and great duke Theodore Ivanovich , of all Russia the only upholder , of volodime , Moscow , and Novogrod , king of Casan , and king of astracan , lord of Vobsco , and great duke of Smolensko , of otver , ughorie , Permia , Viatski , Bulgari , and other region , great duke also of Novogrod in the low country , of Chernigo , of rezan , Polotski , Rostove , yaruslave , Bealozero , and of Liefland , of Udorski , Obdorski , Condenski , and commander of all the country of Siberi and of the north part , and lord over the country of Iverski , Grusinski , and king over the country of Igorski , and ruler over many other kingdom and lordship more . our princely majesty at the request of our brother in law Boris Feodorowich Godenova our servant , and master of our horse , generail comptroller of our house , 439 and governor of the lordship and kingdom of Casan and astracan : unto the english merchant sir John hart knight , sir William Webbe knight , Richard salken-stow Aiderman , Nicholas Moseley aiderman , Robert dove , Wil. garrowe , John Harbey , Robert Chamberlaine , Henry Anderson , John Woodworth , Francis cherry , John Merrick , and Cristopher Holmes ; have gracious give leave to come and go with their ship into our kingdom and territory of Duina with all kind of commodity at their pleasure to traffic from the seaside to our royal city of Moscow , and in all other city , town , country and territory of our whole kingdom of Moscow : upon the humble petition and suit of the say english merchant sir John hart and his company , we have give they leave to pass and traffic into all part of our dominion and territory of Moscow , and to our inheritance of Novogrod and Plesco with their ware and commodity without pay any custom or duty . we the great lord , king , and great duke Theodore Ivanovich of all Russia , have firm give and grant unto the aforesaid english merchant sir John hart and his company , for the love we bear to our dear sister queen Elizabeth , we i say of our gracious goodness have give leave to travel and pass to our royal seat of Moscow , and to all the part of our kingdom with all kind of commodity , and to traffic with all kind of ware at their own pleasure , without pay any custom of their say ware . to you our customer we will and command not to take any manner of custom of the say merchant and their company , neither for enter , weigh nor pass by or through any place of our territory , nor for custom , of judgement by law , or for their person or person ; nor any duty over bridge , or for certificate or process , or for conduct over any stream or water , or for any other custom or duty that may be name ; we will and strait command you not to take any of they in any wise . 440 provide always , that the say merchant shall not colour any stranger ware , nor bring they into our country , nor favour they colourable , nor sei for any stranger . to you our subject also we command , not to meddle or deal with any ware of stranger colourable , nor to have they by you in keep , nor to offer to sei their commodity ; but themselves to sei their own commodity in change or otherwise as they may or can . and in all town , city , country , or any part of our dominion and territory it shall lawful for the foresay merchant and their company to sell or barter away their own commodity in change or otherwise , for or at their pleasure as they will . and whensoever the say merchant or any of they come into our territory of great novgorod or Plesco , or to any other part of our kingdom with their ware , by virtue of these our majesty letter we strait charge and command you our captain , general , and all other that be authorise or in office , to suffer the aforesaid merchant to pass and repass , and to take no kind of custom or duty of they , or any of their good , howsoever it may have name : nor in no place else where they shall come in all our kingdom . likewise if they sell not nor buy no ware , you shall take no custom , but suffer they quiet to pass where they will with their good . of our gracious goodness and mere goodwill we have give the say merchant leave to traffic throughout all our kingdom , and in all town and city with all manner of ware and commodity without pay any custom or duty . wheresoever they shall happen to sei or barter away any of their commodity to our subject , they be to barter or sell by whole sale , and not by retail , as by the yard or by the ounce in their house or elsewhere : but by the pack or whole clothes , velvet , damask , tafiaty by the piece , and not by the yard : and all other ware that be to be sell by weight , they be to be sell not by the ounce , but by great sale . your wine shall|be sell by hog head , pipe or buttes , but not by quart nor pint . 441 the say english merchant be to sei or barter away their own commodity themselves , and not to suffer any russes to buy or sell for they : nor to carry or transport any ware of stranger in stead of their own in no wise . and if the say english merchant shall be desirous to sell any of their commodity at Colmogro , or upon the river of Duina , or at Vologhda or at yeraslave ; when as the say merchant have sell in any of the say town , city or territory , than you our officer and authorise people by virtue of this our gracious letter we will and strait command not to take any custom of the aforesaid merchant , howsoever it may be name . also whensoever the say english merchant or any of their factor shall|be desirous to hire carrier to carry their ware to any place of our dominion or city , it shall|be at their choice and pleasure to hire they the best they can , and where they will , either water man to row , or vessel . also when any of the say merchant themselves , or any of they be desirous to travel into any part of our dominion , or into any other kingdom , or into their own kingdom , if any of our treasure be deliver to they , they to take it with they , and to sei it in bartar or otherwise for such ware as be most requisite and necessary to be bring into our kingdom and to be deliver into our treasury . you , our nobili tie , general and all other in authority suffer they to pass through all our city , town and country without take any custom of they . and when the say merchant have do their traffic in any place and come to the Moscow , they shall make it know at their arrival at the house of chancery and secretariship to Vasili Shalkan . and further when there come any english merchant with their ship or vessel by sea , that by mishap shall|be cast away upon any of our shore or cost , we will and command you to aid and help they , and to seek for their good so perish by any casualty , and to be 442 restore again to the say english merchant or their assign without any prolong or detain . as also if any of the aforesaid merchant good be find in any part of our coast or stream and they not present themselves , let the say good be take and lay up in safety in some place or other , and be deliver to the aforesaid merchant or their factor under penalty of our displeasure . Furthermore we king , lord , and great duke of all Russia , of our gracious goodness give unto the english merchant and their company , their house in the city of Moscow lie hard by the church of S. mark behind the market place : which they shall keep and remain therein after their old accustom use . provide always that they shall keep one ruff porter or one of their own people , and may keep any other ruff servant at their discretion . also their house in sundry place , as at jeraslave , Vologhda , Colmogro , and at saint Michael Archangel , all these house they shall keep and use at their own pleasure , accord to our former letter patent without pay any duty , rent , or custom . nor you the commonalty of the say town shall take any thing of they or they for any duty that shall belong to you , especial of the house aforesaid : but the say english merchant shall enjoy they peaceable for themselves and their family , but shall not suffer any other stranger russes or other to use the aforesaid house : also you shall suffer they to lay their ware and commodity in their warehouse , and to sell their commodity to who they please without let or hindrance , by virtue of this our gracious letter . their housekeeper be a ruff shall not undertake to meddle , or sell any of their ware without they themselves be present , nor to buy any thing for they . also it shall|be lawful for the say merchant when they shall arrive at their port , to lade and unlade their merchandise as in time past they have do at their pleasure . and when they lade their ship with Russe 443 commodity or unlade they , it shall|be lawful for they to hire any of our subject to help they for the present time , and for they to carry their good to and fro with their own vessel to saint Michael Archangel , or elsewhere . also we command you our authorise people at the sea side as well customer as other to take of the foresay merchant a note , or remembrance , what good they bring in and ship out : whereby it may be know what good come in and go out . but in no wise shall you open or unpack any of their ware or merchandise . in like manner when as they ship or send away any of their country commodity from saint Michael Archangel to any other place , or to our royal city of Moscow you shall not hinder nor let they any manner of wise for the ship of their merchandise in or out , by virtue of these our gracious letter of privilege give they . and whensoever any of the say english merchant have any occasion to send over land out of our dominion into their own country any of their servant or factor , by virtue of this our gracious letter we command you to give they their passport out of the office of our secretariship . and whensoever any of our subject have any thing to do with any of the foresay merchant by way of contention : or that they be damnify or hinder by any of our subject : than we appoint and ordain our Chanceller and Secretary Vasili Shalcan to hear their cause , and final to determine on both side accord to equity and justice : and that he shall search the truth between both party . and when the truth can be prove or find out , then to cast lot by order of the foresay judge , and he to who the lot shall fall to take his oath . Furthermore whensoever any of the english merchant or their factor shall come into any part of our dominion or city , and shall|be wrong any kind of way in trade , or otherwise by any abuse , or have 444 any occasion of contention with any by way of trade in merchandise or otherways : we straight charge and command you our governor , and authorise subject within all our realm and territory of the same , to minister justice unto the aforesaid merchant , or to their deputy , and to search the truth of the contention : and for want of sufficient proof cast lot who shall take his oath for the more ready trial of the cause : and in no wise to take any fee or duty of the aforesaid english merchant for the say judgement in law . we will and command all this to be observe and keep in all part of our dominion by all our subject and authorise people , by virtue of these our royal letter patent : and the say letter not to be diminish in any part or parsell thereof , by any person howsoever they be name . and whosoever shall withstand and not regard these our gracious letter shall|be in our high displeasure , and shall incur the loss of his life . this our gracious letter be give in our kingdom and royal city of Moscow , in the year from the begin of the world 7104. in the month of May . subscribe by the emperor chancellor and secretary Vasili Shalcan . 