a testimony of the northeastern discovery make by the english , and of the profit that may arise by pursue the same : take out of the second volume of navigation and voyage , folio 17. of the notable cosmographer , m. John Baptista Ramusius , secretary to the state of Venice : write in italian in the year , 1557. Alla part poi di sotto la nostra Tramontana , i chiascuno scrittore and cosmo-grapho the question and de passati tempi fin ’ hora vi ha messo and meet mare congelato , and che la terra corra continua-mente fino a 90. gradi verso il Polo : sopra questo mappa-mondo all ’ incontro si vede che la terra va solamente un poco sopra la Noruega and Suetia , and voltando corre poi Greco and levante nel paese della Moscovia and Rossia , and va diritto all Cataio . et che cio siam la verita , le navigationi i hanno fat gl ’ Inglesi con le loro navi , volendo andare a scoprire il Cataio all tempo del re Odoardo sesto d’inghilterra , question anni passati , ne possono far vera testimonianza : perch nel mezzo del loro viaggio , capitate per fortuna a i liti di Moscovia , dove trovarona all ’ hora regnare Giovanni Vasilivich Imperatore della Rossia and grand Duca di Moscovia , ill quale con molto piacere and maraviglia vedutogli , fence grandissime carezze , hanno trovato quel mare essere navigabile , and non agghiacciato . la qual navigation ( anchor i con 1’esito fin hora non sia stata bene intesa ) se col spesso fre-quentarla and col lungo uso and cognition de que ’ mari [ i . 513 - ] si continuera , e per fare grandissima mutation and rivol-gimento nelle cose di questa nostra parte del mondo . 458 moreover ( have before speak of diverse particularity , in a excellent map of Paulus Venetus ) on that part subject to our north pole , where every writer and cosmographer of these and of former time hitherto , have , and do place the freeze sea , and that the land stretch continual to 90. degree , towards the pole : contrariwise , in this map be to be see , that the land extend only a little above Norway and Swethland , and then turn it self trend afterward towards the southeast and by east , unto the country of Moscovie and Russia , and stretch direct unto Cathay . and that this be true , the navigation which the english man have of late make , intend to discover Cathay , in the time of Edward the sixth , king of England , be very sufficient witness . for in the mid of their voyage , light by chance upon the coast of Moscovie ( where they find then reign John Vasiliwich emperor of Russia , and great duke of Moscovia , who after he have , to his great delight and admiration , see the english man , entertain they with exceed great courtesy ) find this sea to be navigable , and not freeze . which navigation to Cathay , although it be not as the great yet thorough know , yet if with often frequent rthelterne the same , and by long use and knowledge of those discovery . sea it be continue , it be like to make a wonderful change and revolution in the state of this our part of the world . [ the testimony 459 the testimony of Gerardus Mercator in his last large map of Europe , touch the notable discovery of the english , make of Moscovie by the north-east . agnam occasionem certamque rationem emendandae Europae nobis attulit celeberrima anglorum per Cronium mare navigatio : quae littora septentrionalia finlappiae moscoviaeque juxta coeli situm , mundique plagas digesta habet . Exacta etiam urbis moscuae latitudo ab Anglis observata , interiorum regionum emendatiu describendarum infallibilem legem praescripsit : quibus oblatis adminiculis pulcherrimis , iniquum putavi tabulam hanc castigatiorem non reddere . the same in english . the most famous navigation of the english man by the north-east sea have offer unto i a great occasion , and certain direction for the reformation of the map of Europe : which discovery have the northern part of Finmarke , Lapland , and Moscovie , lay out accord to the just elevation and the quarter of the world . and further , the true observation of the latitude of the city of Moscow , make by the foresay Englishman , have yield i a infallible rule , for the correct of the situation of the inland country : which notable help be minister unto i , i think it my duty to exhibit to the world this map , more exact and perfect then hitherto it have be publish . 460 another testimony of Joannes Metellus Sequanus concern the same navigation and discovery in his preface prefix before Osorius de rebus gestis emanuelis regis Portugalli^ , write about the year , 1574. t ne omnis , unis Hispanis , oceani maris gloria totaque concederetur , Britanni septentriones nova in moscoviam navigation , ab hinc annis viginti plus miniis illustrarunt . nam bellis sueticis a mos-covitarum , narvaeque livoniae exclusi commercio , iter ad illos Oceano , hinc Noruegiae , Finmarchiae , Lappiae , Scricfinniae , biarmiaeque ; illinc Groenlandiae littora praetervecti , ultra Septuagesimum latitudinis Aquilonaris gradum sibi patefaciunt . quam navigationem Belgae postea , non sine tamen cum iisdem Britannis velitatione , sunt secuti . eo vehunt argenti veteris fragmenta , lineasque vestes prope detritas , omnisque generis minutiores merce ad usum , cultumque corporis hominum utriusque sexus , veluti lintea [ i . 514. i and byssea cingula , periscelide , crumena , cultros , and id genus sexcenta . a Moschis autem pelles omnis generis pretiosas adferunt , and salmon salito , fumdque duratos . the same in english . but least all and the whole glory of discover the ocean sea shall be ascribe to the Spaniard , the Englishman about twenty year past , by a new navigation into Moscovie , discover the north-east part . for they by reason of the war of Swethland be hinder from the traffic of the moscovite and of the narve in Liefland , open a passage for themselves by the ocean sea , beyond the northern latitude of 70. degree : have in their course on the one side the coast of Norway , Finmark , Lapland , Scrickfin and Biarmia : on the other side the coast of Gronland . 461 A.D. j574 - the english voyage which voyage the Hollander afterward enter into , but not without some conflict with the english . they carry thither old plate and course linen cloth , and all kind of small mercery ware , serve for the apparel of man and woman , as linen , and silk girdle , garter , purse , knife , and many such like thing . and they bring away from the moscovite , all kind of precious fur , and salmon salt and dry in the smoke . 