a learned epistle write 1581. unto the famous cosmographer m. Gerardus Mercator concern the river Pechora , Naramsay , cara reca , the mighty river of ob , the place of yak olgush in Siberia , the great river ardoh , the lake of kittay call of the borderer Paraha , the country of Carrah Colmak , give good light to the discovery of the north-east passage to Cathay , China and the maluca . it inclyto and celebri Gerardo mercatori , domino and amico singulari in manus proprias duisburgi in Clivia . they meminissem , amice optime , quantam , cum una ageremus , delectatione affi-cerere in legendis geographicis scriptis homeri , Strabonis , Aristotelis , Plinii , Dionis and reliquorum , laetatus sum eo quod incidissem in hunc nuncium , qui tibi have litera tradit , quem tibi come - mendatum esse valde cupio , quique dudum Arusburgi hic ad ossellam fluvium appulit . hominis experientia , ut mihi quidem videtur , multum te adjuverit in re una , eaque summis a te votis expetita , and magnopere elaborata , de qua tam vary inter se dissentiunt cos-mographi recentiores ; patefactione nimirum ingentis illius Promontorii Tabin , celebrisque illius and opulentae regionis sub cathayorum rege per Oceanum ad orientem brumalem . Alferius be est nation Belga , qui captivus aliquot annos vixit in Moscovitarum ditione , apud viros illic celeberrimos Yacovium and Unekium ; a quibus antuerpiam missus est accersitum homines rei nauticae peritos , qui satis amplo proposito praemio ad illos viros se recipiant ; qui Suevo artifice duas ad eam patefac-45® letter to Gerardus Mercator a.d. 1581. tionem nave aedificarunt in Duina fluvio . ut ille remember Dua nave proponit , quamquam sine arte , apposite tamen , and ut in satis intelligas , quod quaeso diligenter perpendas , aditus ad Cathayam per orientem proculdubio brevissimus est tionem orien-& ; admodum expeditus . Adiit ipse fluvium obam tum talem . terra per samoedorum and sibericorum regionem , tum mari per littus Pechorae fluminis ad orientem . hac experientia confirmatus certo apud se statuit navim mercibus onustam , cujus carinam non nimium profunde demissam esse vult , in sinum s. Nicolai conducere in region Moscovitarum , instructam illam quidem rebus omnibus ad eam patefactionem necessariis , atque illic [ i . 510 - ] redintegrato commeatu , moscoviticae nationis notissimos justa mercede asciscere : qui and samoedicam linguam pulchre teneant , and fluvium ob exploratum habeant , ut qui quotannis ea loca ventitant . unde Maio exeunte constituit pergere ad orientem per continentem Ugoriae ad orientales part Pechorae , insulamque cvi nomen est Dolgoia . hic latitudines observare , terram des - dolgoialnsula . cribere , bolidem demittere , locorumque ac punctorum distantias annotare , ubi and quoty licebit . et quoniam Pechorae Sinus vel euntibus vel redeuntibus commodissimus est tum subsidii tum diversorii locus propter glaciem and tempestates , diem impendere decrevit cognoscendis vadis , facillimoque navium aditu inveniendo : quo loco antehac aquarum altitudinem duntaxat ad quinque pede invenit , sed profundiores canales esse non dubitat : deinde per eos fine pergere ad tria quatuorve milliaria nautica , relicta insula quam vaigat insula vai-vocant , media fere via inter ugoriam and novam Zem - sats ' blame : tum sinum quendam praeterire inter vaigat S* ” ™ inter atque obam , qui per meridiem vergen pertingit ad sat wonderful TT’^ . r n ° .. s . » obam vergen terram Ugoriae , in quem confluunt exigui dvo amne per meridlem . two marmesia atque Carah , ad quos amne gens alia | | well naram-samoedorum accolit immanis and eflerata . Multa in eo say cara tractu loca vadosa , multas cataractas invenit ; sed tamen reca ' per quas possit navigari . ubi ad fluvium obam perventum fuerit , qui quidem fluvius ( ut referunt samoedi ) 451 Littus Oba incolitur ab ostiis trium dierumitinere . Yaks oldish locus super obam fluvium dvodecim dierum itinere a mari . Ardoh flumen influens in lacum kit-thaym . • de quo in itinere ad Boghariam scribit antonius Jenkin - sonas . the english voyage septuaginta habet ostia , quas propter ingentem latitudinem multas magnasque concludentem insulas , quas varii incolunt populi , vix quisquam animadvertat , ne temporis nimium impendat , constituit ad summum tria quatuorve tentare ora , ea prasserim quae ex consilio incolarum , quos in itinere aliquot habiturus est , commodissima videbuntur , triaque quatuorve ejus regionis navigiola tentandi ostiis adhibere , quam fieri potest ad littus proxime , ( quod quidem sub itinere trium dierum incolitur ) ut quo loco tutissime navigari possit , intelligat . quod si navim per fluvium obam adverso amne possit impellere , prima si poterit cataracta , eaque , ut verisimile est , commodissima , ad eumque locum appellere , quem aliquando ipse cum suis aliquot per sibericorum regionem terra adiit , qui dvodecim juxta dierum itinere distat a Mari , qua influit in mare flumen ob , qui locus est in continent , prope fluvium ob cvi nomen est yak olgush , nomine mutuato ab illo magno profluente flumini ob illabente , tum certain speraret maximas se difficultates superasse . referunt enim illic populares , qui trium duntaxat dierum navigation ab eo loco abfuerunt ( quod illic rarum est , eo quod multi ad unum duntaxat diem cymbas pelliceas a littore propellente oborta tempestate perierunt , cimi neque a sole neque a syderibus rectionem scirent petere ) per transversum fluminis ob , unde spaciosum esse illius latitudinem constat , grandes se carinas praeciosis onustas mercibus magno fluvio delatas vidisse per Nigros , puta TEthiopes . eum fluvium ardoh illi vocant , qui influit in lacum Kittayum , quem Paraha illi nominant , cvi contermina est gens illa latissimi fusa , quam Carrah Colmak appellant , non alia certain quam Cathaya . illic , si necessitas postulabit , opportunum erit hybernare , se svosque reficere , resque omnes necessarias conquirere . quod si acciderit , non dubitat interim plurimum se adjutum iri , plura illic quaerentem atque ediscentem . Veruntamen sperat aestate eadem ad cathayorum fine se perventurum , nisi ingenti glaciei mole ad os fluvii 452 obse impediatur , quae major interdum , interdum minor est . tum per pechoram redire statuit , atque illic hybernare : vel si id non poterit , in flumen duinae , quo mature satis pertinget , atque ita primo veer proximo in itinere progredi . Unum est quod suo loco oblitus sum . Qui locum illum yak olgush incolunt , a majoribus n'est olim praedicatum asserunt , se in lacu Kitthayo dulcissimam campanarum harmoniam audivisse , atque ampla aedificia conspexisse : et cum gentis Carrah Carrah col-colmak mentionem faciunt ( Cathaya illa est ) ab imo e ! t cath ' pectore suspiria repetunt , manibusque projectis suspiciunt in coelum , velut insignem illius splendorem innuente atque admirante . utinam alferius hic Cosmographiam melius saperet , multum ad illius usum adjungeret , qui sane plurimus est . Multa praetereo , vir amicissime , ipsumque hominem te audire cupio , qui mihi spospondit se in itinere Duisburgi te visurum . Avet enim tecum confer sermon , and procul dubio hominem multum adjuveris . satis instructus videtur pecunia and gratia , in quibus aliisque officiis amicitiae feci illi , si vellet , mei copiam . Deus optimus maximus hominis votis atque alacritati faveat , initia secundet , successus fortunet , exitum fcelicissimum concedat . vale amice ac domine singularis . Arusburgi ad ossellam fluvium 20. Februarii 1581. Tuus quantus quantus sum Joannes Balakus . to the famous and renown Gerardus mer - [ i - 511j cator , his reverend and singular friend at Duisburgh in Cliveland , these be deliver . call to remembrance ( most dear friend ) what exceed delight you take at our be together , in read the geographical write of Homer , Strabo , Aristotle , Pliny , Dion , and the rest , i rejoice not a little that i happen upon such a messenger as the bearer of these present , ( who i do especial recom - 453 two ship build upon the river of Dwina for the north-east discovery . the english voyage mend unto you ) who arrive late here at Arusburg upon the river of Osella . this man experience ( as i be of opinion ) will great avail you to the knowledge of a certain matter which have be by you so vehement desire , and so curious labour for , and concern they which the late cosmographer do hold such variety of opinion : namely , of the discovery of the huge promo ntorie of Tabin , and of the famous and rich country subject unto the emperor of Cathay , and that by the north-east ocean sea . the man be call * Alferius be by birth a Netherlander , who for certain year live captive in the dominion of Russia under two famous man Yacovius and Unekius , by who he be send to Antwerp to procure skilful pilot and mariner , ( by propound liberali reward ) to go unto the two famous personage aforesaid , which two have set a Sweden shipwright on work to build two ship for the same discovery upon the river of Dwina . the passage unto Cathay by the north-east ( as he de-clareth the matter , albeit without art , yet very apt , as you may well perceive , which i request you diligent to consider ) be without doubt very short and easy . this very man himself have travel to the river of ob , both by land , through the country of the samoed , and of Sibier , and also by sea , along the coast of the river Pechora eastward . be encourage by this his experience he be full resolve with himself to conduct a bark lade with , merchandise ( the keel whereof he will not have to draw over much water ) to the bay of saint Nicholas in Russia , be furnish with all thing expedient for such a discovery , and with a new supply of victual at his arrival there , and also to hire into his company certain russes best know unto himself , who can perfect speak the samoeds language , and be acquaint with the river of ob , as have frequent those place year by year . whereupon about the end of may he be determine to sail from the bay of S. Nicholas eastward , by the 454 main of Joughoria , and so to the easterly part of Pechora , and to the island which be call Dolgoia . and island of here also he be purpose to observe the latitude , to Dol&ia . survey and describe the country , to sound the depth of the sea , and to note the distance of place , where , and so oft as occasion shall be offer . and forasmuch as the bay of Pechora be a most convenient place both for harbour and victuali , as well in their go forth as in their return home in regard of ice and tempest , he be determine to bestow a day in sound the flat , and in search out the best entrance for ship : in which place heretofore he find the water to be but five foot deep , howbeit he doubt not but that there be deep channel : and then he intend to proceed on along those coast for the space of three or four league , leave the island call vaigat almost in the middle island of way between Ugoria and Nova Zembla : then also to vaigat . pass by a certain bay between vaigat and ob , trend - baie be southerly into the land of Ugoria , whereinto fall two small river call * Marmesia and Carah , upon the trending which river do inhabit a other barbarous and savage southerly : nation of the samoed . he find many flat in that * or , naram-tract of land , and many cataract or overfal of water , cara yet such as he be able to sail by . when he shall ' come to the river of ob , which river ( as the samoed report ) have seventie mouth , which by reason of the huge breadth thereof contain many and great island , which be inhabit with sundry sort of people , no man scarce can well discover , because he will not spend too much time , he purpose to search three or four at the most of the mouth thereof , those chief which shall be think most commodious by the advice of the inhabitant , of who he mean to have certain with he in his voyage , and mean to employ three or four boat of that country in search of these mouth , as near as possible he can to the shore , which within three day journey of the sea be inhabit , that he may learn where the river be best navigable . if it 455. the place up - so fall out that he may sail up the river ob against h stream , and mount up to that place which heretofore be itl e accompany with certain of his friend , he pass unto day journey by land through the country of Siberia which be about from you twelve day journey from the sea , where the river ob mouth there - fail into the sea , which place be in the continent near cat yak river ob , and be call yak olgush , borrow his olgish . name from that mighty river which fall into the river ob , then doubtless he will conceive full hope that he have pass the great difficulty : for the people dwell thereabouts report , which be three day sail - [ i . 512. ] ing only from that place beyond the river ob , whereby the breadth thereof may be gather ( which be a rare matter there , because that many row with their boat of leather one day journey only from the shore , have be cast away in tempest , have no skill to guide themselves neither by sun nor star ) that they have see great vessel lade with rich and precious merchandise bring down that great river by black or m. Jenkinson swart people . they call that river * ardoh , which fall ^bo^har^ * unto kittay , which they call Paraha , where - speak of the upon border that mighty and large nation which they river ardok . call Carrah Colmak , which be none other than the nation of Cathay . there , if need require , he may fit winter and refresh himself and he , and seek all thing which he shall stand in need of : which if it so fall out , he doubt not but in the mean while he shall be much further in search and learn out many thing in that place . howbeit , he hope that he shall reach to Cathaya that very summer , unless he be hinder by great abundance of ice at the mouth of the river of ob , which be sometime more , and sometime less . if it so fall out , he then purpose to return to Pechora , and there to winter : or if he can do so neither , than he mean to return to the river of Dwina , whither he will reach in good time enough , and so the next spring follow to proceed on his voyage . one thing in due place i forget before . 45$ the people which dwell at that place call yak olgush , affirm that they have hear their forefather say , that they have hear most sweet harmony of bell in the lake of Kitthay , and that they have see therein stately and large building : and when they make mention of the people name Carrah Colmak ( this country be Cathay ) they fetch deep sigh , and hold up their hand , they look up to heaven , signify as it be , and declare the notable glory and magnificence of that nation . i will this Oliver be better see in cosmography , it will great further his experience , which doubtless be very great . most dear friend , i omit many thing , and i wish you shall hear the man himself which promise i faithful that he will visit you in his way at Duisburg , for he desire to confer with you , and doubtless you shall very much further the man . he seem sufficient furnish with money and friend , wherein and in other office of courtesy encage offer he my furtherance if it have please he to have use i . the lord prosper the man desire and forwardness , bless his good beginning , further his proceed , and grant unto he most happy issue . fare you well good sir and my singular friend . from Arusburg upon the river of Ossella , the 20. of February , 1581. you whole at commandment , John Balak . master Anthony Jenkinson in a disputation before her majesty with sir Humphrey Gilbert for proof of a passage by the north-east to Cathaya , among other thing allege this : videlicet , that there come a continual stream or currant through mare glacial , of such swiftness as a colmak tell he , that if you cast any thing therein , it will present be carry out of sight towards the west , etc 