the life and travel of Constantine the great , emperor and king of Britain . Lavius Constantinus cognomento magnus post genitorem Constantium Britannorum Rex , ac romanorum Caesar Augustus , ex britannica matre in britannia natus , and in britannia creatus imperator , patriam natalem magnifici svae glori® participem fecit . Profligatis Alemanis , Hispanis , and Francis , eorumque regibus pro spectaculo bestiis objectis , Galliam subjectam tenuit : tres Helen® matris avunculos britannos , Leolinum , Traherum , and Marium , quos c®teris semper fidentiores habuerat in suis fortunis , Italis two maxentii tyrannide fcelicit^r liberatis , in senatorum ordinem Rom® promovit . Innumer® in eo ( ut Eutropius habet ) claruere tam animi , quam corporis virtute , 272 dum appetentissimus esset glorias militaris , successu semper in bellis prospero . inter litera tam Graecas quam Latinas , a christianissima matre Helena christi fidem edoctus , eos honorabat praecipui , qui in philosophia Christiana vitam reclinassent . unde ab oceani finibus nempe Britannis incipiens , open fretus divina , religionis curam in mediis superstitionum tenebris cepit , ab occiduis ad Indos , innumera ad aeternae spem vitae erigens gentes . animum divinis exercendo studiis , nocte trahebat insomnes , and quaesita scribendi diverticula per otium frequentabat : Imperium oration , ac sanctis operationibus continendum ratus , Egregius Christianae disciplinae praeco , filio ac proceres docuit , pietatem divitiis omnibus , atque ad ipsi anteferre totius mundi Monarchiae . Falsorum deorum eversor , Imaginum cultus per graeciam , tegyp-tum , Persiam , asiam , and universam ditionem romanam , repetitis abrogat legibus , jubens per edicta Christum coli , Evangelium praedicari sacrum , ministris honores , and alimenta dari , atque idolorum ubique destrui templa . et ut fidei forma cunctis videretur , Evangelium Jesus christi ante se semper ferri fecit , and Biblia sacra ad omnes provincias destinari , diademaque Monarchicum primus Britannis regibus dedit : ecclesiis infinita prae - [ ii i . 3. ] stitit , agro , annonam , stipem egenis , aegris , viduis , ac orphanis , pro quibusque ut pater sollicitus . Eusebium , Lactantium , and simile , familiarissimos habuit , and hanc ad deum orationem indy ipsis in ejus vita testibus fudit . Unum te deum esse novimus , unum te regem intelligi-mus , appellamus adjutorem , nobis ab te victoria cecidit , ex te adversarium fudimus , etc Pro deliciis habuit , ut Sextus Aurelianus tradit , literarum studia colere , bonos art fovere , legere , scribere , meditari : composuit Greece and Latini multos libros and Epistolas . e vita nicomediae discessit senex , aetatis svae anno 66. and imperii 32. a christi vero incarnation 339. constantinopli sepultus , Octavio in britanniis regnante . Ejus vitam in quatuor libris Eusebius Caesariensis Graeci scripsit , and Joannes Portesius Gallus in latinum transtulit sermonem . iv 273 s FLavius Constantine , surname the great , king of the Britain after his father , and emperor of the roman , bear in Britain of Helena his mother , and there create emperor , make his native country partaker of his singular glory and renown . have conquer and put to flight the almains , Spaniard , Frenchman , and their king for a spectacle through wen out to wild beast , he hold France it self as subject unto he : and have happy deliver the italian from the tyrannic of Maxentius , he prefer three of his mother uncle , all Britain , namely , Leoline , trahere , and Marius , who in all his action he have find more faithful unto he then any other , to be of the order of the roman senator . Eutropius report , that he infinite excel in the virtue both of the mind and body also , and that have a pleasure in the practice of war , and in the just commendation of martial ! prowess , he never pitch his field but his success in the battle be always victorious . his mother Helena have instruct he in the faith of Christ , although he make much of all man that be learn in the greek and latin tongue , yet he yield speciali honour to those that spend their time in the study of divinity , which he call Christian philosophic : so that begin at the further part of the ocean sea , which then be take to be his own native soil of Britain , and trust in the assistance of God , when the darkness of superstition be most thick , than he undertake a care of religion , stir up innumerable nation from the west as far as India it self , to the hope of eternal ! life . he pass many night without sleep , have his mind occupy in divine study : and whensoever his laisure from great affair do permit he , his vacant time shall be spend in the use of writing and other good exercise , assure himself that his kingdom and 274 empire be to be continue and strengthen to he by prayer and holy work : and oftentimes take upon he as it be the person of a notable preacher of christian discipline , he will teach his child and nobility , that godliness be to be prefer before riches , yea , before the monarchic of all the world . he overthrow the false god of the heathen , and by many law often revive , he abrogate the worship of image in all the country of Greece , Egypt , Persia , Asia , and the whole roman empire , command Christ only by his edict to be worship , the sacred gospel to be preach , the minister thereof to be honour and relieve , and the temple of idol every where to be destroy . Whithersoever he go he cause the book of the gospel of Christ to be still carry before he , that thereby it may appear to be a form of faith to all man , and to appertain general to all nation . he be the first that appoint a Imperiali diadem , or crown to the king of Britain . he be most beneficial to all church , bestow upon they land and field , and upon the poor , sick person , widow and orphan , corn and wood , be as careful of they as if he have be their natural father . he use learned man most familiar , as Eusebius , Lactantius and other , and they be witness that this be his usual prayer to God . o lord we know thou to be the only God , we be sure that thou be the only king , and we call upon thou as our helper : through thou we have get the victory , and throw the enemy . Sextus Aurelius report , that it be his great delight to embrace the study of learning , to favour good art , to read , write and meditate , and that he compose many book and epistle both in the greek and latin tongue . he die at Nicomedia , be then 66. year of age , in the 32. year of his reign , and in the 339. year after 275 by thou we have over - the incarnation of Christ , and be bury at Constantinople , Octavius be then king of Britain : who life Eusebius bishop of Caesarea have write in greek in 4. book , which afterward be translate into the latin tongue by John Portes a Frenchman . 