a letter write by the grave and learned gudbrandus thorlacius bishop of holen in island , concern the ancient state of island and Gronland , etc reverendissimo viro , erudition and virtute conspicuo , D. Hugoni Branham , Ecclesiae Harevicensis in Anglia pastori vigilantissimo , fratri and symmystae observando . Irabar equidem ( ut conjicis , reverend domine pastor ) primo literarum tuarum intuitu , ignotum i , ab ignoto , scriptis salutari . caeterum , cum ulterius progrederer , comperi i , si non aliter , certi nomine teniis , tibi ( quae tua est humanitas ) innotuisse : simiilque quod te nominis islandorum studiosum experirer , ex animo gavisus sum . Undi etiam faciam , ut tua pieta , tuiimque nomen , de Evangelio Jesus christi nobis congratulantis , ddque gente nostra tam benign tamque honorifici sentientis and scribentis , apud nos ignotum esse desinat . 194 quid verb ad antiquitatis monimenta attinet , quae hie extare creduntur , nihil sand est ( praeter illa , quorum in Commentario isto de Islandia , quem vidisse te scribis , fit mentio ) de hac nostra insula lectu scriptuve dignum , quod cum humanitate tua communicem . de vicinis itidem terris pauca , praeter historiam regum Noruegiae , seu veriiis ejusdem historiae fragmenta ; quae aliis aliter descripta sunt : sunt tamen talia , quae Krantzius non attigerit , aut eorum certain pauca . de vicina quoque gronlandia , id veterum opinion habemus , eam magno circuitu ab extrema noruegia , ubi | | Biarmlandia nuncupatur , and a qua haud vasto intervallo sita sit , circum quasi islandiam exporrigi . illic nostrate aliquando commercia exercuisse , and eam terram tempore Pontificiorum suos episcopos habuisse annal nostri testantur . caetera nobis incognita . at hodid fama est , vestris Britannis ( quos ego prope maris dominos appellarim ) quotannis esse in Gronlandia negotiationes : de qua re , si i certiorem feceris , non erit injucundum . etiam velim quaecunque nova erunt de rebus vestratium aut vicinorum regnorum , ea non omitta . Vale foeliciter ( reverend Dom. pastor ) Deo , musis , and commisso gregi quam diutissime superstes , Arnen . ex Islandia in festo visitationis D. Mariae anno 1595. human , tuus studiosus Gudbrandus thorlacius episcopus Holensis in Islandia . A.D. 1595 - Commentarius brevis de Islandia : per amgpimum jonam Islandum editus , 1593. | | Biarmia . Gronlandis olim suos habuit episcopos . the same in english . [ I. 591. ] to the reverend , learned , and virtuous , master Hugh Branham minister of the church of Harewich in England , his brother and fellow-pastor . etc i much marvel ( even as your self , reverend sir , conjecture that i will ) at the first sight of your letter , that be a stranger i shall be salute in write by one altogether unknown unto i . howbeit , read a little further , i find my self , if not otherwise , yet by name at least ( which proceed of 195 this be the brief commentary of Jonas arngrimus immediacy go before . | | Biarmia . Gronland in old time have Christian bishop . the english voyage your courtesy ) know unto you : and also , for that i see you desirous of the credit and honest report of we islander , i great rejoice . wherefore i my self will be a mean , that your virtue and good name ( because you congratulate with we for the gospel of Christ here publish , and do think and write so love and honourable of our nation ) may cease hereafter to be unknown among we . as touch the monument of antiquity which be here think to be extant , there be , in very deed , nothing ( except those particular , whereof mention be make in the commentary of island , which you write unto i that you have see ) worthy to be read or write , which i may communicate with you . and as concern our neighbour country we have little to show , beside the history of the king of Norway , ( or rather some fragment of the same history ) which other have otherwise describe : howbeit they be all in a manner such thing as Krantzius never mention : unless it be some few relation . Moreover , as touch Gronland , we hold this from the opinion of our ancestor ; that , from the extreme part of Norway , which be call two Biarmlandia , and from whence the say Gronland be not far distant , it fetch about the northern coast of island with a huge circuit in manner of a half moon . our chronicle likewise do testify that our own countryman in time past resort thither for traffic , and also that the very same country of Gronland have certain bishop in the day of popery . more than this we can avouch . but now it be report that your Englishman ( who i may almost call the lord of the ocean sea ) make yearly voyage unto Gronland : concern which matter if you please to give i further advertisement , you shall do i a especial favour . Moreover , whatsoever news you hear concern the affair of England or of other country thereabouts , i pray you make we acquaint therewith . thus ( reverend sir ) wish you long life , for the service of God , for 196 the increase of learning , and the benefit of the people commit to your charge , i bid you farewell . from island upon the feast of the visitation of the bless virgin mary , anno Dom. 1595. you Gudbrandus thorlacius bishop of Hola in island . 