the voyage of Ingulphus abbot of Croiland unto Jerusalem , perform ( accord to Florentius Wigorniensis ) in the year of our lord , 1064 , and describe by the say Ingulphus himself about the conclusion of his brief history . A.D. 1064. go Ingulphus humilis minister sancti Guthlaci monasteriique svi croilan - densis , natus in anglia , and a parentibus Anglicis , quip urbis pulcherrimae londoniarum , pro literis addiscendis in teneriori aetate constitutus , primum west-monasterio , postmodum oxoniensi study traditus eram . cumque in Aristotele arripiendo supra multos coaetaneos meos profecissem , etiam rhetoricam [ two . i . 9 ] A.D. 1051. A.D. 1064 , accord to florentine ifigomieneie . Tullii primam and secundam talo tenus induebam . Factus ergo adolescentior , fastidiens parentum meorum exiguitatem , paternos lares relinquere , and palatia regum aut principum affectans , mollibus vestiri , pomposisque laciniis amiciri indies ardentius appetebam . et ecce , inclytus nunc rex noster angliae , tunc adhuc comes normanniae wilhelmus ad colloquium tunc regis angliae edwardi cognati svi , cum grandi ministrantium comitatu lon-donias adventabat . quibus citius insertus , ingerens i ubique ad omnia emergentia negotia peragenda , cum prosper plurima perfecissem , in brevi agnitus illustrissimo comiti and astrictissimi adamatus , cum ipso normanniam enavigabam . Factus ibidem scriba ejus , pro libito totam comitis curiam , ad nonnullorum invidiam 288 regebam ; quosque volui humiliabam , and quos volui exaltabam . cumque juvenili calore impulsus in tam celso statu supra meos natales consistere taederem , quin semper ad altiora conscendere , instabili animo , ac nimium prurienti affectu , ad erubescentiam ambitiosus avidissime desiderarem : nuntiatur per universam normanniam plurimos archiepiscopos imperii cum nonnullis aliis terras principibus velle pro merito animarum suarum more peregrinorum cum debita devotion hierosolymam proficisci . de familia ergo comitis domini nostri plurimi tam milite quam clerici , quorum primus and praecipuus ego eram , cum licentia , and domini nostri comitis benevolentia , in dictum iter nos omnes accinximus : and alemanniam petentes , equite triginta numero and ampliiis domino Maguntino conjuncti sumus . Parati namque omnes ad viam , and cum dominis episcopis connumerati septem millia , pertranseunte prosperi multa terrarum spatia , tandem constantinopolim pervenimus . ubi alexium imperatorem ejus adorante Agiosophiam vidimus , and infinita sanctuaria osculati sumus . divertentes inde per lyciam , in manus arabicorum latronum incidimus ; evisceratique the infinitis pecuniis , cum mortibus multorum , and maximo vitas nostrae periculo vix evadentes , tandem desideratissimam civitatem hierosolymam laeto introitu tenebamus . ab ipso tunc patriarcha Sophronio nomine , viro veneranda canitie honestissimo ac sanctissimo , grandi cymbalorum tonitru , and luminarium immenso fulgore suscepti , ad divinissimam ecclesiam sanctissimi sepulchri , tam Syrorum , quam Latinorum solenni procession deducti sumus . ibi quot preces inoravimus , quot lachrymas infle-vimus , quot suspiria inspiravimus , solus ejus inhabitator novit D. noster Jesus christus . ab ipso itaque gloriosissimo sepulchre christi ad alia sanctuaria civitatis invisenda circumducti , infinitam summam sanctarum ecclesiarum , and oratoriorum , quae Achim Soldanus dudum destruxerat , oculis lachrymosis vidimus . et omnibus ruinis sanctissimae civitatis , tam iv 289 t A.D. io64 . extra , quam intra ; numerosis lachrymis intimo affectu compassi , ad quorundam restaurationem datis non paucis pecuniis , exire in patriam and sacratissimo Jordane intingi , universique christi vestigia osculari , desiderantissima devotion suspirabamus . say Arabum latrunculi qui omnem viam observabant , longiiis a civitate evagari , sva rabiosa multitudine innumera non sinebant . Vere igitur accedente , stolus navium januen-sium in porta joppensi applicuit . in quibus , cum sva mercimonia Christiani mercatore per civitate maritimas commutassent , and sancta loca similiter adorassent , ascendentes omnes mari nos commisimus . et jactati fluctibus and procellis innumeris tandem Brundisium , and prospero itinere per apuliam romam petentes , sanctorum Apostolorum Petri and Pauli limina , and copiosissima sanctorum martyrum monumenta per omnes stationes osculati sumus . Ind& archiepiscopi , caeterique principe imperii alemanniam per dextram repetentes , nos versus franciam ad sinistram declinante , cum inenarrabilibus and gratiis and osculis ab invicem discessimus . et tandem de triginta equitibus , qui de Normannia pingues exivimus , vix viginti paupere peregrini , and omnes pedite , macie multa attenuati , reversion sumus . the same in english . IIngulphus a humble servant of reverend Guthlac and of his monastery of Croiland , bear in England , and of english parent , at the beautiful ! city of London , be in my youth , for the attain of good letter , place first at Westminster , and afterward send to the university of Oxford . and have excel diverse of my equal in learning of Aristotle , i inure my self somewhat unto the first and second rhetoric of Tully . and as i grow in age , disdain my parent mean estate , and forsake my own native soil , i affect the court of king and prince , and be desirous to be clad in silk , and to wear brave and costly attire . and lo , at the same time William our sovereign king 290 now , but then earl of Normandy , with a great troup of follower and attendant come unto London , to confer with king Edward the confessor his kinsman . 1051. into who company intrude my self , and proffer my service for the performance of any speedy or weigh tie affair , in short time , after i have do many thing with good success , i be know and most entire belove by the victorious Erle himself , and with he i sail into Normandy . and there be make his secretary , i govern the earl court ( albeit with the envy of some ) as my self please , yea who i will i abase , and prefer who i think good . when as therefore , be carry with a youthful heat and lusty humour , i begin to be weary even of this place , wherein i be advance so high above my parentage , and with a inconstant mind , and affection too too ambitious , most vehement aspire at all occasion to climb high : [ ii i . 10. ] there go a report throughout all Normandy , that diverse archbishop of the empire , and secular prince be desirous for their soul health , and for devotion sake , to go on pilgrimage to Jerusalem . wherefore out of the family of our lord the earl , sundry of we , both gentleman and clerk ( principali of who be my self ) with the licence and good will of our say lord the earl , speed we on that voyage , and travail thirty horse of we into high Germany , we join our self unto the archbishop of Mentz . And be with the company of the bishop seven thousand person sufficient provide for such a expedition , we pass prosperous through many province , and at length attain unto Constantinople . where do reverence unto the emperor Alexius , we see the church of sancta Sophia , and kiss diverse sacred relic . depart thence through Lycia , we fall into the hand of the arabian thief : and after we have be rob of infinite sum of money , and have lose many of our people , hardly escape with extreme danger of our life , at length we joyful enter into the most wish ci tie of 291 Jerusalem . where we be receive by the most reverend , age , and holy patriarch Sophronius , with great melody of cymbal and with torchlight , and be accompany unto the most divine church of our saviour his sepulchre with a solemn procession aswell of Syrians as of Latines . here , how many prayer we utter , what abundance of tear we shed , what deep sigh we breathe forth , our lord Jesus Christ only know . wherefore be conduct from the most glorious sepulchre of Christ to visit other sacred monument of the city , we see with weep eye a great number of holy church and oratory , which Achim the sultan of Egypt have late destroy . and so have bewail with sad tear , and most sorrowful and bleed affection , all the ruin of that most holy city both within and without , and have bestow money for the re-edify of some , we desire with most ardent devotion to go forth into the country , to wash our self in the most sacred river of Jordan , and to kiss all the step of Christ . howbeit the thievish arabian lurk upon every way , will not suffer we to travel far from the city , by reason of their huge and furious multitude . wherefore about the spring there arrive at the port of Joppa a fleet of ship from Genoa . in which fleet ( when the christian merchant have exchange all their ware at the coast town , and have likewise visit the holy place ) we all of we embark , commit our self to the sea : and be toss with many storm and tempest , at length we arrive at Brundisium : and so with a prosperous journey travel through Apulia towards Rome , we there visit the habitation of the holy apostle Peter and Paul , and do reverence unto diverse monument of holy martyr in all place throughout the city . from thence the archbishop and other prince of the empire travel towards the right hand for Alemain , and we decline towards the left hand for France , depart asunder , take our leaf with unspeakable thanks and courtesy . and so at length , of 292 thirty horseman which go out of Normandy fat , lusty , and frolic , we return thither scarce twenty poor pilgrim of we , be all footman , and consume with leanness to the bare bone . A.D. c . 1097. 