Mention make of one Godericus , a valiant Englishman , who be with his ship in the voyage unto the holy land in the second year of bald wine king of Jerusalem , in the three year of Henry the first of England . hronicon Hierosolymitanum lib . 9 cap . 9 verum dehinc septem diebus evolutis rex ab Assur exiens , navem quae dicitur Buza ascendit , and cum eo Godericus pirata de regno angliae , ac vexillo hastae praefixo and elato in aere ad radios solis usque , Japhet cum paucis navigavit , ut hoc ejus signo cives Christiani recognito , fiduciam vitae regis haberent , and non facile hostium minis pavefacti , turpiter diffugium facerent , aut urbem reddere cogerentur . sciebat enim eos multum de vita and salute ejus desperare . Saraceni autem viso ejus signo , and recognito , ea parte quae urbem navigio cingebat illi in galei viginti and Carinis tredecim , quas vulgo appellant Cazh , occurrerunt , volente Buzam regis coronare . say dei auxilio undis maris illis ex adverso tumescentibus ac reluctantibus , Buza autem regis facili , and agili cursu inter procellas labente , ac volitante , in portu Joppae delusis hostibus subitd affuit , sex ex saracenis in arcu suo in navicula percussis , ac vulneratis . Intrans itaque civitatem dum incolumis omnium pateret oculis , revixit spiritus cunctorum gementium and de ejus morte hactenus dolentium , eo quod caput and rex Christianorum and princeps Jerusalem adhuc vivus and incolumis receptus sit . the same in english . but seven day afterward , the king come out of the town of Assur enter into a ship call a buss , and one Godericke a pirate of the kingdom of England with he , and fasten his banner on the top of a spear , and hold it up aloft in the air against 297 the beam of the sun , sail unto Japhet with a small company ; that the christian citizen there see this his banner , may conceive hope that the king be yet live , and be not easy terrify with the threat of the enemy may shameful run away , or be constrain to yield up the city . for he know that they be very much out of hope of his life and safety . the Saracen see and know this his banner , that part of they which environ the city by water make towards he with twenty galley and thirteen ship , which they common call Cazh , seek to enclose the king ship . but , by god help the billow of the sea swell and rage against they , and the king ship glide and pass through the wave with a easy and nimble course arrive sudden in the haven of Joppa , the enemy frustrate of their purpose ; and six of the Saracen be hurt and wound by shot out of the king ship . so that the king enter into the city , and now appear in safety in all their sight , the spirit of all they that mourn for he , and until then lament as though he have be dead , revive , because that the head and king of the christian , and prince of Jerusalem be yet alive , and come again unto they in perfect health . 