Mention make of one Hardine of England one of the chief personage , and a leader among other of two hundred sail of ship of Christians that land at Joppa in the year of our lord God 1102. hronicon Hierosolymitanum libro 9 cap . two . interea dum haec obsidio ageretur 200. nave Christianorum navigio Joppen appulsae sunt , ut adorarent in Jerusalem . horum bernardus Witrazh de terra Galatiae , Hardinus de Anglia , otho de roges , Hadewerck , unus de praepotenti - bus westfalorum , primi and ductore fuisse referuntur , 298 etc erat autem tertia feria Julii mensis , quando hae Christianorum copiae , deo protegente , huc navigio angustiatis and obsessis ad opem collatae sunt . sarracenorum autem turmae , videntes quia Christianorum virtus audacter fancy ad faciem vicino sibi hospitio proximi jungebatur , media nocte orbi incumbente , amotis tentoriis amplius milliari subtractae consederunt , dum luce exorta consilium inirent , utrum ascalonem redirent , aut cives Japhet crebris assultibus vexarent . the same in english . [ ii i . 13. ] while the Saracen continue their siege against Joppa , two hundred sail of christian ship arrive at Joppa , that they may perform their devotion at Jerusalem . the chief man and leader of these Christians be report to have be : Bernard Witrazh of the land of Galatia , Hardine of England , Otho of roges , Haderwerck one of the chief noble man of Westphalia , etc This christian power through God speciali provision , arrive here for the succour and relief of the distress and besiege Christians in Joppa , the three day of July , 1102. and in the second year of Baldwine king of Jerusalem . whereupon the multitude of the Saracen , see that the christian power join themselves bold , close by they even face to face in a lodging hard by they , the very next night at midnight , remove their tent , and pitch they more than a mile off , that they may the next morning be advise whether they shall return to Ascalon , or by often assault vex the citizen of Japhet . chronicon Hierosolymitanum , eodem libro 9 cap . 12. continue this history of these two hundred sail of ship , and show how by their prowess chief , the multitude of the Saracen be in short space vanquish and overthrow : the word be these ; ab ipso verb die tertiae feriae dum sic in superbia and elatione svae multitudinis immobiles Saraceni persisterent , and multis armorum terroribus Christianum populum vexarent , 299 sexta feria appropinquante , rex baldwinus in tubis and cornibus a Japhet egredien , in manu robusta equitum and peditum virtutem illorum crudeli bello est aggressus , magnis hinc and hinc clamoribus intonante . Christiani quoque qui navigio appulsi sunt horribili pariter clamore cum rege baldwino , and gravi strepitu vociferante , babylonios vehementi pugna sunt aggressi , saevissimis atque mortiferis plagis eos affligentes , donec bello fatigati , and ultra vim non sustinentes fugam versus ascalonem inierunt . alii vero ab insecutoribus eripi existimantes , and mari se credentes , intolerabili procellarum fluctuatione absorpti sunt . et sic civitas joppe cum habitatoribus suis liberata est . ceciderunt hac die tria millia sarracenorum : Christianorum vero pauci periisse inventi sunt . the same in english . yet notwithstanding , after the say three day of July , the Saracen persist high mind and insolent , by reason of their great multitude , and much annoy the christian people with their many forceable and terrible weapon ; whereupon , on the sixth day of July early in the morning king Baldwine issue out of Japhet , his trumpet and cornet yield a great and loud sound , and with a very strong army as well of horseman as footman , who on every side make great shout and outcry , with fierce and sharp battle set on the main power of their enemy . the Christians also who arrive in the navy , rear great clamour and noise , with loud voice and shouting in horrible wise together , with king Baldwine assault likewise with strong battle the babylonian , and afflict they with most sore and deadly wound , until the Saracen be weary with fight , nor able long to endure and hold out against the valour of the christian , flee towards Ascalon . and other of they hope to escape from they that pursue they , leap into the sea , and be swallow up in the wave thereof . and so the city of Joppa with the inhabitant thereof be free 300 of their enemy . there be slay this day three thousand Saracen , and but a few of the christian perish . 