the travail of Hubert Walter bishop of Sarisburie . Ubertus Walterus Sarisburiensis copus , vir probus , ingenioque ac pietate clarus , inter praecipuos unus eorum erat , qui post richardum regem expugnandorum Saracenorum gratia in syriam proficiscebantur . cum ex Palaestina redien , audiret in Sicilia , quod idem richardus in inimicorum manus incidisset , omisso itinere incoepto , ad eum cursim divertebat : quem and ille statim in Angliam misit , ut illic regii Senatus authoritate , indicto pro ejus redemption tributo pecuniam colligeret , quod and industrius fecit ac regem liberavit . Ind cantuariorum archiepiscopus factus , post ejus mortem Joanni illius fratri ac successori paria fidelitatis officia praestitit . Longa enim oration toti anglorum nationi persuasit , quod vir providus , praestan , fortis , genere nobilissimus , and imperio dignissimus esset : quo salutatus a populo fuit , atque in regem coronatus . Composuit quaedam opuscula , and ex immenso animi dolore demum obiisse fertur , anno salutis humanae 1205. cum sedisset annos 11. Menses octo , and die sex : quum vidisset ex intestinis odiis , omnia in transmarinis regionibus pessum ire , regnante Joanne . the same in english . HUbert Walter bishop of Sarisburie , a virtuous man , and famous for his good wit and piety , be one of the chief of they that follow king Richard into Syria go against the Saracen . as he return from 346 Palaestina and come in his journey into Sicilia , he there hear of the ill fortune of the king be fall into his enemy hand , and thereupon leave his journey homeward , he go present and in all haste to the place where the king be captive , who the king immediate upon his come send into England , that by the authority of the council , a tribute may be collect for his redemption : which this Hubert perform with great diligence , and deliver the king . after this he be make archbishop of Canterbury , and after the death of king Richard he show the like duty of fidelity and trust to his brother John that succeed he . for by a long oration he persuade the whole nation of the english man , that ke be a very circumspect man , virtuous , valiant , bear of noble parentage , and most worthy of the crown . whereupon he be so receive of all the people and crown king . he write certain book , and die at the last with very great grief of mind , in the year 1205 , have be archbishop the space of 11 year 8 month and six day , by reason of the civil discord abroad , whereby all thing go topsy turvy , and in the reign of king John. 