the life and travail of Baldwinus Devonius , sometime archbishop of Canterbury . Aldwinus Devonius , tenui loco excestriae natus , vir ore facundus , exactus philosophus , and ad omne studiorum genus per illos dies aptissimus inveniebatur . scholarum rector primiim erat , tum postea archidiaconus , erudition ac sapientia in omni negotio celebris : fuit praeterea . Cister - ciensis Monachus , and Abbas Fordensis Coenobii , magnus suorum estimation , ac universae eorum societati quasi antesignanus : fuit deinde Wigorniensis praesul , fuit and mortuo demiim Richardo Cantuariorum Archiepiscopus , ac totius angliae primus . cui muneri baldwinus solliciti invigilan , egregium se pastorem exhibuit , dominicum seman , quantum patiebatur ejus temporis iniquitas , ubique locorum spargen . richardus anglorum rex , acceptis tunc regni insigniis , summo study classem , ac omnia ad Hierosolymitanum bellum gerendum necessaria paravit . Secutus est illico regem in Syriam , and palaestinam usque baldwinus , ut esset in tam sancto ( ut ipse putabat ) itinere laborum , dolorum , ac periculorum particeps . praefuit cantuariensi Ecclesiae fere 6. annis , and richardum regem in syriam secutus , anno salutis nostrae 1190. Tyri vitam finivit , ubi and sepultus est . the same in english . BAldwine a Devonshire man bear in Exeter of mean parentage , be a very eloquent man , a exact philosopher , and in those day very excellent in all kind of study . he be first of all a schoolmaster : afterward he become a archdeacon , very famous for his learning 339 and wisdom in all his do . he be also a Cistercian monk and abbot of Ford monastery , and the chief of all those that be of his order : he grow after this to be bishop of Worcester , and at last after the death of Archb. Richard he be promote and make archbishop of Canterbury , and primate of all England . in the discharge of which place he be very vigilant , show himself a worthy pastor , sow the seed of God word in every place as far forth as the iniquity of that time permit . in his time king Richard with all endeavour prepare a fleet and all thing necessary for wage of war against the infidel at Jerusalem , take with he the standard and ensign of the kingdom . This Baldwine eftsoon follow the king into Syria and Palestina , as one desirous to be partaker of his travail , pain , and peril in so holy a voyage . he be archbishop of Canterbury almost six year : but have follow the king into where he be also bury . [ ii i . 29. ] a annotation concern the travail of the say Baldwine , take out of Giraldus cam-brensis , in his Itinerarium Cambria , lib . 2. Cap. 14. fol. 229. inter primos Thomae becketi successor hic secundus , audita salvatoris and salutiferae crucis injuria nostris ( proh dolour ) diebus per Saladinum irrogata , cruce signatus , in ejusdem obsequiis , tam remotis finibus quam propinquis , praedicationis officium viriliter assumpsit . et postmodiim iter accipiens , navigi6que fungens apud marsiliam , transcurso tandem pelagi profundo , in portu tyrensi incolumis applicuit : and inde ad exercitum nostrum obsidentem pariter and obsessum aconem transivit : ubi multos ex nostris inveniens , and fere cunctos principum defectu , in summa desolation jam positos , and desperation , alio quidem long expectation fatigatos , alio fame and inopiam graviter afflictos , quosdam vero agris 340 Syria , in the year 1190. he die at tyre , inclementia distemperatos , diem foeliciter in terra sacra clausurus extremum , singulos pro posse vinculo charitatis amplectens , sumptibus and impensis , verbis , and vitae meriti confirmavit . the same in english . this Baldwine be the second successor unto Thomas Becket , after he have hear you wrong which be do to our saviour , and the sign of the cross by Saladine the sultan of Egypt , take upon he the lord character , he courageous perform his office of preach in the obedience thereof , as well in far distant country as at home . and afterward take his journey and embark himself at Marseils , have at length pass you Levant sea , he arrive safe in the haven of Tyrus , and from thence go over to Achon unto our army , besiege the town , and yet ( as it be ) besiege it self : where find many of our countryman , and almost all man remain in wonderful pensiveness and despair , through the withdraw of the prince , some of they tire with long expectation , other grievous afflict with hunger and poverty , and other distemper with the heat of the weather , be ready happy to end his day in the holy land , embrace every one accord to his ability in the bond of love , he aid they at his cost and charge , and they with his word and good exam strengthen of life . 