a note draw out of a very ancient book remain in the hand of the right worshipful m. Thomas Tilney esquire , touch sir Frederike Tilney his ancestor , knight at Aeon in the holy land for his valour , by king Richard the first , as follow . Ertinuit iste libre prius Frederico Tilney de Boston , in comitatu lincolniae militi facto apud Aeon in terra Judaeae anno regis richardi primi tertio . vir erat iste magnae staturae and potens in corpore : qui cum patribus suis dormit apud tirrington juxta villam svi nominis Tilney in Mershland . cujus altitudo in salva custodia permanent ibidem usque in hunc diem . et post ejus obitum sexdecem militibus ejus nominis Tilney haereditas illa successive obvenit , quorum unus post alium semper habitabat apud Boston praedictum : dum fratris senioris haereditas haeredi general devoluta est , quae nupta est Johanni duci norfolciae . Eorum mile ultimus fuit Philippus Tilney nuper de Shelleigh in comitatu suffolciae , pater and genitor Thomae Tilney de Hadleigh in comitatu praedicto Armigeri , cvi modo attinet iste libre . anno aetatis svae 64. anno domini 1556. the same in english . this book pertain in time pass unto sir Frederick Tilney of Boston in the county of Lincoln , who be knight at Aeon in the land of jury , in the three year of the reign of king Richard the first . this knight be of a tall stature , and strong of body , who rest inter with his forefather at Tirrington , near unto a town in Marshland call by his own name Tilney . the just height of this knight be there keep in safe custody until this very day . also , after this man decease , the inheritance of his land fall successive unto 342 sixteen sundry knight call all by the name of Tilney , who dwell always , one after another , at the town of Boston aforesaid , until such time as the possession of the elder brother fall unto a heir general , which be marry unto John duke of Northfolke . the last knight of that name be sir Philip Tilney late of Shelleigh in the county of Suffolk , predecessor and father unto Thomas Tilney of Hadleigh in the county aforesaid esquire , unto who the say book of late appertain . in the year of his age 64. and in the year of our lord , 1556. 