the travail of Ranulph Glanvile earl of Chester . Anulphus Glanvile Cestriae come , vir nobilissimi generis , and utroque jure eruditus , in albo illustrium virorum a i merito ponendus venit . ita probe omnes adolescendae svae annos legibus tum humanis tum divinis consecravit , ut non prius in hominem per aetatem evaserit , quam nomen decusque ab insigni erudition sibi comparaverit . cum profecti essent francorum hero ptolemaidem , inito come Joanne Brenno hierosolymorum rege concilio , damiatam TEgypti urbem obsidendam constituebant , anno salutis humanae 1218. misit illuc henricus rex , ab Honorio 3 Rom. pontifice rogatus , cum magna armatorum manu ranulphum , ad remember christianam juvandam . cujus virtus , Polydoro testae , in eo bello miris omnium laudibus celebrata fuit . quo confecto negotio , Ranulphus in patriam reversus , scripsit , de legibus angliae librum unum . fertur praeterea , and alia quaedam scripsisse , sed tempus edax rerum , ea nobis abstulit . claruit anno a Servatoris nostri nativitate 1230 confectus senio , dum henricus tertius sub antichristi tyrannide in Anglia regnaret . the same in english . RAnulph Glanvile earl of Chester , a man of a very noble house , and learn in both the law , deserve of duty to be here place by i in the catalogue of worthy and notable man . he apply so well all the year of his youth to the study of humane and divine law , that he come not so soon to the age of a man , [ ii i . 33. ] as he have purchase to himself by reason of his singular learning , renown and honour . when the noble man of France go to Ptolomais , upon the counsel of John burn king of Jerusalem , they resolve to besiege 35° Damiata a city of Egypt , in the year 1218. and then Henry the king upon the motion of Honorius the three , bishop of room , send thither this earl Ranulph with a great power of arm soldier , to further the enterprise of the Christians : who valour in that war ( by the testimony of Polidor Virgil ) be marvelous commend of all man . after the end of which business , he be return into his country , write a book of the law of England . it be also report that he write other book , but time the destroyer of many memorial , have take they from we . he flourish in the year after the nativity of Christ 1230 , be very age , and in the reign of king Henry the three . 