the voyage of m. Roger Bodenham with the great bark Aucher to Candia and Chio , in the year 1550. n the year 1550. the 13 of November i Roger Bodenham captain of the bark Aucher enter the say ship at Gravesend , for my voyage to the hand of Candia and Chio in the Levant . the master of my ship be one William Sherwood . from thence we depart to the bark Tilbery hope , and there remain with contrary wind aucher g > eth until the 6. of January 1551. the 6 of Januarie , the f°rlevant-m . come to Tilbery , and i have provide a skilful pilot to carry i over the land end , who name be m. wood , and with all speed i vale down that night xo mile to take the tide in the morning , which happy i do , and that night come to Dover , and there come to a anchor , and there remain until Tuesday , meet with the worthy knight sir Anthony Aucher owner of the say ship . [ ii i . ico . ] the two day we arrive in Plimoth , and the 13 in the morning we set forward on our voyage with a prosperous wind , and the 16 we have sight of cape Finister on the coast of Spain . the 30 we arrive at Cade , and there discharge certain merchandise , and take other aboard . the 20 of February we depart from Cade , and pass the straight of Gibraltar that night , and the 25 Mallorca . we come to the he of Mallorca , and stay there five day with contrary wind . the first of march , we have sight of Sardenna , and the Messina . five of the say month we arrive at Messina in Sicilia , and there discharge much good , and remain there until good Friday in Lent. the chief merchant that jade the say bark Aucher be a merchant stranger call Anselm Salvago , and because the time be then very dangerous , and no go into Levant , especial to Chio , without a safe conduct from the Turk , the say Anselm promise the owner sir Anthony Aucher , that we shall receive the same at Messina . but i be post from thence to Candia , and there i be answer that i shall send to Chio , and there i shall have my safe conduct . i be force to send one , and he have his answer that the Turk will give none , will i to look what be best for i to do , which be no small trouble to i , consider i be bind to deliver the good that be in the ship at Chio , or send they at my adventure . the merchant without care of the loss of the ship will have compel i to go , or send their good at i the Turk adventure , the which i deny , and say plain i will armylo be ” not go > because the Turk galley be come forth to siege Malta , go against Malta , but by the french king mean , he ■ be persuade to leave Malta , and to go to Tripoli in Barbary , which by the french he win . in this time there be in Candia certain Turk vessel call Skyrasas , which have bring wheat thither to sell , and be ready to depart for turquoise . and they depart in the morning be time , carry news that i will not go forth : the same night i prepare beforehand what i think good , without make any man privy , until i see time . than i have no small business to cause my mariner to venture with the ship in such a manifest danger . nevertheless i win they to go all with i , except three which i set on land , and with all diligence i be ready to set forth about eight of the clock at night , be a fair moon shine night , and go out . than my 3 mariner make such request unto the rest of my man to come aboard , as i be constrain to take they in . and so with good wind we put into the archipelago , and be among the hand the wind scant , and i be force to anchor at a hand call Micone , where i tarry 10 or 12 day , have a greek pilot to carry t^eat the ship to Chio. in this mean season , there come many small boat with mysson sail to go for Chio , with diverse good to sell , and the pilot request i that i will let they go in my company , to which i yield . after the say day expire , i weigh and set sail for the island of Chio , with which place i fall in the after noon , whereupon i cast to seaward again to come with the island in the morning betimes . the foresay small vessel which come in my company , depart from i to win the shore , to get in you night , but upon a sudden they espy 3 foist of Turk come upon they to spoil they . my pilot , have a son in one of those small vessel , entreat i to cast about towards they , which at his request i do , and be some thing far from they , i cause my gunner to shoot a demy-colvering at a foist that be ready to enter one of the boat . this be so happy a shot , that it make the Turk to fall a stern of the boat and to leave he , by the which mean he escape . than they all come to i , and request that they may hang at my stern until day light , by which time i come before the mole of Chio , and send my boat on land to the merchant of that place to send for their good out of hand , or else i will return back with all to Candia , and they shall fetch their good there . but in fine , what by persuasion of my merchant english man , and those of Chio , i be entreat to come into the harbour , and have a safe assurance for 20 day against the Turk army , the town of with a bond of the city in the sum of 12000 ducat . Chio be bind go j make haste and sell such good as i have to Turk ucau^fir they come thither , and put all in order , with as much speed safeguard of as i can , fear the come of the Turk navy , the bark of the which , the chief of the city know right well . Aucher . go upon the sudden they call i of great friendship , and in secret tell i , i have no way to save my self but to be go , for say they , we be not able to defend you , that be not able to help our self , for the Turk where he come , take what he • will , and leave what he list , but the chief of the Turk set order y‘ none shall do any harm to the people or to their good . this be such news to i , that indeed i be at my wit end , and be bring into many imagination how to do , for that the wind be contrary . in fine , i determine to go forth . but the merchant english man and other regard more their gain then the ship , hinder i very much in my purpose of go forth , and make the mariner to come to i to demand their wage to be pay they out of hand , and to have a time [ ii i . 101. ] to employ the same there . but God provide so for i > that i pay they their money that night , and then against their charge they , that it they will not set the ship forth , captain . i will make they to answer the same in England , with danger of their head . many be marry in England and have somewhat to loose , those do stick to i . i have twelve gunner : the master gunner who be a mad brain fellow , and the owner servant have a parliament between themselves , and he upon the same come up to i with his sword draw , swear that he have promise the owner sir Anthony Aucher , to live and die in the say ship against all that shall offer any harm to the ship , and that he will fight with the whole army of the Turk , and never yield : with this fellow i have much to do , but at the last i make he confess his fault and follow my advice . thus with much labour i get out of the mole of Chio , into the sea by warp forth , with the help of genoueses boat , and a french boat that be in the mole , and be out god send i a speciali gale of wind to go my way . than i cause a piece to be shoot off for some of my man that be yet in the town , and with much a do they come aboard , and then i set sail a little before one of the clock , and i make all the sail i can , and about half a hour past two of the clock there come seven galley into Chio to stay the ship : Turk and the admiral of they be in a great rage because ' she Ga^tesco^e‘° be go . whereupon they put some of the best in prison , and take all the man of the three ship which i leave in the port , and put they into the galley . they will have follow after i , but that the town man find mean they do not . the next day come thither a hundred more of galley , and there tarry for their whole company , which be together be about two hundred and 50 sail , take their voyage for to surprise the hand of Malta . the next day after i depart , i have the sight of Candia , but i be two day after or ever i can get in , where i think my self out of their danger . there i continue until the Turk army be pass , who come within the sight of the town . there be preparation make as though the turk have come thither . there be in that hand of Candia many fwe thousand banish man , that live continual in the mountain , they come down to serve , to the number of four or ’ ' five thousand , they be good archer , every one with his bow and arrow , a sword and a dagger , with long hair , master Matthew baker . and boot that reach up to their grine , and a shirt of male , hang the one half before , and the other half behind , these be send away again assoon as the army be pass . they will drink wine out of all measure . then the army be pass , i jade my ship with wine and other thing : and so after i have that which i leave in Chio , i depart for Messina . in the way i find about Zante , certain galliot of Turk , lay aboard of certain vessel of Venice lade with Muscatels : i rescue they , and have but a barrel of wine for my powder and shot : and within a few day after i come to Messina . i have in my ship a spanish pilot call Noblezia , which i take in at Cade at my come forth : he go with i all this voyage into the Levant without wage , of good will that he bear i and the ship , he stand i in good steed until i come back again to Cade , and then i need no pilot and so from thence i come to London with the ship and good in safety , God be praise . and all those mariner that be in my say ship , which be , beside boy , threescore and ten , for the most part be within five or six year after , able to take charge , and do . Richard Chanceller , who first discover Russia , be with i in that voyage , and Matthew Baker , who afterward become the queen majesty chief shipwright . 