the worthy enterprise of John Foxe a Englishman in deliver 266. Christians out of the captivity of the Turk at Alexandria , the 3. of Januarie 1577. among our merchant here in England , it be a common voyage to traffic into Spain : whereunto a ship , be call the three half moon , man with 38. man , and well fence with munition , the better to encounter their enemy withal , and have wind and tide , set from Portsmouth , 1563. and bend her journey towards Seville a city in Spain , intend there to traffic with they . And fall near the strait , they perceive themselves to be beset round with eight galley of the Turk , in such wise , that there be no way for they to fly or escape away , but that either they must yield or else be sink . which the owner perceive , manful encourage his company , exhort they valiant to show their manhood , show they that God be their god , and not their enemy , request they also not to faint in see such a heap of their enemy ready to devour they ; put they in mind also , that if it be God pleasure to give they into their enemy hand , it be not they y‘ ought to show one displeasant look or countenance thereagainst ; but to take it patient , and not to prescribe a day and time for their deliverance , as the citizen of Bethulia do , but to put themselves under his mercy . and again , if it be his mind and good will to show his mighty power by they , if their enemy be ten time so many , they be not able to stand in their hand ; put they likewise in mind of the old and ancient worthiness of their countryman , who in the hard extremity have always most prevail and go away conqueror , yea , and where it have be almost impossible . such ( quoth he ) have ’S3 John fox take 1563. be the valiantness of our countryman , and such have be the mighty power of our god . with other like encouragement , exhort they to behave themselves manful , they fall all on their knee make their prayer brief unto God : who be all rise up again perceive their enemy by their sign and defiance bend to the spoil , who mercy be nothing else but cruelty , whereupon every man take he to his weapon . then stand up one grove the master , be a comely man , with his sword and target , hold they up in defiance against his enemy . so likewise stand up the owner , the master mate , boateswaine , Purser , and every man well appoint . now likewise sound up the drum , trumpet and flute , which will have encourage any man , have he never so little heart or courage in he . then take he to his charge John Foxe the gunner in the dispose of his piece in order to the best effect , and send his bullet towards the Turk , who likewise bestow their piece thrice as fast towards the Christians . but short they draw near , so that the bowman fall to their charge in send forth their arrow so thick among the galley , and also in double their shot so sore upon the galley , that there be twice so many of the Turk slay , as the number of the christian be in all . but the turk discharge twice as fast against the christian , and so long , that the ship be very sore strike and bruise under water . which the Turk perceive , make the more haste to come aboard the ship : which ere they can do , many a Turk buy it dear with the loss of their life . yet be all in vain , and board they be , where they find so hot a skirmish , that it have be better they have not meddle with the feast . for the Englishman show themselves man in deed , in work manful with their brown bill and halberd : where the owner , master , boateswaine , and their company stand to it so 154 lusty , that the Turk be half dismay . but chief the valour be the boateswaine show himself valiant above the rest : fair for he fare among the Turk like a wood lion : for boatswatne-there be none of they that either can or dare stand in his face , till at the last there come a shot from the Turk , which break his whistle asunder , and smite he on the breast , so that he fall down , bid they farewell , and to be of good comfort , encourage they likewise to win praise by death , rather than to live captive in misery and shame . which they hear , in deed intend to have do , as it appear by their skirmish : but the press and store of the Turk be so great , that they be not able long to endure , but be so overpress , that they can not wield their weapon : by reason whereof , they must needs be take , which none [ ii i . 132. ] of they intend to have be , but rather to have die : except only the master mate , who shrink from the skirmish , like a notable coward , esteem neither the valour of his name , nor account of the present example of his fellow , nor have respect to the misery , whereunto he shall be put . but in fine , so it be , that the turk be victor , whereof they have no great cause to rejoice , or triumph . then will it have grieve any hard heart to see these infidel so violent entreat the christian , not have any respect of their manhood which they have taste of , nor yet respect their own state , how they may have meet with such a booty , as may have give they the overthrow : but no remorse hereof , or any thing else do bridle their fierce and tyrannous deal , but that the Christians must needs to the galley , to serve in new office : and they be no soon in they , but their garment be pull over their ear , and tear from their back , and they set to the oar . i will make no mention of their misery , be now under their enemy rage stripe . i think there be no man will judge their fare good , or their body unlade of stripe , and not pester with too much heat , and * 55 the Englishman cart prisoner unto a haven near Alexandria . the english voyage also with too much cold : but i will go to my purpose , which be , to show the end of those , be in mere misery , which continual do call on God with a steadfast hope that he will deliver they , and with a sure faith that he can do it . Nigh to the city of Alexandria , be a haven town , and under the dominion of the Turk , there be a road , be make very fensible with strong wall , whereinto the Turk do customable bring their galley on shore every year , in the winter season , and there do trim they , and lie they up against the spring time . in which road there be a prison , wherein the captive and such prisoner as serve in the galley , be put for all that time , until the sea be calm and passable for the galley , every prisoner be most grievous lade with iron on their leg , to their great pain , and sore disable of they to any labour take . into which prison be these Christians put , and fast ward all the winter season . but ere it be long , the master and the owner , by mean of friend , be redeem : the rest abide still by the misery , while that they be all ( through reason of their ill usage and worse fare , miserable starve ) save one John fox , who ( as some man can abide hard and more misery , then other some can , so can some likewise make more shift , and work more devise to help their state and live , then other some can do ) be somewhat skilful in the craft of a Barbour , by reason thereof make great shift in help his fare now and then with a good meal . insomuch , till at the last , God send he favour in the sight of the keeper of the prison , so that he have leave to go in and out to the road , at his pleasure , pay a certain stipend unto the keeper , and wear a lock about his leg : which liberty likewise , six more have upon like sufferance : who by reason of their long imprisonment , not be fear or suspect to start aside , or that they will work the Turk any mischief , have liberty to go in and out at the say road , in such manner , as this John fox 156 the enterprise of John fox do , with iron on their leg , and to return again at night . in the year of our lord 1577. in the winter season , the galley happy come to their accustom harbour , and be discharge of all their mast , sail , and other such furniture , as unto galley do appertain , and all the master and mariner of they be then nest in their own home : there remain in the prison of the say road two hundred threescore and eight Christian prisoner , who have be take by the Turks force , and be of sixteen sundry nation . among which there be three Englishman , whereof one be name John fox of Woodbridge in Suffolk , the other William Wickney of Portsmouth , in the county of Southampton , and the three Robert moor of Harwich in the county of Essex . which John fox have be thirteen or fourteen year under their gentle entreatance , and be too too weary thereof , mind his escape , weigh with himself by what mean it may be bring to pass : and continual ponder with himself thereof , take a good heart unto he , in hope that God will not be always scourge his child , and never cease to pray he to further his pretend enterprise , if that it shall redound to his glory . not far from the road , and somewhat from thence , at one side of the city , there be a certain victual house , which one Peter unticaro have hire , pay also a certain fee unto the keeper of the road . This Peter unticaro be a Spaniard bear , and a christian , and have be prisoner about thirty year , and never practise any mean to escape , but keep himself quiet without touch or suspect of any conspiracy : until that now this John Foxe use much thither , they break one to another their mind , concern the restraint of their liberty and imprisonment . so that this John fox at length open unto this unticaro the devise which he will fain put in practice , make privy one moor to this their intent . which three debate of this matter 157 A.D. 1577 - Januarie . the english voyage at such time as they can compass to meet together : insomuch , that at seven week end they have sufficient conclude how the matter shall be , if it please God to far they thereto : who make five moor privy to this their devise , who they think they may safe trust , determine in three night after to accomplish their deliberate purpose . whereupon the same John fox , and Peter unticaro , and the other six appoint to meet all together in the prison the next day , be the last day of December : where this John fox certify the rest of the prisoner , what their intent and devise be , and how and when they mind to bring their purpose to pass : who thereunto persuade they without much a do to further their devise . which the same John fox see , deliver unto they a sort of file , which he have gather together for this purpose , by the mean of Peter unticaro , charge they that every man shall be ready discharge of his iron by eight of the clock on the next day at night . on the next day at night , this say John fox , and his six other companion , be all come to the house of Peter unticaro , pass the time away in mirth for fear of suspect , till the night come on , so that it be time for they to put in practise their devise , send Peter unticaro to the master of the road , in the name of one of the master of the city , with who this keeper be acquaint , and at who request he also will come at the first : who desire he to take the pain to meet he there , promise he , that he will bring he back again . the keeper agree to go with he , will the warder not to bar the gate , say , that he will not stay long , but will come again with all speed . in the mean season , the other seven have provide they of such weapon , as they can get in that house : and John fox take he to a old rusty sword blade , without either hilt or pomell , which he make to serve his turn , in bend the hand end of the sword , in steed 158 the enterprise of John fox of a pomell , and the other have get such spit and glaive as they find in the house . the keeper now be come unto the house , and perceive no light , nor hear any noise , straightway suspect the matter : and return backward , John fox stand behind the corner of the house , step forth unto he : who perceive it to be John fox , say , oh fox , what have i deserve of thou , that thou shall seek my death ? thou villain ( quoth Fox ) have be a bloodsucker of many a christian blood , and now thou shall know what thou have deserve at my hand : wherewith he lift up his bright shine sword of ten year rust , and strike he so main a blow , as therewithal ! his head cleave a sunder , so that he fall stark dead to the ground . whereupon Peter unticaro go in , and certify the rest how the case stand with the keeper : who come present forth , and some with their spit run he through , and the other with their glaive hew he in sunder , cut off his head , and mangle he so , that no man shall discern what he be . then march they towards the road , whereinto they enter soft , where be six warder , who one of they ask , say , who be there ? quoth fox and his company , all friend . which when they be all within , prove contrary : for , quoth fox , my master , here be not to every man a man , wherefore look you play your part . who so behave themselves in deed , that they have dispatch these six quick . then John fox intend not to be bar of his enterprise , and mind to work sure in that which he go about , bar the gate sure , and plant a canon against it . then enter they into the gaoler lodge , where they find the key of the fortress and prison by his bed side , and there have they all better weapon . in this chamber be a chest , wherein be a rich treasure , and all in ducat , which this Peter unticaro , and two more , open , stuff themselves so full as they can , between their shirt and their skin : which John fox 159 will not once touch , and say , that it be his and their liberty which he seek for , to the honour of his god , and not to make a mart of the wicked treasure of the infidel . yet do these word sink nothing into their stomach , they do it for a good intent : so do Saul save the fat ox , to offer unto the lord , and they to serve their own turn . but neither do Saul escape the wrath of God therefore , neither have these that thing which they desire so , and do thirst after . such be God justice . he that they put their trust in , to deliver they from the tyrannous hand of their enemy , he ( i say ) can supply their want of necessary . now these eight be arm with such weapon as they think well of , think themselves sufficient champion to encounter a strong enemy , and coming unto the prison , fox open the gate and door thereof , and call forth all the prisoner , who he set , some to ram up the gate , some to the dress up of a certain galley , which be the best in all the road , and be call the captain of Alexandria , whereinto some carry mast , sail , oar , and other such furniture as do belong unto a galley . at the prison be certain warder , who John fox and his company slay : in the kill of who , there be eight more of the Turk , which perceive they , and get they to the top of the prison : unto who John fox , and his company , be fain to come by ladder , where they find a hot skirmish . for some of they be there slay , some wound , and some but scar , and not hurt . as John fox be thrice shoot through his apparel , and not hurt , Peter unticaro , and the other two , that have arm they with the ducat , be slay , as not able to wield themselves , be so pester with the weight and uneasy carry of the wicked and profane treasure : and also diverse Christians be aswell hurt about that skirmish , as Turk slay . among the Turk be one thrust through , who ( let we not say that it be ill fortune ) fall off from the top 160 of the prison wall , and make such a low , that the inhabitant thereabouts ( as here and there scatter stand a house or two ) come and daw he , so that they understand the case , how that the prisoner be pay their ransom : wherewith they raise both Alexandria which lie on the west side of the road , and a castle which be at the city end , next to the road , and also a other fortress which lie on the northside of the road : so that now they have no way to escape , but one , which by man reason ( the two hold lie so upon the mouth of the road ) may seem impossible to be a way for they . So be the red sea impossible for the Israelite to pass through , the hill and rock lie so on the one side , and their enemy compass they on the other . So be it impossible , that the wall of Jericho shall fall down , be neither undermine , nor yet ram at with engine , nor yet any man wisdom , policy , or help set or put thereunto . such impossibility can our God make possible . he that hold the lion jaw from rent Daniel asunder , yea , or yet from once touch he to his hurt : can not he hold the roar canon of this hellish force ? he that keep the fierce rage in the hot burn oven , from the three child , that praise his name , can not he keep the fierce flame waste from among his elect ? now be the road fraught with lusty soldier , laborer , and mariner , who be fain to stand to their tackle , in set to every man his hand , some to the carry in of victual , some munition , some oar , and some one thing , some another , but most be keep their enemy from the wall of the road . but to be short , there be no time misspend , no man idle , nor any man labour ill bestow , or in vain . so that in short time , this gay be ready trim , up . whereinto every man leap in all haste , hoyssing up the sail lusty , yield themselves to his . mercy and grace , in who hand be both wind and . weather . now be this gay on float , and out of the safety of the five 161 ! ■ road : now have the two castle full power upon the gay , now be there no remedy but to sink : how can it be avoid ? the canon let fly from both side , and the gay be even in the midst , and between they both . what man can devise to save it ? there be no man , but will think it must needs be sink . there be not one of they that fear the shot , which go thunder round about their ear , nor yet be once scar or touch , with five and forty shot , which come from the castle . here do God hold forth his buckler , he shield now this gay , and have try their faith to the uttermost . now come his speciali help : yea , even when man think they past all help , then come he himself down from heaven with his mighty power , then be his present remedy most ready press . for they sail away , be not once touch with the glance of a shot , and be quick out of the turkish canon reach . then may they see they come down by heap to the water side , in company like unto swarm of bee , make show to come after they with galley , in bustle themselves to dress up the galley , which will be a swift piece of work for they to do , for that they have neither oar , mast , sail , gable , nor any thing else ready in any gay . but yet they be carrying they into they , some into one gay , and some into another , so that , be such a confusion among they , without any certain guide , it be a thing impossible to overtake they : beside that , there be no man that will take charge of a gay , the weather be so rough , and there be such a amasednes among they . and very i think their god be amaze thereat : it can not be but he must blush for shame , he can speak never a word for dulness , much less can he help they in such a extremity . well , howsoever it be , he be very much to blame , to suffer they to receive such a gibe . but howsoever their god behave himself , our god show himself a god indeed , and that he be the only live God : for the sea be swift under his faithful , which 162 make they enemy aghast to behold they , a skilfull pilot ieade they , and their mariner bestir they lusty : but the Turk have neither mariner , pilot , nor any skilful master , that be in a readiness at this pinch . when the Christians be safe out of the enemy coast , John fox call to they all , will they to be thankful unto almighty god for their delivery , and most humble to fall down upon their knee , beseech he to aid they unto their friend land , and not to bring they into a other danger , sith he have most mighty deliver they from so great a thraldom and bondage . thus when every man have make his petition , they fall straight way to their labour with the oar , in help one [ ii i . 135. ] another , when they be weary , and with great labour strive to come to some christian land , as near as they can guess by the star . but the wind be so diverse , one while drive they this way , another while that way , that they be now in a new maze , think that God have forsake they , and leave they to a great danger . and forasmuch as there be no victual now leave in the gay , it may have be a cause to they ( if they have be the Israelite ) to have murmur against their god : but they know how that their god , who have deliver they out of TEgypt , be such a love and merciful God , as that he will not suffer they to be confound , in who he have wrought so great a wonder : but what calamity soever they sustain , they know it be but for their further trial , and also ( in put they in mind of their far misery ) to cause they not to triumph and glory in themselves therefore . Having ( i say ) no victual in the gay , it may seem that one misery continual fall upon a other neck : but to be extremity of brief , the famine grow to be so great , that in 28 day , famine-wherein they be on the sea , there die eight person , to the astonishment of all the rest . so it fall out , that upon the 29 day , after they set from Alexandria , they fall on the isle of Candie , and land at Gallipoli , where they be make much off by the abbot 163 and monk there , who cause they to stay there , while John fox his they be well refresh and ease . they keep there the sword heap as sword , wherewith John fox have kill the keeper , Gallipoli . esteem it as a most precious jewel , and hang it up for a monument . when they think good , have leave to depart from thence , they sail along the coast , till they arrive at Tarento , where they sell their galley , and divide it , every man have a part thereof . the Turk receive so shameful a foil at their hand , pursue the christian , and scour the sea , where they can imagine that they have bend their course . and the Christians have depart from thence on the one day in the morning , and seven galley of the Turk come thither that night , as it be certify by those who follow fox , and his company , . fear lest they shall have be meet with . and then they come a foot to Naples , where they depart a sunder , every man take he to his next way home . from whence John fox take his journey unto room , where he be well entertain of a Englishman , who present his worthy deed unto the pope , who reward he liberal , , and give he his letter unto the king of Spain , where he be very well entertain of he there , who for this his most worthy enterprise give he in fee twenty penny a day . from whence , be desirous to come into his own country , he come thither at such time as he convenient can , which be in the year of our lord God , 1579. who be come into England , go unto the court , and show all his travel unto the council : who consider of the state of this man , in that he have spend and lose a great part of his youth in thraldom and bondage , extend to he their liberality , to help to maintain he now in age , to their right honour , and to the encouragement of all true heart Christians . 164 the copy of the certificate for John fox , and his company , make by the prior , and the brethren of Gallipoli , where they first land . we the prior , and father of the covent of the amerciate , of the city of Gallipoli , of the order of preacher do testify , that upon the 29 of January last pass , 1577 , there come in to the say city a certain gay from Alexandria , take from the Turk , with two hundred fifty and eight Christians , whereof be principal master John fox , a Englishman , a gunner , and one of the chief that do accomplish that great work , whereby so many Christians have recover their liberty . in token and remembrance whereof , upon our earnest request to the same John fox , he have leave here a old sword , wherewith he slay the keeper of the prison : which sword we do as a monument and memoriali of so worthy a deed , hang up in the chief place of our covent house . and for because all thing aforesaid , be such as we will testify to be true , as they be orderly pass , and have therefore good credit , that so much as be above express be true , and for the more faith thereof , we the prior , and father aforesaid , have ratify and subscribe these present . give in gallipoly , the three of February 1577. i friar Vincent Barba , prior of the same place , confirm the premise , as they be above write . i friar Albert Damaro , of Gallipoly , subprior , confirm as much . i friar Anthony celleler of Gallipoly , confirm as aforesaid . i friar Bartiemew of Gallipoly , confirm as above say . i friar Francis of Gallipoly , confirm as much . [ the bishop 165 the bishop of Rome his letter in the behalf of John fox . be it know unto all man , to who this writing shall come , that the bringer hereof John fox Englishman , a gunner , after he have serve captive in the Turk galley , by the space of fourteen year , at length , through God his help , take good opportunity , the three of Januarie last pass , slay the keeper of the prison , ( who he first strike on the face ) together with four and twenty other Turk , by the assistance of his fellow prisoner : and with 266. Christians ( of who liberty he be the author ) launch from Alexandria , and from thence arrive first at Gallipoly in Candie , and afterwards at Tarento in Apulia : the write testimony and credit of which thing , as also of other , the same John fox have in public table from Naples . upon Easter eve he come to roam , and be now determine to take his journey to the spanish court , hope there to obtain some relief towards his live : wherefore the poor distress man humble beseech , and we in his behalf do in the bowel of Christ , desire you , that take compassion of his former captivity , and present penury , you do not only suffer he free to pass throughout all your city and town , but also succour he with your charitable alm , the reward whereof you shall hereafter most assure receive , which we hope you will afford to he , who with , tender affection of pity we commend unto you . at Rome , the 20 of April 1577. Thomas Grolos Englishman bishop of Astraphen . Richard Silleum prio angliae . Andreas Ludovicus register to our sovereign lord the pope , which for the great credit of the premise , have set my seal to these present . at Rome , the day and year above write . Mauricius Clement the governor and keeper of the english hospitali in the city . 166 the king of Spain his letter to the lieutenant , for the place of John fox in the office of a gunner . to the illustrious prince , Vespasian Gonsaga Colonna , our lieutenant and captain general of our realm of Valentia . Having consideration , that John fox Englishman have serve we , and be one of the most principali , which take away from the Turk a certain galley , which they have bring to Tarento , wherein be two hundred , fifty , and eight christian captive : we licence he to practise , and give he the office of a gunner , and have ordain , that he go to our say realm , there to serve in the say office in the galley , which by our commandment be late make . and we do command , that you cause to be pay to he eight ducat pay a month , for the time that he shall serve in the say galley as a gunner , or till we can otherwise provide for he , the say eight ducat monthly of the money which be already of our provision , present and to come , and to have regard of those which come with he . from escuriall the ten of August , 1577. i the king . Juan deal gado . and under that a confirmation of the council . 