the true report of the siege and take of Famagusta , of the antique writer call Tamassus , a city in Cyprus 1571. in the which the whole order of all the skirmish , battery , mine , and assault give to the say fortress , may plain appear . english out of italian by William malim . to the right honourable and his singular good lord , and only patron the earl of Leicester , baron of Denbigh , knight of the honourable order of the garter , one of the queen majesty most honourable privy council etc William malim wish long health with increase of honour . t have be a natural instinct ( right honourable and my especial good lord ) ingraff in noble personage heart , much approve and confirm also by custom , for they to seek from time to time , by some mean in their life , by the which they after their death may deliver over their name to their posterity : lest otherwise with their body , their fame also altogether may perchance be bury . upon the which consideration we read many notable and famous thing to have be erect in time past of noble personage ( have have wealth at will ) in such sort , that not only certain ruin of the same sumptuous work build so many hundred year past , do still remain , but also the most part of those prince , the author of they , do continual by they dwell in our memory . as the pyramid make at Memphis , or near the famous river of Nilus , by the great expense of the king of Egypt : the tower call Pharia , make in the hand of Pharos by king Ptolemy : the wall of Babylon , make or at the least reedify by 118 queen Semiramis : Diana church at Ephesus build by all the noble person of Asia : Mausolus tomb or sepulchre , make by his wife queen of Caria : colossus Solis place at Rhodes , i remember not by what prince charge , but make by the hand of care Lindius scholar to Lysippus : and the image of Jupiter , make of ivory by the hand of the skilful workman Phydias . the which monument make of barbarous and heathen prince to redeem themselves from oblivion deserve both for the magnificence , and perfect workmanship of the same , to be account in those day as the seven wonder of the world . since the which time , a easy , ready , and light way , be also of more continuance than the former , have be find out , namely , letter , which be first invent by the caldies and Egyptians , as we read , and augment since by other , to our great benefit , and now last of all ( not long time pass ) the same to have be commit to printer press , to the great perfection of the same : man being first inforce to write their act and monument in beast skin dry , in bark of tree , or otherwise perchance as unready . by the which benefit of letter ( now reduce into print ) we see how easy a thing it be , and have be for noble person , to live for ever by the help of learned man . for the memory of those two worthy and valiant captain Scipio and Hannibal have be long before this present [ ill 118. ] quite forget , except Titus Livius , or some such learned historiographer have write of they in time . and Alexander Magnus himself that great conqueror have nothing be speak of , have not Q. Curtius , or some other like by his learned stile revive the remembrance of he , and call back again his do to his posterity . for the which cause we see common in all age learned man to be much make of by noble personage , as that rare pattern of learning Aristotle to have be great honour of that former renown monarch Alexander : who affirm open , that he be more bind to his master Aristotle , then to king Philip his father , because the one have well frame his mind , the other only his body . many other like example i can allege at this present , if i know not unto who i now write , or in what : for your honour be skilful in history , and so familiar acquaint with the matter it self , that be in still entertain learned man with all courtesy , i shall seem to light a candle at noon tide , to put you in remembrance of the one , or to exhort you to do the other , daily be accustom to perform the same . Crassus say that in Tully first book , de oratore : that a lawyer house be the oracle of the whole city . but i can just witness , that for these five year last pass , since my return from my travel beyond the sea , that your lodging in the court ( where i through your undeserving goodness to my great comfort do daily frequent ) have be a continual receptacle or harbour for all learned man come from both the eye of the realm , Cambridge , and Oxford ( of the which university your lordship be Chanceller ) to their great satisfaction of mind , and ready dispatch of their suit . especial for preacher and minister of true religion : of the which you have be from time to time not only a great favourer , but a earnest furtherer , and protector : so that these two nursery of learning ( in one of the which i have before this spend part of my time , that i may speak bold what i think ) shall wrong your honour great , and much forget themselves , if by all mean possible they shall not hereafter ( as at this present to their small power many well learned gentleman of they do ) labour and travel in show of themselves thankful , to reverence and honour your lordship , and honest their own name : who study certain will sudden decay and fall flat , if they be not hold up by such noble prop , and have not some sure ankerhold in their distress to lean unto . how ready daily your travel be , and have long be beside to benefit all other person , in who any spark of virtue or honesty remains , i need not labour to express , the world 1 20 know already the same . but whosoever they be , that in all their life time have a especial care by all mean to profit as many as they be able , and hurt none , do not only a laudable act , but lead a perfect and very godly life . whereupon Strabo affirm this most true to be speak of they : mortales tum demum deum imitor , cum benefici fuerint . that be , mortali man then special to follow the nature of God , when they be beneficial and bountiful to other . great commendation undoubted it bring to any noble personage , that as the moon , that light and brightness which she receive of the sun , be wont present to spread abroad upon the face of the earth , to the refresh and comfort of all inferior and natural thing bear life : so for he , to bestow all that favour and credit , which he have get at the prince hand , to the help and relief of the worthy and needy . great be the force ( my right honourable lord ) of true virtue , which cause man , as Tully write in his book de Amicitia , to be love and honour oft of those person , which never see they . whereof i never have better proof ( i take God and my one conscience to witness , the which i declare also to certain of my friend assoon as i return ) then at my last be at Constantinople , in the year of our lord master 1564 , whereas i oft resort ( as occasion serve ) to the right honourable christian ambassador , while i make my p abode there ( namely unto monsieur Antonio Petrimol , lieger there for the french king , signior m. victor braga-dino , for the signiory of Venice , signior Lorenzo Giustiniano , for the state of Scio , or Chios , and signior albertacio delli alberti , for the duke of Florence ) hear they often report and speak very honorable of your lordship , partly for your other good inclination of nature , but especial for your liberality , and courteous entreat of diverse of their friend and countryman , which upon sundry occasion have be here in this our realm . so that to conclude , all man just favour your honourable deal and desert : and i for my part have reverence and honour 121 Scio lose . the english voyage the same evermore both here at home , and elsewhere abroad , wish often to have have some just occasion to pay part of that in good will , which my slender ability will never suffer i full to discharge . for unto who shall i soon present any thing any way , especial concern matter do abroad , then unto your lordship , by who i be much cherish abroad in my travel , and maintain since my return here at home ? for the which cause i have enterprise ( hope great of your lordship favour herein ) to clothe and set forth a few italian news in our english attire , be first move thereunto by the right worshipful m. D. Wilson master of her majesty request , your honour assure trusty friend , a great and painful furtherer of learning , who i , and many other for diverse respect ought to reverence : who remember that i have be at Cyprus , be willing that my pen shall travel about the christian and turkish affair , which there late have happen : persuading himself , that somewhat thereby i may benefit this our native country . against who reasonable motion i can not great wrestle , hazard rather my slender skill in attempt and perform this his request task , than he through my refusal shall seem to want any jot of my good will . in offer up the which news , although i shall present no new thing to your honour , because you be so well acquaint with the italian copy , as i know : yet i trust your lordship will not mislike , that the same which be both pleasant to read , and so necessary to be know for diverse of our captain and other our countryman , which be ignorant in the italian tongue , may thus now show it self abroad , cover under the wing of your lordship protection . certain it move i much to remember the loss of those three notable hand , to the great discomfort of all Christendom , to those hellish Turk , horseleech of christian blood : namely Rhodes besiege on saint John Baptists day , and take on Johns day the Evangelist , be the 27 of December 1522. Scio or Chios be 122 lose since my be there , take of Piali bassa with 80 galley , the 17 of April 1566. and now last of all not only Famagusta the chief hold and fortress in Cyprus Cyprus lose . to have be lose of the venetian the 15 of August last past 1571 ( the chief governor and captain of they be hew in sunder by the commandment of that tyrant Mustafa bassa ) but all the whole hand also to be conquer by those cruel turk , ancient profess enemy to all christian religion . in the which evil success ( come to we as i take it for our offence ) as i lament the generail loss : so i be sure pensive to understand by this too true a report of the vile death of two particular noble gentleman of Venice , signior m. Lorenzo Tiepolo , and signior m. Giovanni Antonio Querini : of both the which i in my travail be very courteous use , the former of they be then ( as now also he be in this overthrow ) governor of Baffo in Cyprus , the other captain of one of the castle at Corcyra in Greece , now call Corfu . but thing past be past amendment , and they can never die more honourable , then in the defence of their country . beside that the late blow , which the turk have receive since this their fury , in token of God wrath against they , do much comfort every christian heart . Moreover this uniform preparation which be certain conclude , and forthwith look for , by very many christian prince ( will God by all general ) against these barbarous mahometist : who cruelty and beastly behaviour i partly know , and be able to judge of , have be in Turkey among they more than eight month together . who unfaithfulness also and breach of promise , as the venetian manly courage in defence of themselves , and their fortress , your honour may easy read in this short treatise and small handful of leaf , i have set down also a short description of the hand of Cyprus , for the better understanding of the whole matter . the which i not only most humble beseech your honour now favourable to accept as a earnest penny of more to 123 come , and of my present good will : but with your accustom goodness towards i , to defend the same against such person , who tongue too ready roll sometime against other man painful travel , persuade themselves to purchase the soon some credit of learning with the rude sort , by control and overdaintie sift of other man labour task . for i know in all age to be find as well basilisk as elephant . thus nothing doubt of your ready aid herein , as i assure trust of your honour favourable acceptation of this my poor present , wish long life with the increase of God holy spirit to your lordship and to all your most honourable family ( unto who i have whole dedicate my self by my own choice and election for ever ) i , crave pardon for my former boldness , most humble thus take my leave . from lambhith the 23 of march . Ann. 1572. your honour most humble and faithful servant for ever , William malim . 