a letter write in spanish by sir Edward Osborne , to the king of Alger , the 20. of July , 1584. in the behalf of certain english captive there detain . Uy alto y poderoso Rey , sea servida vostra alteza . Como la muy alta y potentissima magestad del grand Senor tiene hecho articulos de privilegios con la serenissimus magestad de nuestra Reyna d’Inglatierra , para los vassallos della poder libremente yr y bolver , y tratar por mar y tierra en los dominios de sum potentissima magestad , Como a la claram paresce por los dichos articulos , de che embiamo el tractado all Senor Juan Tipton nuestro commissario , para le muestrar a vostra Alteza . Contra el tenor de los quales articulos por do galera the sum ciudad de Alger ha sido hechado all fondo en la mar un des nuestros navios que venia de Patras , que es en la Morea , cargado de corinte y otras mercaderias , que alii se compraron , y las mass de la gente del la matado y ahogados en la mar , y el resto est a detenidos por esclavo : cosa muy contraria a los dichos articulos y privilegios . que es occasion , que por esto supplicamo a vostra Alteza muy humilmente , que , pue que la potentissima magestad deal grand signior es servida nos favorescer por los dichos articulos , tambien sea servida vostra Alteza assistirnos en ello , otorgan-donos por vostra autoridad sum ajuda y favour , segun que esperamo , para que puedan estar libre , y bolver para anca aquello pobres hombre ansi hechos esclavo , common dicho es . y ansi mismo , que man vostra Alteza dar orden a los capitanes , maestre y gente de las galera , que nos dexen de aqui adelante hacer nuestro trafico con sey naos cada anno para turquia a los dominios del grand signior a paz y a salvo , por no contrariar a los dichos nuestros privilegios , Llevando cada una de nuestras 268 sir Edward OSBORNE’S letter dicha naos por se conoscer un salvo condutto de sum alta and potentissima magestad . y con esta vostra tan senal-lada merce in favour que en esso reciberemos , quedaremos nosotros con grandissima obligation a vostra Alteza de servir la por ello , segun que el dicho signior Juan Tipton , a quien nos reportamo de todo lo dema , mejor informefa vostra Alteza : Cuya serenissimus persona y estado supplicamos y pidimos a dios omnipotent prosper in accrescente con toda felicitad y honra . de la ciuidad de Londres a los veynte dias de Julio deal will y quinientos y ochenta y quatro annos . all servito de vuestra Alteza por y en nombre de todo los tratantes en turquia , io el Mayor de Londres , Edward Osborne . the same in english . right high and mighty king , may it please your highness to understand , that the most high and most mighty majesty of the grand signior have confirm certain article of privilege with the most excellent majesty of our queen of England , that her subject may free go and come , and traffic by sea and land in the dominion of his most mighty majesty , as appear more at large by you say article , whereof we have send the copy unto m. Joh. Tipton our commissary , to show the same unto your highness . against the tenor of which article , one of our ship which come from Patras which be in Morea , lade with corant and other merchandize which be buy in those part , be sink by 2. galley of your ci tie of Alger , and the great number of the man thereof be slay and drown in the sea , the residue be detain as slave : a act very contrary to the meaning of the aforesaid article and privilege : which be the occasion that by these present we beseech your highness very humble , that since it have please the most mighty majesty of the grand signior to favour we with the say 269 A.D. i584 . a english ship sink by two galley of Alger . privilege , it will please your highness in like manner to assist we in the same , grant we by your authority , your aid and favour , accord as our hope be , that these poor man so detain in captivity , as be aforesaid , may be set at liberty , and return into their country . and likewise that your highness will send to give order to the captain , master and people of your galley , that from henceforth they will suffer we to use . our 0 traffic with six ship yearly into turquoise unto the dominion of the grand signior in peace and safety , [ il i . 176. ] that they do not withstand those our say privilege , every one of our foresay ship carry with they a passport of his most high and most mighty majesty to be know by . and for that your so singular favour and courtesy which in so do we shall receive , we on our part with all bind duty unto your highness , will seek to honour you in that behalf , accord as the say master John Tipton ( to who we refer our self touch all other circumstance ) shall moor at large inform your highness , who most excellent person and estate , we pray and beseech almighty God to prosper and increase with all felicity and honour . from the city of London , the 20. of July , 1584. at the service of your highness , for and in the name of our whole company trade into turquoise , i mayor of London , Edward Osburne . 