commission give by m. William hareborne the english ambassador , to Richard Forster , authorise he consul of the english nation in the part of Aleppo , Damascus , Aman , Tripoli , Jerusalem , etc William Harborne , her majesty ambassador , Ligier with the grand signior , for the affair of the Levant do in her majesty name confirm and appoint Richard Forster gentleman , my deputy and Consuli in the part of Aleppo , Damascus , Aman , Tripoli , Jerusalem , and all other port whatsoever in the province of Syria , Palestina , and jury , to execute the office of Consuli over all our nation her majesty subject , of what estate or quality soever : give he hereby full power to defend , protect , and maintain all such her majesty subject as to he shall be obedient , in all honest and just cause whatsoever : and in like case no less power to imprison , punish , and correct any and all such as he shall find disobedient to he in the like cause , even in 260 1583-such order as 1 my self may do by virtue of her majesty commission give i the 26 of November 1582 , the copy whereof i have annex to this present under her majesty seal deliver i to that use . straight charge and command all her majesty subject in those part , as they will avoid her highness displeasure and their own harm , to honour his authority , and have due respect unto the same , aid and assist he there with their person and good in any cause requisite to her majesty good service , and commodity or her dominion . in witness whereof i have confirm and seal these present at Rapamat my mansion house by Pera over against Constantinople , the 20 of June 1583. a letter of direction of the english ambassador to m. Richard Forster , appoint the first english consuli at Tripoli in Syria . ousin Forster , these few word be for your remembrance when it shall please the almighty to send you safe arrival in Tripoli of Syria . when it shall please God to send you thither , you be to certify our nation at Tripoli of the certain day of your land , to the end they both may have their house in a readiness , and also meet you personal at your entrance to accompany you , be your self apparel in the best manner . the next , second , or three day , after your come , give it out that you be craze and not well dispose , by mean of your travel at sea , during which time , you and those there be most wise to determine in what manner you be to present your self to the Beglerbi , Cadi , and other officer : who every of they be to be present accord to the order accustom of other former in like office : which after the note of John blank , late vice-consul of Tripoli for the french , deliver you 261 herewith , be very much : and therefore , if thereof you can save any thing , i pray you do it , as i doubt not but you will . they be to give you there also another janizary accord as the french have ; who outward proceed you be to imitate and follow , in such sort as you be not his inferior , accord as those of our nation heretofore with he resident can inform you . touch your demeanour after your place , you be wise to proceed consider both french and Venetian will have a envious eye on you : who if they perceive wise and well advise , they will fear to offer you any injury . but if they shall perceive any insufficiency in you , they will not omit any occasion to harm you . they be subtle , malicious , and dissemble people , wherefore you must always have their do for suspect , and wary walk in all your action : wherein if you call for god divine assistance , as do become every faithful good christian , the same shall in such sort direct you as he shall be glorify , your self preserve , your do bless , and your enemy confound . which if contrariwise you omit and forget , your enemy malice shall|be satisfy with your confusion , which God defend , and for his mercy sake keep you . touch any outloper of our nation , which may happen to come thither to traffic , you be not to suffer , but to imprison the chief officer , and suffer the rest not to traffic at any time , and together enter in such bond as you think meet , that both they shall not deal in the grand signior dominion , and also not harm , during their voyage , any his subject ship , vessel , or whatsoever other , but quiet depart out of the same country without any harm do . And touch those there for the company , you be to defend they accord to your privilege and such commandment as you have have hence , in the best order you may . in all and every your action , at any hand , beware of rashness and anger , after both which repentance follow . touch your deal in their affair of merchandise , you be not to deal 262 otherwise then in secret and counsel . you be careful to foresee the charge of the house , that the same may be in all honest measure to the company profit and your own health through moderation in diet , and at the best hand , and in due time to provide thing needful , to save what may be : for he that buy every thing when he need it , harm his own house , and help the retailer . so as it be , in my opinion , wisdom to foresee the buy of all thing in their native soil , in due time , and at the first hand every year , as you be to send the company the particular account of the same expense . touch your self , you be to cause to be employ fifty or threescore ducat , videlicet , twenty in soap , and the rest in spice , whereof the most part to be pepper , whereof we spend very much . the spice be to be provide by our friend William barrat , and the soap buy you at your first arrival , for that this ship lade then same commodity will cause it to amount in price . from our mansion Rapamat , the five of September 1583. 