the passport in italian grant to Thomas Shingleton Englishman , by the king of Algiers . 1583. oi Assan bassa vicere and lochotenente e capitan della jurisditione de Algiers doniamo e concediamo libero salvo condutto a Thomas Shingleton mercadante , che possi con suo vassello e marinari de che nation se siano , e mercadantia di qual si voglia nation , andare and venire , e negotiare , e contrattare liberamente in questa citta de Algiers and all tri lochi de la nostra jurisditione cosi di ponente comi di levante : and cosi anchora commandiamo all capitan di mare di Algiers and d ’ altri lochi de nostra jurisditione , ray de Vasselli and capitani de levante , and altri capitani di vasselli tanto grossi como picholi , si commanda a qual si voglia , che trovando il sopradetto Thomas Shingleton Inglese nelli mari di Genua , Francia , Napoli , Calabria , e sardigna con suo vassello e mercantia , and homini de che nationi si siano , non gli debba molestare , ne piggliare , ne toccare cosa de nessuna manera tanto di denare , como di qual si voglia altra robba , sotto la pena e disgratia di perdir la vita and la robba : et per quanto havete a caro la gratia del grand Signor nostro patron sultan Murates Ottomano , lo lasciarete andare per suo camino senza dargli nessuno impedimento . Dato in 266 Algieri in nostro reggio Palazzo , sigillato del nostro reggio sigillo , e fermato della grand ferma , and scritto del nostro reggio Secretario , ill the 23 de Jenaro , 1583. the same in english . we Assan Bassha viceroy and lieutenant , and captain of the jurisdiction of Algiers , give and grant free safeconduct to Thomas Shingleton merchant , that with his ship and mariner , of what nation soever they be , and with his merchandise of what country soever , he may go and come , and trade and traffic free in this city of Algiers , and other place of our jurisdiction , as well of the west as of the east . and in like sort we further command the captain of the sea of Algiers , and other place of our jurisdiction , the reiz of vessel and captain of the Levant , and other captain of vessel aswell great as small , whosoever they be , we do command they , that find the foresay Thomas Shingleton Englishman in the sea of Genua , France , Naples , Calabria , and Sardinia , with his ship and merchandise , [ ii i . 175. ] and man of what nation soever they be , that they molest they not , neither take nor touch any kind of thing of they , neither money nor any other kind of good , under pain and peril of loose of their life and good : and as you make account of the favour of the grand signior our lord sultan murate hottoman , so see you let he pass on his way without any manner of impediment . Dated at Alger in our kingly palace , sign with our princely signet , and seal with our great seal , and write by our secretary of estate , the 23. of Januarie , 1583. 