the voyage make to Tripoli in Barbary , in the year 1583. with a ship call the Jesus , wherein the adventure and distress of some Englishman be true report , and other necessary circumstance observe . write by Thomas Sanders . his voyage be set forth by the right worshipful sir Edward Osborne knight , chief merchant of all the turkish company , and one master Richard staper , the ship be of the burden of one hundred ton , call the Jesus , she be bud at farmne a river by Portsmouth . the owner be master Thomas Thomson , Nicholas Carnaby , and John Gilman . the master be one ache Hellier of Blackwall , and his mate be one Richard morris of that place : their phot be one Anthony Jerado a Frenchman , of the province of Marseils : the purser be one William Thomson our owner son : the merchant factor be roman sonning a Frenchman , and Richard skeg servant unto the say master staper . the owner be bind unto the merchant by charter party thereupon , in one thousand mark , that the say ship by god permission shall go for Tripoli in Barbary , that be to say , first from Portsmouth to Newhaven in Normandy , from thence to saint Lucar , otherwise call saint Lucas in Andeluzia , and from thence to Tripoli , which be in the east part of Africa , and so to return unto London . but here ought every man to note and consider the work of our god , that many time what man do determine God do disappoint . the say master have some occasion to go to farmne , take with he the pilot and the purser , and return again by mean of a perry of wind , the boat wherein they be , be drown , with the say master , the purser , and all the company : only the say pilot by experience in swim save himself : 292 these be the beginning of our sorrow . after which the say master mate will not proceed in that voyage , and the owner hear of this misfortune , and the unwillingness of the master mate , do send down one Richard nm ma ! ter deimond , and ship he for master , who do choose ch°sen-for his mate one Andrew Dier , and so the say ship depart on her voyage accord : that be to say , about the 16 of October , in An. 1583. she make sail from Portsmouth , and the 18 day then next follow she arrive at Newhaven , where our say last master dei - new mond by a surfeit die . the factor then appoint master te • the say Andrew Dier , be then master mate , to be their master for that voyage , who do choose to be his mate the two quarter master of the same ship , to wit , Peter Austine , and Shillabey , and for Purser be ship one Richard Burges . afterwards about the 8 day of November we make sail forth ward , and by force of weather we be drive back again into Portesmouth , where we renew our victual and other necessary , and then the wind come fair . about the 29 day then next follow we depart thence , and the first day of December by mean of a contrary wind , we be driven'to Plymouth . the 18 day then next follow , we make forthward again , and by force of weather we be drive to Falmouth , where we remain until the first day of January : at which time the wind come fair , we depart thence , and about the 20 day of the say month we arrive safe at saint Lucar . and about the 9 day of march next follow , we make sail from thence , and about the 18 day of the same month we come to Tripoli in Barbary , where we be very well entertain by the king of that country , and also of the commons . the commodity of that place be ’ sweet oil : the king there be a merchant , and the rather ( willing to prefer himself before his commons ) request our say factor to traffic with he , and promise they that if they will take his oil at his [ n . i . 185. ] own price , they shall pay no manner of custom , and 293 another ship of Bristol come to Tripoli . the english voyage they take of he certain ton of oil : and afterward perceive that they may have far better cheap notwithstanding the custom free , they desire the king to licence they to take the oil at the pleasure of his commons , for that his price do exceed they : whereunto the king will not agree , but be rather content to abate his price , insomuch that the factor buy all their oil of the king custom free , and so jade the same aboard . in the mean time there come to that place one mile Dickenson in a ship of Bristol , who together with our say factor take a house to themselves there . Oure french factor roman sonning desire to buy a commodity in the market , and want money , desire the say mile Dickenson to lend he a hundred chikinoe until he come to his lodging , which he do , and afterward the same sonning meet with mile Dickenson in the street , and deliver he money bind up in a napkin : say , master Dickenson there be the money that i borrow of you , and so thank he for the same : he doubt nothing less than falsehood , which be seidome know among merchant , and special be together in one house , and be the more detestable between Christians , they be in turquoise among the heathen . the say Dickenson do not tell the money present , until he come to his lodging , and then find nine chikinoe lack of his hundred , which be about three pound , for that every Chikino be worth seven shilling of english money , he come to the say roman sonning and deliver he his handkerchief , and ask he how many chikinoe he have deliver he ? Sonnings answer , a hundred : Dickenson say no : and so they protest and swear on both part . but in the end the say roman sonning do swear deep with detestable oath and curse , and pray God that he may show his work on he , that other may take ensample thereby , and that he may be hang like a dog , and never come into England again , if he do 294 not deliver unto the say Dickenson a hundred chikinoe . and here behold a notable example of all blasphemer , curser and swearer , how God reward he accord : for many time it come to pass , that God show his miracle upon such monstrous blasphemer , to the ensample of other , as now hereafter you shall hear what befall to this roman sonning . there be a man in the say town a pledge , who name be patron Norado , who the year before have do this sonning some pleasure there . the foresay patron Norado be indebt unto a Turk of that town , in the sum of four hundred and fifty crown , for certain good send by he into Christendom in a ship of his own , and by his own brother , and himself remain in Tripoli as pledge until his say brother return : and , as the report go there , after his brother arrival into Christendom , he come among lewd company , and lose his brother say ship and good at dice , and never return unto he again . the say patron Norado be void of all hope , and find now opportunity , consult with the say sonning for to swim a seaboorde the island , and the ship be then out of danger , shall take he in ( as after be confess ) and so to go to Tolon in the province of Marseilis with this patron Norado , and there to take in his lade . the ship be ready the first day of May , and have her sail all aboard , our say factor do take their leave of the king , who very courteous bid they farewell , and when they come aboard , they command the master and the company hasty to get out the ship : the master answer that it be unpossible , for that the a conspiracy practise by the french factor , to deceive a turkish merchant of 4 50 crown . wind be contrary and overblow . and he require we upon forfeiture of our band , that we shall do our endeavour to get she forth . then go we to warp out the ship , and present the king send a boat aboard of we , with three man in she , command the say sonning to come a shore : at who come , the 295 king demand of he custom for the oil : Sonnings answer he that his highness have promise to deliver they custom free . but notwithstanding the king weigh not his say promise , and as a infideli that have not the fear of God before his eye , nor regard of his word , albeit he be a king , he cause the say sonning to pay the custom to the uttermost penny . and afterward will he to make haste gway , say , that the janissary will have the oil ashore again . Theise janissary be soldier there under the great Turk , and their power be above the king . and so the say factor depart from the king , and come to the waterside , and call for a boat to come aboard , and the beginning he bring with he the foresay patron Norado . the ' fromes and company inquisitive to know what man that be , occasion of all sonning answer , that he be his countryman , a their misery . passenger : i pray God say the company , that we come not into trouble by this man . then say Sonnings angry , what have you to do with any matter of i ? if any thing chance otherwise then well , i must answer for all . now the Turk unto who this patron Norado be [ ii i . 186. ] indebt , miss he ( suppose he to be aboard of our ship ) present go unto the king , and tell he that he think that his pledge patron Norado be aboard of the english ship , whereupon the king present send a boat aboard of we , with three man in she , command the say sonning to come a shore , and not speak any thing as touch the man , he say that he will come present in his own boat , but assoon as they be go , he will we to warp forth the ship , and say that he will see the knave hang before he will go a shore . and when the king see that he come not a shore , but still continue warp away the ship , he straight command the gunner of the bulwark next unto we , to shoot three shoot without ball . than we come all to the say sonning , and ask of he what the matter be that we be shoot at , he say 296 that it be the janissary who will have the oil a shore again , and will we to make haste away , and after that he have discharge three shot without ball , he command all the gunner in the town to do their endeavour to sink we , but the turkish gunner can not once strike we , wherefore the king send present to the Banio : ( this Banio be the prison whereas all the captive lay at night ) and promise if that there be any that can either sink we , or else cause we to come in again , he shall have a hundred crown , and his liberty . with that come forth a Spaniard call Sebastian , which have be a old servitor in Flanders , and he say , that upon the performance of that promise , he will undertake either to sink we , or to cause we to come in again , and thereto he will gage his life , and at the first shot he split our rudder head in piece , and the second shoot he strike we under the water , and the three shot he shoot we through our foremast with a colver shot , and thus he have rend both our rudder and mast , and shoot we under water , we be enforce to go in again . This Sebastian for all his diligence herein , have neither his liberty , nor a hundred crown , so promise by the say king , but after his service do be commit again to prison , whereby may appear the regard that the Turk or infideli have of his word , although he be able to perform . it , yea more , though he be a king . than our merchant see no remedy , they together with five of our company go a shore , and then they cease shoot : they shoot unto we in the whole , nine and thirty shoot , without the hurt of any man . and when our merchant come a shore , the king command present that they with the rest of our company that be with they , shall be chein four and four , to a hundred weight of iron , and when we come in with the ship , there come present above a hundred turk aboard of we , and they search we , and strip our very clothes from our back , and break open our chest , 297 and make a spoil of all that we have : and the christian caitiff likewise that come a board of we make spoil of our good , and use we as ill as the Turk do . and our master mate have a Geneva bible in his hand , there come the king chief gunner , and take it out from he , who show i of it , and i have the language , go present to the king treasurer , and tell he of it , say , that sith it be the will of God that we shall fall into their hand , yet that they shall grant we to use our conscience to our own discretion , as they suffer the Spaniard and other nation to use they , and he grant we : then i tell he that the master gunner have take away a bible from one of our man : the treasurer go present and command he to deliver up the bible again , which he do : and within a little after he take it from the man again , and i show the treasurer of it , and present he command he to deliver it again : say , thou villain , will thou turn to Christianity again ? for he be a renegado , which be one that first be a christian , and afterward become a Turk , and so he deliver i the bible the second time . and then i have it in my hand , the gunner come to i , and speak these word , say , thou dog , i will have the book in despite of thou , and take it from i , say : if thou tell the king treasurer of it any more , by Mahomet i will be revenge of thou . notwithstanding i go the three time unto the king treasurer , and tell he of it , and he come with i , say thus unto the gunner : by the head of the great Turk , if thou take it from he again , thou shall have a hundred bastinade . and forthwith he deliver i the book , say , he have not the value of a pin of the spoil of the ship , which be the better for he , as hereafter you shall hear : for there be none , neither Christian nor Turk that take the value of a pennyworth of our good from we , but perish both body and good 298 within seventeen month follow , as hereafter shall plain appear . then come the guardian bassa , which be the keeper of the king captive , to fetch we all a shore , and then i remember the miserable estate of poor distress captive , in the time of their bondage to those infidel , go to my own chest , and take out thereof a jar of oil , and fill a basket full of white Ruske to carry a shore with i , but before i come to the Banio , the turkish boy have take away almost all my bread , and the keeper say , deliver i the jar of oil , and when thou come to the [ ii i . 187. ] Banio thou shall have it again , but i never have it of he any more . but when i come to the Banio , and see our merchant and all the rest of our company in chain , and we all ready to receive the same reward , what heart in the world be there so hard , but will have pity our cause , hear or see the lamentable greeting there be betwixt we : all this happen the first of May , 1584. and the second day of the same month , the king the english-with all his counsel sit in judgement upon we . the araigud . first that be have forth to be arraign , be the factor , and the master , and the king ask they wherefore they come not a shore when he send for they . And roman sonning answer , that though he be king on shore , and may command there , so be he as touch those that be under he : and therefore say , if any offence be , the fault be whole in my self , and in no other . then forthwith the king give judgement , that the say roman sonning shall be hang over the north-east bulwark : from whence he convey the forename patron Norado , and then he call for our master Andrew Dier , and use few word to he , and so condemn he to be hang over the wall of the westermost bulwark . 299 then fall our other factor ( name Richard skeg ) upon his knee before the king , and say , i beseech your highness either to pardon our master , or else suffer i to die for he , for he be ignorant of this cause . and then the people of that country favour the say Richard skeg beseech the king to pardon they both . so then the king speak these word : behold , for thy sake , i pardon the master . then present the Turk shout , and cry , say : away with the master from the presence of the king . and then he come into the Banio whereas we be , and tell we what have happen , and we all rejoice at the good hap of master skeg , that he be save , and our master for his sake . but afterward our joy be turn to double sorrow , for in the mean time the king mind be alter : for that one of his counsel have advise he , that unless the master die also , by the law they can not confiscate the ship nor good , neither captive any of the man : master Dier whereupon the king send for our master again , and give condemn to anotijer judgement after his pardon for one cause , a bulwark^ which be that he shall be hang . here all true Christians may see what trust a christian man may put in a infidel promise , who be a king , pardon a man now , as you have hear , and within a hour after hang he for the same cause before a whole multitude : and also promise our factor their oil custom free , and at their go away make they pay the uttermost penny for the custom thereof . a Frenchman and when that roman sonning see no remedy but turnedTurke , shou | j die , he protest to turn Turk , hope ™ fe^and after - thereby to have save his life . then say the Turk , if ward be thou will turn Turk , speak the word that thereunto hang . belong : and he do so . then say they unto he , now thou shall die in the faith of a Turk , and so he do , as the Turk report that be at his execution . and the forename patron Norado , whereas before he have liberty and do nothing , he then be condemn slave 300 * 5 $4-perpetuali , except there be payment make of the foresay sum of money . then the king condemn all we , who be in number six and twenty , of the which , two be hang ( as you have hear ) and one die the first day we come on shore , by the visitation of almighty God : and the other three and twenty he condemn slave perpetual unto the great Turk , and the ship and good be confiscate to the use of the great Turk : and then we all fall down upon our knee , give God thank for this sorrowful visitation , and give our self whole to the almighty power of God , unto who all secret be know , that he of his goodness will vouchsafe to look upon we . here may all true christian heart see the wonderful work of God show upon such infidel , blasphemer , whoremaster , and renegade Christians , and so you shall read in the end of this book , of the like upon the unfaithful king and all his child , and of as many as take any portion of the say good . but first to show our miserable bondage and slavery , every jive and unto what small pittance and allowance we be ™ en tie , for every five man have allowance but five asper ot ofbreadaday . bread in a day , which be but two penny English : and our lodging be to lie on the bare board , with a very simple cape to cover we , we be also forcible and most violent shave , head and beard , and within three day after , i and six more of my fellow , together with fourscore italian and Spaniards be send forth in a galeot to take a greekish carmosell , which come into Africa to steal negro , and go out of Tripoli unto that place , which be two hundred and fourty league thence , but we be chain three and three to a oar , and we row naked above the girdle , and the boatswain of the galley walk abaft the mast , and his mate afore the mast , and each of they a bull pissell dry in their hand , and when their devilish choler rise , they will strike the christian for no cause : and [ ii i . 188. ] 301 the christian send 3. time a week 30. mile to fetch wood . the english voyage they allow we but half a pound of bread a man in a day without any other kind of sustenance , water except . and when we come to the place whereas we see the carmosell , we be not suffer to have neither needle , bodkin , knife , or any other weapon about we , nor at any other time in the night , upon pain of one hundred bastinade : we be then also cruel manackle in such sort , that we can not put our hand the length of one foot asunder the one from the other , and every night they search our chain three time , to see if they be fast rivet : we continue fight with the carmosell three hour , and then we take it , and lose but two of our man in that fight , but there be slay of the greek five , and fourteen be cruel hurt , and they that be sound , be present make slave , and chain to the oar : and within fifteen day after we return again into Tripoli , and then we be put to all manner of slavery . i be put to hew stone , and other to carry stone , and some to draw the cart with earth , and some to make mortar , and some to draw stone , ( for at that time the Turk build a church : ) and thus we be put to all kind of slavery that be to be do . and in the time of our be there , the moor that be the husbandman of the country , rebel against the king , because he will have constrain they to pay great tribute than heretofore they have do , so that the soldier of Tripoli march forth of the town to have join battle against the moor for their rebellion , and the king send with they four piece of ordinance , which be draw by the captive twenty mile into the country after they , and at the sight thereof the moor flee , and then the captain return back again . than i and certain christian moor be send twelve mile into the country with a cart to load timber , and we return again the same day . now the king have 18. captive , which three time a week go to fetch wood thirty mile from the town : 302 and on a time he appoint i for one of the 18. and we depart at eight of the clock in the night , and upon the way as we ride upon the camel , i demand of one of our company , who do direct we the way ? he say , that there be a moor in our company which be our guide : and i demand of they how Tripoli and the wood bare one off the other ? and he say , east Northeast , and west Southwest . and at midnight or near thereabouts , as i be ride upon my camel , i fall asleep , and the guide and all the rest ride away from i , not think but i have be among they . when i awake , and find my self alone dare not call nor hallow for fear least the wild moor shall hear i , because they hold this opinion , that in kill a christian they do god good service : and muse with my self what be best for i to do , if i shall go forth , and the wild moor shall hap to meet with i , they will kill i : and on the other side , if i shall return back to Tripoli without any wood or company , i shall be most miserable use : therefore of two evil , rather i have to go forth to the lose of my life , than to turn back and trust to their mercy , fear to be use as before i have see other : for understand by some of my company before , how Tripoli and the say wood do lie one off another , by the north star i go forth at adventure , and as God will have it , i come right to the place where they be , even about a hour before day : there altogether we rest and give our camel provender , and assoon as the day appear , we . ride all into the wood : and i see no wood there , but a stick here and a stick there , about the bigness of a man arm grow in the sand , it cause i to marveile how so many camel shall be load in that place . the wood be juniper , we need no axe nor edge tool to cut it , but pluck it up by strength of hand root and all , which a man may easy do , and so gather it together , a little at one place and so at another , and jade our camel , and come home about seven of the clock that 3°3 eighteen captive runaway from Tripoli . the judgement of God upon blasphemer . £11 . i . 189. ] the green dragon . the english voyage night follow : because i fall lame , and my camel be tire , i leave my wood in the way . there be in Tripoli that time a venetian , who name be Benedetto Venetiano , and seventeen captive moor of his company , which run away from Tripoli in a boat , and come in sight of a island call Malta , which lie fourty league from Tripoli right north , and be within a mile of the shore , and very fair weather , one of their company say , in dispetto de dio adesso venio a pilliar terra , which be as much to say : in the despite of God i shall now fetch the shore , and present there arise a mighty storm , with thunder and rain and the wind at north , their boat be very small , so that they be enforce to bear up room , and to shear right afore the wind over against the coast of Barbary from whence they come , and row up and down the coast , their victual be spend , the 21. day after their departure they be enforce through the want of food to come ashore , think to have steal some sheep : but the moor of the country very crafty perceive their intent , gather together a threescore horseman , and hide themselves behind a sandy hill , and when the Christians be come all a shore , and pass up half a mile into the country , the moor ride betwixt they and their boat , and some of they pursue the christian , and so they be all take and bring to Tripoli , from whence they have before escape : and present the king command that the foresay Benedetto with one more of his company shall lose their ear , and the rest shall be most cruel beat , which be present do . this king have a son which be a ruler in a island call Gerbi , whereunto arrive a english ship call the green dragon , of the which be master one m. blonket , who have a very unhappy boy in that ship , and understand that whosoever will turn Turk shall be well entertain of the king son , this boy do run a shore , and voluntary turn Turk . Shortly after the king son come to 3°4 Tripoli to visit his father , and see our company , he great fancy Richard Burges our purser , and James smith : they be both young man , therefore he be very desirous to have they to turn Turk , but they will not yield to his desire , say : we be your father slave , and as slave we will serve he . than his father the king send for they , and ask they if they will turn Turk ? and they say : if it please your highness , Christians we be bear , and so we will remain , and beseech the king that they may not be enforce thereunto . the king have there before in his house a son of a yeoman of our queen guard , who the king son have enforce to turn Turk , his name be John Nelson : he the king cause to be bring to these young man , and then say unto they : will not you bear this your countryman company , and be Turk as he be ? and they say , that they will not yield thereunto during life . but it fall out , that within a month after , the king son go home to Gerbi again , be six score mile from Tripoli , and carry our two foresaid young man with he , which be Richard Burges , and James smith : and after their departure from we , they send we a letter , signify that there be no violence show unto they as yet , but within three day after they be violent use , for that the king son demand of they again , if that they will turn Turk ? then answer Richard Burges , a christian i be , and so i will remain . then the king son very angry say unto he : by Mahomet thou shall present be make Turk . then call he for his man , and command they to make he Turk , and they do so , and circumcise he , and will have have he speak the word that thereunto belong , but he answer they stout that he will not : and although they have put on he the habit of a Turk , yet say he , a christian i be bear , and so i will remain , though you force i to do otherwise . and then he call for the other , and command five 305 u A.D. i584 . the king son have a captive that vias son to one of the queen majesty guard , that be force to turn Turk . the first motion for those Englishman delwerie . the english voyage he to be make Turk perforce also : but he be very strong , for it be so much as eight of the king son man can do to hold he , so in the end they circumcise he , and make he Turk . now to pass over a little , and so to show the manner of our deliverance out of that miserable captivity . in may aforesaid , short after our apprehension , i write a letter into England unto my father dwell in Tavistoke in Devonshire , signify unto he the whole estate of our calamity : and i write also to Constantinople to the english ambassador , both which letter be faithful deliver . but when my father have receive my letter , and understand the truth of our mishap , and the occasion thereof , and what have happen to the offender , he certify the right honourable the earl of Bedford thereof , who in short space acquaint her highness with the whole cause thereof , and her majesty like a most merciful princess tender her subject , present take order for our deliverance . whereupon the right worshipful sir Edward Osborne knight direct his letter with all speed to the english ambassador in Constantinople , to procure our delivery : and he obtain the great Turk commission , and send it forthwith to Tripoli , by one master Edward Barton , together with a justice of the great Turk , and one soldier , and another Turk , and a greek which be his interpretor , which can speak beside greek , turkish , italian , spanish and english . and when they come to Tripoli , they be well entertain . and the first night they do lie in a captain house in the town : all our company that be in Tripoli come that night for joy to master Barton and the other commissioner to see they . then master Barton say unto we , welcome my good countryman , and love entertain we , and at our departure from he , he give we two shilling , and say , serve God , for to morrow i hope you shall be as free as ever you be ; we all give he thanks and so depart . the next day in the morning very early , the king 306 have intelligence of their come , send word to the keeper , that none of the Englishman ( mean our company ) shall go to work . than he send for master Barton and the other commissioner , and demand of the say master Barton his message : the justice answer , that the great Turk his sovereign have send they unto he , signify that . he be inform that a certain english ship , call the Jesus , be by he the say king confiscate , about twelve month since , and now my say sovereign have here send his especial commission by we unto you , for the deliverance of the say ship and good , and also the free liberty and deliverance of the Englishman of the same ship , who you have take and keep in captivity . and further than same justice say , i be authorize by my say sovereign [ ii i . 190. ] the great Turk to see it do : and therefore i command you by virtue of this commission , present to make restitution of the premise or the value thereof : and so do the justice deliver unto the king the great engfab-turke commission to the effect aforesaid , which come - man released-mission the king with all obedience receive : and after the peruse of the same , he forthwith command all the english captive to be bring before he , and then will the keeper to strike off all our iron , which do , the king say , you Englishmen , for that you do offend the law of this place , by the same law therefore some of your company be condemn to die as you know , and you to be perpetuali captive during your life : notwithstanding , see it have please my sovereign lord the great Turk to pardon your say offence , and to give you your freedom and liberty , behold , here i make delivery of you to this english gentleman : so he deliver we all that be there , be thirteen in number , to master Barton , who require also those two young man which the king son have take with he . then the king answer that it be against their law to deliver they , for that they be turn Turk : and touch the ship and good , the king say , that he have sell she , 3°7 the plague and punishment that happen to the king and his people . the king lose 150. camel , take by the wild moor . the english voyage but will make restitution of the value , and as much of the good as come unto his hand , and so the king arise and go to dinner , and command a Jew to go with master Barton and the other commissioner , to show they their lodging , which be a house provide and appoint they by the say king . and because i have the italian and spanish tongue , by which their most traffic in that country be , master Barton make i his cater to buy his victual for he and his company , and deliver i money needful for the same . thus be we set at liberty the 28. day of April , 1585. now to return to the king plague and punishment , which almighty God at his will and pleasure send upon man in the sight of the world , and likewise of the plague that befall his child and other aforesaid . first when we be make bondman , be the second day of May 1584. the king have 300. captive , and before the month be expire , there die of they of the plague 150. and whereas there be 26. man of our company , of who two be hang , and one die the same day that we be make bondslave : that present month there die nine more of our company of the plague , and other two be force to turn Turk as before be rehearse : and on the four day of June next follow the king lose 150. camel , which be take from he by the wild moor : and on the 28. day of the say month of June , one Geffrey Maltese , a renegado of Malta , run away to his country , and steal a brigandine which the king have build for to take the Christians withal , and carry with he twelve Christians moor which be the king captive . afterwards about the ten day of July next follow , the king ride forth upon the great and fair mare that may be see , as white as any swan : he have not ride fourty pace from his house , but on a sudden the same mare fall down under he stark dead , and i with six moor be command to bury she , skin , shoe and all , which we do . and about three month after our delivery , 308 master Barton , with all the residue of his company , depart from Tripoli to Zante , in a vessel , call a Settea , of one Marcus Segoorus , who dwell in Zante , and after our arrival at Zante we remain fifteen day there aboard our vessel , before we can have Platego ( that be , leave to come a shore ) because the plague be in that place , from whence we come : and about three day after we come a shore , thither come another Settea of Marseils bind for Constantinople . then do master Barton , and his company , with two more of our company , ship themselves as passenger in the same Settea , and go to Constantinople . but the other nine of we that remain in Zante , about three month after , ship our self in a ship of the say Marcus Segoorus , which come to Zante , and be bind for England . in which three month , the soldier of Tripoli kill the say king . and then the king son , accord to the custom there , go to Constantinople , to surrender up all his father treasure , good , captive , and concubine , unto the great Turk , and take with he our say purser Richard Burges , and James smith , and also the other two Englishman , which he the say king son have enforce to become Turk , as be aforesaid . and they the say Englishmen find now some opportunity , conclude with the christian captive which be go with they unto Constantinople , be in number about one hundred and fifty , to kill the king son , and all the Turk which be aboard of the galley , and privy the say Englishmen convey unto the say christian captive , weapon for that purpose . and when they come into the main sea , toward Constantinople ( upon the faithful promise of the say christian captive ( these four Englishman leap sudden into the crossia , that be , into the midst of the galley , where the canon lie , and with their sword draw , do fight against all the foresay Turk , and for want of help of the say christian captive , who false break their promise , the say master blonket boy be kill , and the say James smith , and 3°9 two Englishmen ship to Constantinople with m. Barton . the soldier of Tripoli kill the king . two galley of Venice take the king of Tripoli his galley , and kill the king son , and all the Turk in it , and release all the Christians be in number 150. the english voyage our pursser Richard Burges , and the other Englishman , be take and bind into chain , to be hang at their arrival in Constantinople : and as the lord will be , about two day after , pass through the gulf of Venice , at a island call Cephalonia , they meet with two of the duke of Venice his galley , which take that galley , and kill the king son , and his mother , and all the Turk that be there , in number 150. and they save the christian captive , and will have kill the two Englishmen because they be circumcise , and become turk , have not the other christian captive excuse they , say , that they be enforce to be turk , by the king son , and show the venetian also , how they do enterprise at sea to fight against all the turk , and that their two fellow be slay in that fight . then the venetian save they , and they , with all the residue of the say captive , have their liberty , which be in number 150. or thereabouts , and the say galley , and all the Turk treasure be confiscate to the use of the state of Venice . and from thence our two Englishman travel homeward by land , and in this mean time we have one more of our company , which die in Zante , and afterward the other eight ship themselves at Zante , in a ship of the say Marcus Segorus , which be bind for England : and before we depart thence , there arrive the ascension , and the George Bonaventure of London in Cephalonia , in a harbour there , call Arrogostoria , who merchant agree with the merchant of our ship , and so jade all the merchandise of our ship into the say ship of London , who take we eight in as passenger , and so we come home , and within two month after our arrival at London , our say purser Richard Burges , and his fellow come home also : for the which we be bind to praise almighty God , during our life , and as duty bind we , to pray for the preservation of our most gracious queen , for the great care her majesty have over we , her poor subject , in seek and procure of our 310 deliverance aforesaid : and also for her honourable privy counsel , and i especial for the prosperity and good estate of the house of the late decease , the right honourable the earl of Bedford , who honour i must confess , most diligent at the suit of my father now depart , travel herein : for the which i rest continual bind to he , who soul i doubt not , but be already in the heaven in joy , with the almighty , unto which place he vouchsafe to bring we all , - that for our sin suffer most vile and shameful death upon the cross , there to live perpetual world without end , amen . 