his three letter to master Leonard poor , write from goa . Michael Stropene a italian accuse our man to be spy . you last 1 send you be from ormuz , whereby i certify you what have happen there unto i , and the rest of my company , which be , that four day after our arrival there , we be all commit to prison , except one italian which come with i from Aleppo , who the captain never examine , only demand what countryman he be , but i make account Michael Stropene , who accuse we , have inform the captain of he . the first day we arrive there , this Stropene accuse we that we be spy send from don Antonio , beside diverse other lie : notwithstanding 458 if we have be of any other country then of England , we may free have trade with they . and although we be Englishman , i know no reason to the contrary , but that we may trade hither and thither as well as other nation , for all nation do , and may come free to Ormuz , as Frenchmen , Fleming , almain , hungarian , italian , greek , armenian , nazarany , Turk and moor , Jew 8c Gentiles , persian , moscovite , and there be no nation that they seek for to trouble , except we : wherefore it be contrary to all justice and reason that they shall suffer all nation to trade with they , and to forbid we . but now i have as great liberty as any other nation , except it be to go out of the country , which thing as yet i desire not . but i think hereafter , and before it be long , if i shall be desirous to go from hence , that they will not deny i licence . before we may be suffer to come out of prison , i be force to put in surety for 2000 pardau , not to depart from hence without licence of the viceroy : otherwise except this , we have as much liberty as any other nation , for i have our good again , 8c have take a house in the chief street in the town , call the rue drette , where we sell our good . there be two cause which move the captain of two cause of ormus to imprison we , 8c afterward to send we hither . oar . mens im the first be , because Michael Stropene have accuse we at of many matter , which be most false . and the second be for that m. drake at his be at Maluco , cause two piece of his ordinance to be shoot at a gallion of the king of Portugal , as they say . but of these thing i do not know at ormus : and in the ship that we be send in come the chief justice in ormus , who be call Aveador general of that place , he have be there three year , so that now his time be expire : which Aveador be a great friend to the captain of ormus , who , certain day after our coming from thence , send for i into his chamber , and 459 there begin to demand of i many thing , to the which i answer : and among the rest , he say , that master Drake be send out of England with many ship , and come to Maluco , and there jade clove , and find a gallion there of the king of Portugal , he cause two piece of his great ordinance to be shoot at the same : and so perceive that this do great grieve they , i ask , if they will be revenge of i for that which m. Drake have do ? to the which he answer , no : although his meaning be to the contrary . [ ii i . 249. ] he say moreover , that the cause why the captain of ormus do send i for goa , be , for that the viceroy will understand of i , what news there be of don Antonio , and whether he be in England , yea or no , and that it may be all for the best that i be send hither , the which i trust in God will so fall out , although contrary to his expectation : for have it not please God to put into the mind of the archbishop and other two Padres or Jesuit of S. Paul coiledge to stand our friend , we may have rot in prison . the archbishop be a very good man , who have two young man to his servant , the one of they be bear at Hamborough , and be call Bernard Borgers : and the other be bear at Enchuysen , who name be the author of John linscot , who do we great pleasure : for by they the book of the ^g archbishop be many time put in mind of we . ast n tes , and the two good father of saint Paul , who travel very much for we , the one of they be call Padre mark , who be bear in Bruges in Flanders , and the | | this be he other be bear in Wiltshire in England , and be call who letter to „ padre Thomas Stevens . his father .. t , , , from goa be also encage chance to hnde here a young man , who be before put bear in Antwerp , but the most part of his bring down , andhe up have be in London , his name be Francis de rea , ^fplew6^5 and w^h he it be my hap to be acquaint in ledge in Aleppo , who also have do i great pleasure here . Oxford . in the prison at ormus we remain many day , 460 also we lay a long time at sea come hither , and forthwith at our arrival here be carry to prison , and the next day after be send for before the Aveador , who be the chief justice , to be examine : and when we be examine , he present send we back again to prison . and after our be here in prison 13 day , James James stone story go into the monastery of saint Paul , where he t^r painter . remain , and be make one of the company , which life he like very well . and upon S. Thomas day ( which be 22 day arrive after our arrival here ) i come out of prison , and the atj^a the,20 next day after come out Ralph Fitch , and William bet , if these trouble have not chance , i have be in possibility to have make as good a voyage as ever any man make with so much money . many of our thing i have sell very well , both here and at ormus in prison , notwithstanding the captain will i ( if i will ) to sell what i can before we embark : and so with officer i go diverse time out of the castle in the morning , and sell thing , and at night return again to the prison , and all thing that i sell they do write , and at our embark from thence , the captain give order that i shall deliver all my money with the good into the hand of the scrivano , or purser of the ship , which i do , and the scrivano make a remembrance , which he leave there with the captain , that my self and the rest with money and good he shall deliver into the hand of the Aveador general of India : but at our arrival here , the Aveador will neither meddle with good nor money , for that he can not prove any thing against we : wherefore the good remain in the ship 9 or 10 day after our arrival , and then , for that the ship be to sail from thence , the scrivano send the gpod on shore , and here they remain a day and a night , and no body to receive they . in the end they suffer this bringer to receive they , who come with i from ormus , and put they into a house 461 which he have hire for i , where they remain four or five day . but afterward when they shall deliver the money , it be conclude by the justice , that both the money and good shall be deliver into the positor hand , where they remain fourteen day after my come out of prison . at my be in Aleppo , i buy a fountain of silver and gilt , six knife , six spoon , and one fork trim with coral for five and twenty chekin , which the captain of ormus do take , and pay for the same twenty pardaos , which be one hundred larine , and be worth there or here one hundred chekin . also he have five emraud set in gold , which be worth five hundred or six hundred crown , and pay for the same a hundred pardaos . also he have nineteen and a half pike of cloth , which cost in London twenty shilling the pike , and be worth 9 or 10 crown the pike , and he pay for the same twelve larine a pike . also he have two piece of green kersey , which be worth four and twenty pardaos the piece , and pay for they sixteen pardaos a piece : beside diverse other trifle , that the officer and other have in the like order , and some for nothing at all . but the cause of all this be Michael Stropene , which come to ormus not worth a penny , and now have thirty or forty thousand crown , and he grieve that any other stranger shall trade thither but himself . but that shall not skill , for i trust in God to go both thither and hither , and to buy and sell as free as he or any other . here be very great good to be do in diverse of our commodity , and in like manner there be great profit to be make with commodity of this country , to be carry to Aleppo . it be long for i to write , and tedious for you to read of all thing that have pass since my part from you . but of all the trouble that have chance since my arrival in ormus , this bringer be able to certify you . i mind to stay here : wherefore if you will write 462 1584-unto i , you may send your letter to some friend at Lisbon , and from thence by the ship they may be convey hither . let the direction of your letter be either [ ii i . 250. ] in portuguise or spanish , whereby they may come the better to my hand . from goa this 20 day of Januarie . 1584. 