a description of the yearly voyage or pilgrimage of the mahumitans , Turk and moor unto Mecca in Arabia . Lexandria the most ancient city in Africa situate by the seaside contain seven mile in circuit , and be environ with two wall one near to the other with high tower , but the wall within be far high than those without , with a great ditch round about the same : yet be not this city very 329 strong by reason of the great antiquity , be almost half destroy and ruinate . the greatness of this city be such , that if it be of double habitation , as it be compass with a double wall , it may be true say , that there be two alexandrias one build upon another , because under the foundation of the say city be great habitation , and incredible huge pillar . true it be , that this part underneath remain at this day inhabitable , because of the corrupt air , as also for that by time , which consume all thing , it be great ruinate . it may well be say , that the founder hereof , as he be worthy in all his enterprise , so likewise in build hereof he do a work worthy of himself , name it after his own name . this city have one defect , for it be subject to a evil air , which only proceed of that hollowness underneath , out of the which issue infinite moisture : and that this be true the air without do evident testify , which be more subtle and wholesome then that beneath . the water hereof be salt , by reason that the soil of it self be likewise so . and therefore the inhabitant , at such time as the river Nilus flow , be accustom to open a great ditch , the head whereof extend into the say river , and from thence they convey the same within half a mile of Alexandria , and so consequent by mean of conductpipe the water come unto the cistern of Alexandria , which be full serve the city from one inundation to another . within the city be a pyramid mention of in history , but not of great importance . without the city be la colonna di Pompeio , or the pillar of Pompey , be of such height and thickness , that it be suppose there be not the like in the whole world beside . within the city there be nothing of importance save a little castle which be guard with 60 janissary . Alexandria have three port , one towards Rossetto , another to the land ward , and the three to the sea ward , which be call Babelbar , without which appear a broad hand call Ghesira in the moor tongue , which be not whole a 330 hand , because a iide point or corner thereof touch the firm land , and therefore may be call Peninsula , that be to say , almost a hand . hereupon be build many house of the Jew , in respect of the air . This Peninsula be situate between two very good port , one of they be much more safe than the other , call the old port , into the which only the vessel of Barbary , and the six galley of the grand signior depute for the guard of Alexandria do enter . and this port have upon the right hand at the mouth or entrance thereof a case of small importance , and guard but with fifteen man or thereabouts . on the other side of this hand be the other call the new port , which name be not unfidy give unto it , for that in all man judgement in time pass there have not be water there , because in the midst of this port , where the water be very deep , there be discover and find great sepulchre and other building , out of the which be daily dig with engine Jaspar and Porphyry stone of great value , of the which great store be send to Constantinople for the ornament of the mesquitas or turkish temple , and of other building of the grand signior . into this port enter all such vessel as traffic to this place . this port have on each side a castle , whereof that upon the Peninsula be call Faraone , upon the top whereof every night there be a light set in a great lantern for direction of the ship , and for the guard thereof be appoint 200 janissary : the other on the other side be but a iide castle keep by 18 man . it be certain , that this haven of Alexandria be one of the chief haven in the world : for hither come to traffic people of every nation , and all sort of vessel which go round about the city . it be more inhabit by stranger , merchant , and Christians , then by man of the country which be but a few in number . within fontechosigni-the city be five Fontechi , that be to say , one of the an h ™ * Frenchman , where the consul be resident , and this be the fair and most commodious or all the rest . or the other four , two belong to the venetian , one to the 331 raguseans , and the four to the genouese . and all stranger which come to traffic there , except the venetian , be under the french consuli . it be also to be understand , that all the christian dwell within their Fontechi , and every evening at the go down of the sun , they which be appoint for that office go about and shut all the gate of the say Fontechi outward , and the Christians shut the same within : and so likewise they do on the Friday ( which be the moor and the Turk sabbath ) till their devotion be expire . and by this mean all party be secure and void of fear : for in so do the Christians may sleep quiet and not fear rob , and the moor need not doubt while they sleep or pray , that the Christians shall make any tumult , as in time pass have happen . of the coast of Alexandria . on the side towards Barbary along the sea-coast for a great space there be find neither hold , nor any thing worthy of mention : but on the other side towards Syria 13 mile from Alexandria stand a little castle Bichier . call Bichier keep by fifty Turk , which castle be very old and weak , and have a port which in time past be good , but at this present be utter decay and full of sand , so that the vessel which come thither dare not come near the shore , but ride far off into the sea . Rosetto . forty mile further be Rossetto , which be a iide town without wall , and be situate upon the bank of Nilus three mile from the sea , at which place many time they build ship and other vessel , for government whereof [ ii i . 200. ] be appoint a sanjacbey , without any other guard : it be a place of traffic , and the inhabitant be very rich , but naughty varlet and traitor . further down along the seaside and the river bank be another iide case like unto the abovesaid , and because the moor believe , that Mecca will in short time be conquer by the christian , they hold opinion , that the same be lose shall be renew in this place of Rossetto , namely , 332 that all their prayer , vow , and pilgrimage shall be transport to Rossetto , as the religious order of saint John of the Rhodes be translate thence to Malta . further forward thirty mile stand another castle of small importance call brulle , keep continual by fourty Turk , which have a good and secure port , in form like to a very great lake or pond , wherein be take great quantity of fish , which they salt , and the merchant of Candie and Cyprus come thither to lade the same , and it be great esteem , especial of the candiot , who have great abundance of wine adventure abroad to seek meat fit for the taste of the say wine . distant from brulle five and thirty mile there be another castle like unto the abovesaid keep by a aga with fourty man or thereabouts . moor within the land by the river side be Damiata a ancient city environ with wall contain five mile in circuit , and but of small strength . for the government of this place be a Sanjaco with all his household and no other company . this city be very large , delightful , and pleasant , abound with garden and fair fountain . other forty mile further be Latma , a castle of very small importance , and keep as other with forty Turk under a aga . in this place be no port , but a road very dangerous , and without other habitation . pass this place we enter Judea . but because our intent be to reason simple of the voyage to Mecca , we will proceed no further this way , but return to our first way , let it suffice to say , that from Alexandria to Cairo be two hundred mile , in which way i find nothing worthy of memory . of the mighty city of Cairo . CAiro contain in circuit eighteen mile , be so inhabit and replenish with people , that almost it can receive more ; and therefore they have begin to build new house without the city and about the wall . in Cairo be people of all nation , as Christians , Armenians , abexin , Turk , moor , Jew , Indian , 333 median , persian , arabian , and other sort of people , which resort thither by reason of the great traffic . this city be govern by a bassa , which minister justice , together with the Cadie throughout the whole kingdom . also there be two and twenty sanjacke , who office be only to oversee and guard the kingdom for every good respect . there be also seven thousand Turk in pay , to wit , three thousand janissary , and four thousand horseman : the rest of the people in Cairo be for the most part merchant which go and come , and the remnant be moor and other base people . about two mile from Cairo there be another little Cairo call the old Cairo , which contain in circuit little more than ten mile , and the better half be not inhabit , but destroy , whereof i need not make any other mention . the new Cairo answer every year in tribute to the grand signior , 600000 ducat of gold , neat and free of all charge grow on the same , which money be send to Constantinople , about the fine of September , by the way of Aleppo , always by land , under the custody of three hundred horseman and two hundred janissary footman . the city of Cairo be adorn with many fair mesquitas rich , great , and of goodly and gorgeous build , among which be five principali . the first be call Morastano , that be to say , the hospitali , which have off rend five hundred ducat of gold every day leave unto it by a king of Damascus from ancient time ; which king have conquer Cairo , for the space of five day continual put the people thereof to the sword , and in the end repent he of so great manslaughter , cause this cruelty to cease , and , to obtain remission for his sin commit , cause this hospitali to be build , enrich it as be abovesaid . the second famous monument of Cairo be call Neffisa , of one Neffisa bury there , who be a dame of honour , and move by lust , yield her body voluntary without reward , to any that require the same , and say she bestow this alm for the love of her prophet Maho - 334 meet , and therefore at this day they adore she , reverence she , and final have canonize she for a saint , affirm that she do many miracle . the three be call Zavia della Innachari , who be one of the four doctor in the law . the four be call Imamsciafii , where be bury Sciafii the second doctor of this law . of the other two doctor one be bury in Damascus , the other in Aleppo . the five and last famous monument be Giamalazar , that be , the house of Lazarus : and this be the generail university of the whole kingdom of Egypt . in this place anno 1566 in the month of January by misfortune of 1566. fire be burn nine thousand book of great value , as well for that they be write by hand , as also [ ii i . 201. ] wrought so rich with gold , that they be worth 300 and 400 ducat a piece , one with another . and because it can never be know yet how this fire begin , they have and do hold the same for a most sinister augury , and a evident and manifest sign of their utter ruin . the house of Cairo without be very fair , and within the great number rich adorn with hang wrought with gold . Every person which resort to this place for traffic sake , be bind to pay half a ducat , except the gentleman Venetians , Siotes , and rhaguseans , becapse they be tributary to the grand signior . Cairo be distant from the river Nilus descnp-a mile and more , be situate on a plain , save that °f^air0‘ on the one side it have a fair little hill , on the top whereof stand a fair castle , but not strong , for that it may be batter on every side , but very rich and large , compass about with fair garden into the which they convey water for their necessity out of Nilus , with certain wheel and other like engine . this magnificent city be adorn with very fruitful garden both pleasant and commodious , with great plenty of pond to water the same . ' notwithstanding the great pleasure of Cairo be in the month of August , when by mean of the great rain in Ethiopia the river Nilus overflow and water all the country , and then they open the mouth of a 335 great ditch , which extend into the river , and pass through the midst of the city , and enter there be innumerable bark row too and fro lade with gallant girl and beautiful dame , which with sing , eat , drink and feast , take their solace . the woman of this country be most beautiful , and go in rich attire bedeck with gold , precious stone , and jewel of great value , but chief perfume with odour , and be very libidinous , and the man likewise , but foul and hard favour . the soil be very fertile and abundant , the flesh fat which they sell without bone , their candle they make of the marrow of cattle , because the moor eat the tallow . they use also certain little furnace make of purpose , under the which they make fire , put into the furnace four or five hundred egg , and the say fire they nourish by little and little , until the chicken be hatch , which after they be hatch , and become somewhat big , they sell they by measure in such sort , as we sell and measure nut and chestnut and such like . of certain notable monument without the city of Cairo . without the city , six mile high into the land , be to be see near unto the river diverse pira-mides , among which be three marvellous great , and very artificial wrought . out of one of these be daily dig the body of ancient man , not rot but all whole , the cause whereof be the quality of the egyptian soil , which will not consume the flesh of man , but rather dry and harden the same , and so always con-serveth it . and these dead body be the mummy which the physician and apothecary do against our will make we to swallow . also by dig in these pyramid oftentimes be find certain idol or image of gold , silver , and other mettle , but under the other pyramid the body be not take up so whole as in this , but there be find leg and arm comparable to 336 the limb of giant . near to these pyramid appears out of the sand a great head of stone somewhat like marble , which be discover so far as the neck join with the shoulder , be all whole , save that it want a little tip of the nose . ' the neck of this head contain in circuit about six and thirty foot , so that it may be accord to the neck consider , what greatness the head be of . the river Nilus be a mile broad , wherein be very many great croccodile from Cairo upward , but low than Cairo pass no such creature : and this , they say , be by reason of a enchantment make long since which hinder their passage for come any low than Cairo . Moreover of these creature there be sometime find some of a incredible bigness , that be to say , of fourty foot about . the male have their member like to a man , and the female like to a woman . Theise monster oftentimes issue out of the water to feed , and find any small beast , as sheep , lamb , goat , or other like , do great harm . and while they be forth of the water , if they happen at unware upon any man , woman or child , who they can overcome , they spare not their life . in the year of our lord one thousand five hundred and sixty it happen , that certain poor Christians travel by Cairo towards the country of Prete Janni to rescue certain slave , be guide by a Chaus , and journey alongst the bank of the say river . the Chaus remain linger alone behind to make his prayer ( as their custom be ) at a place call Tana , who be busy in his double devotion one of these crocodile cease by the shoulder , and draw he under water , so that he be never after see . and for this cause they have make in sundry place certain hedge as bank within the water , so that betwixt the hedge and bank of the river there remain so much water , that the woman wash may take water without danger at their pleasure . this country be so fruitful , that it [ H. i . 202. ] cause the woman as also other creature to bring five 337 viceroy forth one , two , and ofttimes three at a birth . five mile southward of Cairo be a place call Matarea , where the balm be refine : and therefore some will say , that the tree which bear the balm grow in the say place , wherein they be deceive : for the say tree grow two day journey from Mecca , in a place call Bedrihone , which yield balm in great plenty , but savage , wild , and without virtue , and therefore the moor carry the same within little chest from Bedrihone to Matarea , where the tree be replant ( be it by virtue of the soil , or the water , air , or any other thing whatsoever ) it suffice that here they bear the true balm and liquour so much in these day esteem of . in this place of Matarea there be certain little house , with most goodly garden , and a chapel of antiquity , where the very moor themselves affirm , that the mother of the bless Christ flee from the fury of wicked Herode there save her self with the child , wherein that say of the prophet be fulfil , ex jEgypto vocavi filium meum . the which chapel in the year of our lord one thousand five hundred and four , the magnifico Daniel Barbaro first consuli of that place go to visit , and cause it to be renew and reedify , so that in these day there resort thither many Christians , who oftentimes bring with they a priest , to say mass there . also about a harquebus-shotte from Matarea be a spire of great height like to that at room , and more beautiful to behold . near unto the old Cairo be yet twelve storehouse of great antiquity , but now very much decay , and these till late day serve to keep corn for behoof of the kingdom , concern which many be of opinion , that the founder hereof be Joseph the son of Jacob , for consideration of the seven dear year . also pass high up by the bank of Nilus , there be to be see a fair city overflow with water , the which at such time as Nilus flow lie under water , but when the water return to the mark , there plain appear princely palace , and stately pillar , be 338 of some call Thebes , where they say that Pharaoh be one Thebes . resident . Moreover three day journey high up be two great image of speckle marble , all whole , and somewhat sink into the earth , be thing wonderful to consider of , for the nose of either be two span and a half long , and the space from one ear to the other contain ten span , the body be correspondent to their head , and grave in excellent proportion , so that they be shape of marvellous hugeness , and these they call the wife , and the daughter of Pharaoh . of the patriarch of Greece . in Cairo be two patriarch , one of the greek , and another of the jacobite . the greek patriarch call Gioechni , be about the age of one hundred and thirteen year , be a very good and holy man . they say , that when sultan Gauri of Egypt reign , there be do this miracle follow : this good patriarch be envy at by the Jew of the country , for none other cause , but for his good work , and holy life , it happen ( i say ) that be in disputation with certain of the hebrew inn presence of the sultan , and reason of their law and faith , it be say unto he by one of these miscreant : sith thou believe in the faith of Christ , take and drink this potion which i will give thou ; and if thy Christ be true Messiah and true God , he will ( say he ) deliver thou from danger . to who the ancient patriarch answer , that he be content : whereupon that curse Jewe bring he a cup of the most venomous and deadly poison that can be find , which the holy patriarch have perceive , say : in the name of the father , of the son , and of the holy ghost . : and have so say he drink it quite up ; which do , he take a drop of pure water , put it into that very cup , and give it unto the Jewe , say unto he , i in the name of my Christ have drink thy poison , and therefore in the name of thy expect Messiah , drink this water of i within thy own cup . whereupon the Jewe 339 take the cup out of the hand of the patriarch , and have drink the water , within half a hour burst a sunder . and the patriarch have none other hurt , save that he become somewhat pale in sight , and so remain ever after . and this miracle ( which merit to be call no less ) be do to the great commendation of the holy patriarch in the presence of a thousand person , and namely of the sultan of Egypt : who see the despite of the Jew , unto their own cost and confusion compel they to make the conduct , which with so many engine come into the castle from Nilus above mention . and this triumphant patriarch not long since be alive , and in perfect health , which God continue long time . [ il i . 203. ] of the preparation of the Carovan to go to Mecca . as touch the Carovan which go to Mecca , it be to be understand , that the mahometans observe a kind of Lent continue one whole moon , and be a movable ceremony , which sometime fall high , sometime low in the year call in their tongue Ramazan , and their feast be call Bairam . during this time of Lent all they which intend to go unto Mecca resort unto Cairo , because that twenty day after the feast the Carovan be ready to depart on the voyage : and thither resort a great multitude of people from Asia , Grecia , and Barbaria to go on this voyage , some move by devotion , and some for traffic sake , and some to pass away the time . now within few day after the feast they which go on the voyage depart out of the city two league unto a place call Birca , where they expect the captain of the Carovan . this place have a great pond cause by the inundation of Nilus , and so make , that the camel and other beast may drink therein : whereof , namely , of mule , camel , and dromedary there be at least forty thousand , and the person which follow the Carovan every year be about fifty thousand , 340 few more or less , accord to the time . Moreover every three year they renew the captain of the Carovan , call in the arabian tongue Amarilla Haggi , that be , the captain of the pilgrim , to who the grand signior give every voyage eighteen purse , contain each of they six hundred twenty and five ducat of gold , and these be for the behoof of the Carovan , and also to do alm unto the needful pilgrim . this captain , beside other servingman which follow he , have also four Chausi to serve he . likewise he have with he for the security of the Carovan four hundred soldier , to wit , two hundred Spachi or horseman mount on dromedary , and two hundred janissary ride upon camel . the Chausi and the Spachi be at the charge of the captain , but the janissary not so , for their provision be make they from Cairo . the Spachi wear cap or bonnet like to the cap of sergeant , but the janissary after another sort , with a lap fall down behind like a frenchhood , and have before a great piece of wrought silver on their head . the charge of these be to cause the Carovan to march in good array when need require ; these be not at the commandment of any but of the captain of the Carovan . Moreover the captain have for his guide eight pilot , the office of who be always stable and firm from heir to heir , and these go before guide the Carovan , and show the way , as be well experience in the place , and in the night they govern they as the mariner , by the star . Theise also use to send before four or five man carry piece of dry wood which give light , because they shall not go out of the way , and if at any time through their ill hap they wander astray out •of the way , they be cast down and beat with so many bastinade upon the sole of their foot , as serve they for a perpetuali remembrance . the captain of the Carovan have his lieutenant accompany continual with fifteen Spachi , and he have the charge to set the Carovan in order , and to cause they to depart on their 341 piece of dry wood in stead of torch . journey when need require : and during the voyage their office be some while to go before with the forward , sometime to come behind with the rearward , sometime to march on the one side , and sometime on the other , to spy , that the coast be clear . the Carovan carry with it six piece of ordinance draw by 12 camel , which serve to terrify the arabian , as also to make triumph at Mecca , and other place . the merchant which follow the Carovan , some carry for merchandise cloth of silk , some coral , some tin , other wheat , rise , and all sort of grain . some sell by the way , some at Mecca , so that every one bring something to gain by , because all merchandise that go by land pay no custom , but that which go by sea be bind to pay ten in the hundred . the beginning of the voyage . the feast before the Carovan set forth , the captain with all his retinue and officer resort unto the case of Cairo before the bassa , which give unto every man a garment , and that of the captain be wrought with gold , and the other be serve accord to their degree . Moreover he deliver unto he you chisva Talnabi , which signify in the arabian tongue , the garment of the prophet : this vesture be of silk , wrought in the midst with letter of gold , which signify : la ilia ill ’ alia Mahumet Resullala : that be to say , there be no god but God , and his ambassador Mahumet . this garment be make of purpose to cover from top to bottom a little house in Mecca stand in the midst of the Mesquita , the which house ( they say ) be build by Abraham or by his son Ishmael . after this he deliver to he a gate make of purpose for the foresay [ two i . 204. . ] house of Abraham wrought all with fine gold , and be of excellent workmanship , and it be a thing of great value . beside , he deliver unto he a cover of green velvet make in manner of a pyramid , about nine palm high , and artificial wrought with most fine golde* 342 and this be to cover the tomb of their prophet within Medina , which tomb be build in manner of a pyramid : and beside that cover there be bring many other of gold and silk , for the ornament of the say tomb . which thing be consign , the bassa depart not from his place ; but the captain of the Carovan take his leave with all his officer and soldier , and depart accompany with all the people of Cairo orderly in manner of a procession , with sing , shout and a thousand other ceremony too long to recite . from the castle they go to a gate of the city call bab-nassera , without the which stand a mosquita , and therein they lie up the say vesture very well keep and guard . and of this ceremony they make so great account , that the world come to see this sight , yea the woman great with child , and other with child in their arm , neither be it lawful for any man to forbid his wife the go to this feast , for that in so do the wife may separate her self from her husband , and may lie with any other man , in regard of so great a trespass . now this procession proceed from the castle towards the mosquita , the camel which bring the vesture be all adorn with cloth of gold , with many little bell , and pass along the street you may see the multitude cast upon the say vesture thousand of beautiful ! flower ; of diverse colour , and sweet water , other bring towel and fine cloth touch the same , which ever after they keep as relic with great reverence . afterwards have leave the vesture in the mosquita , as be aforesaid , they return again into the city , where they remain the space of 20 day , and then the captain depart with his company , and take the vesture out of the mosquita , carry the same to the foresay place of Birca , where the captain have pitch his tent with the standard of the grand signior over the gate , and the other principali tent stand about he , stay there some ten day and no more : in which time all those resort thither that mean to follow the Carovan in this voyage to Mecca . where 343 you shall see certain woman which intend to go on this voyage accompany with their parent and friend mount upon camel , adorn with so many trifle , tassel , and knot , that in behold the same a man can refrain from laughter . the last night before their departure they make great feast and triumph within the Carovan , with castle and other infinite devise of firework , the janissary always stand round about the tent of the captain with such shout and joy , that on every side the earth resound , and this night they discharge all their ordinance , four or six time , and after at the break of the day upon the sound of a trumpet they march forward on their way . what time the Carovan travel , and when it rest . it be to be note , that from Cairo to Mecca they make 40 day journey or thereabouts , and the same great day journey . for the custom of the Carovan be to travel much and rest little , and ordinary they journey in this manner : they travel from two a clock in the morning until the sun rise , then have rest till noon , they set forward , and so continue till night , and then also rest again , as be abovesaid , till two of the clock : and this order they observe until the end of the voyage , never change the same , except in some place , whereof we will hereafter speak , where for respect of water they rest sometime a day and a half , and this they observe to refresh themselves , otherwise both man and beast will die . in what order the Carovan travel . the manner and order which the Carovan observe in march be this . it go divide into three part , to wit , the foreward , the main battle , and the rearward . in the foreward go the 8 pilot before with a Chaus , which have four knave , and each knave carry a sinew of a bull , to the end that if occasion require , you bastonado 344 may be give to such as deserve the same . Theise knave cast offender down , turn up the sole of their foot make fast to a staff , give they a perpetuali remembrance for they and the beholder . This Chaus be as the captain of the foreward , which command light to be carry before when they travel in the night . also there go in this foreward 6 Santones with red turban upon their head , and these eat and ride at the cost of the captain of the Carovan . Theise Santones when the Carovan arrive at any good lodging , sudden after they have escry the place , cry with a horrible voice say , good cheer , good cheer , we be near to the wish lodging . for which good news the chief of the company bestow their benevolence upon they . in this foreward go very near the three part of the people of the Carovan , behind who go always 25 Spachi arm with sword , bow and arrow to defend they from thief . next unto the [ ii i . 205. ] forward , within a quarter of a mile , follow the main battle , and before the same be draw the say six piece of ordinance , with their gunner , and fifteen Spachi archer . and next unto these come the chief physician , who be a old man of authority , have with he many medicine , ointment , salve , and other like refreshing for the sick , have also camel with he for the sick to ride on , which have no horse nor beast . next unto he go one Carnell alone , the fair that can be find : for with great industry be seek the great and fair which may be find within the dominion of the grand signior . this camel also be deck with cloth of gold and silk , and carry a little chest make of pure legmame make in likeness of the ark of the old testament : but , as be abovesaid , make of pure legmame , without gold or any other thing of cost . within this chest be the Alcoran all write with great letter of gold , bind between e two table of massy gold , and the chest during their voyage be cover with silk , but at their enter into Mecca it be all cover with cloth of gold , adorn with jewel , and 345 ' the like at the entrance into Medina . the Carnell aforesaid which carry the chest , be compass about with many arabian singer and musician , always sing and play upon instrument . after this follow fifteen other most fair camel , every one carry one of the abovesaid vesture , be cover from top to toe with silk . behind these go twenty other camel which carry the money , apparel , and provision of the Amir el Cheggi captain of the Carovan . after follow the royal standard of the grand signior , accompany continual with the musician of the captain , and five and twenty Spachi archer , with a Chaus before they , and about these marvelous thing go all the people and camel which follow the Carovan . behind these , less than a mile , follow the rearward , whereof the great part be pilgrim : the occasion whereof be , for that the merchant seek always to be in the foreward for the security of their good , but the pilgrim which have little to loose care not though they come behind . behind these always go five and twenty other Spachi well arm with another Chaus their captain , and forty arabian all archer for guard of the rearward . and because the Carovan go always along the red sea bank , which in go forth they have on their right hand , therefore the two hundred janissary part into three company go upon their left hand well arm and mount upon camel bind one to another , for upon that side be all the danger of thief , and on the other no danger at all , the captain of the Carovan always go about his people , sometime on the one side , and sometime on the other , never keep any firm place , be continual accompany with a Chaus and 25. Spachi , arm and mount upon dromedary , and 8. musician with viole in their hand , which cease not sound till the captain take his rest , upon who they attend , till such time as he enter his pavilion , and then licens all his attendant and follower to depart , they go each man to their lodging . 346 of thing notable which be see in this voyage by the way . because in the way there be not many thing find worthy memory , for that the Carovan seidome rest in place of habitation , of which in the way there be but few , yea rather the Carovan rest altogether in the field : therefore in this our voyage we will only make mention of certain castle find in the way , which be these , namely , agerut , Nachel , Aeba , biritem , Muel , and Ezlem . of which five , the two first be keep of Moores , and the other three of Turk , and for guard they have eight man or ten at the most in every castle , with four or five Smerigli , which serve to keep the water from the arabian , so that the Carovan come thither , may have wherewithal ! to refresh it self . Agerut be distant from Suez a port of the red sea eight mile , where be always resident five and twenty galley of the grand signior for the keep of that sea Nachel be distant from the sea a day journey . the wall of Aeba be found upon the red sea bank . biritem and Muel likewise be dash by the wave of the sea Ezlem be distant from thence above a day journey . Theise five castle abovesaid be not of force altogether to defend themselves against a hundred man . the Carovan depart from Birca until Agerut find no water by the way to drink , neither from Agerut till Nachel , nor from nachel till Aeba , but between Aeba and biritem be find two water , one call Agium el Cassap , and the other Magaraxiaibi , that be to say , the river of Jethro the father in law of Moses , for this be the place mention in the second chapter of exodus , whither it be say that Moses flee from the anger of Pharaoh , who will have kill he , because he have slay the egyptian , [ ii i . 206. ] which fight with the hebrew , in which place stand the city of midian ; and there be yet the pond , near unto the which Moses sit down . and from that place forward they find more store of water by the way , and 347 in more place , though not so good . it be also to be note , that in this voyage it be needful and a usual thing , that the captain put his hand to his purse , in these place , and bestow present , garment , and turban upon certain of the chief of the arabian , to the end they may give he and his Carovan free passage : who also promise , that their follower likewise shall do no damage to the Carovan , and bind themselves to accomplish the same , promise also by word of mouth , that if the Carovan be rob , they will make restitution of such thing as be steal : but notwithstanding the Carovan be by they oftentimes damnify , and those which be rob have no other restitution at the arabian hand then the show of they a pair of heal , fly into such place as it be impossible to find they . now the Carovan continue her accustom journey , and have pass the abovesaid castle , and other not worthy mention , at length come to a place call Jehbir , which be the beginning and confine of the state and realm of Serifo the king of Mecca : where , at their approach issue out to meet they the governor of the land , with all his people to receive the Carovan , with such shout and triumph , as be impossible to express , where they stay one whole day . this place abound with fresh and clear water , which with stream fall down from the high mountain . Moreover , in this place be great store of date , and flesh great store and good cheap , and especial lace mutton which willing fall down , and here the weary pilgrim have commodity to refresh themselves , say , that this wicked fact purge they from a multitude of sin , and beside increase devotion to prosecute the voyage . touch the build in these place , it be to be judge by the house half ruinate , that it have be a magnificent city : but because it be in time past inhabit more with thief then true man , it be therefore altogether destroy by sultan Gauri king of / Egypt , who go on pilgrimage unto Mecca , and pass by this place , there 348 be by the inhabitant hereof some injury do unto his Carovan , which he understand of , dissemble till his return from Mecca , and then cause it to be burn and destroy in pitiful sort for revenge of the injury do unto the Carovan . the Carovan have rest and be refresh as be abovesaid , the next day depart on the way , and the first place they arrive at worthy mention be call bedrihonem , in which place ( as be aforesaid ) grow those little shrub whereout balm issue . and before the Carovan arrive at this place , a mile from the city be a large and great field environ about with most high and huge mountain . and in this field , accord to the Alcoran , their prophet Mahomet have a most fierce and cruel battle give by the Christians of the country and other people which set themselves against they , and withstand his opinion , so that he be overcome and vanquish of the christian , and almost half of his people slay in the battle . whereupon , the prophet see himself in such extremity , fall to his prayer , and they say , that God have compassion upon his dear friend and prophet , hear he , and send he infinite thousand of angel , wherewith return to the battle , they conquer and overcome the conqueror . and therefore in memory of this victory , the Carovan lodge every year one night in this place , make great bonfire with great mirth . and they say that as yet there be hear upon the mountain a little drum , which while the Carovan pass , never cease sound . and they say further , that the say drum be sound by the angel in sign of that great victory grant of God to their prophet . also the mahometan write affirm , that after the end of the say battle , the prophet commanded certain of his people to go and bury all the mahometans which be dead in the field , who go , know not the one from the other , because as yet they use not circumcision , so they return unto he , answer , that they have be to do his commandment , but they know not the musulmans from the 349 Christians . to who the prophet answer , say : turn again , and all those which you shall find with their face downward , leave they , because all they be misbeliever ; and the other which you shall find with their face turn upward , they bury , for they be the true Musulmani , and so his commandment be do . the next morning by sun rise , the Carovan arrive at bedrihonem , in which place every man wash himself from top to toe , as well man as woman , and leave off their apparel , have each one a cloth about their privity , call in their tongue Photah , and another white one upon their shoulder , all which can go to Mecca in this habit , do so , and be think to merit more than the other , but they which can do so make a vow to sacrifice a ram at the mountain of pardon : and after they be wash , it be not lawful for any man or woman to kill either flea or louse with their hand , neither yet to take they with their nail , until they have accomplish their vow oration in the mountain of pardon abovesaid : and therefore they carry with they certain stick make of purpose in manner of a file , call in their language Area , Cassah Guch , with which they grate their shoulder . and so the Carovan march , come within two mile of Mecca where they rest that night . in the morning at the break of day , with all pomp possible they set forward towards Mecca , and draw near thereunto , the Seripho issue forth of the city with his guard , accompany with a infinite number of people , shout , and make great triumph . And be come out of the city a boweshoote into a fair field , where a great multitude of tent be pitch , and in the midst the pavilion of the captain , who meet with the Serifo , after salutation on each side , they light from their horse and enter into the pavilion , where the king of Mecca deprive himself of all authority and power , and commit the same to the abovenamed captain , give he full licence and authority to command , govern , and minister justice 350 during his abode in Mecca with his company , and on the other side the captain to requite this liberality use towards he by the Serifo give he a garment of cloth of gold of great value , with certain jewel and other like thing . Arter this , sit down together upon carpet and hide they eat together , and rise from thence with certain of the chief , and take with they the garment and gate abovesaid , they go direct to the mosquita , attend on but with a few , and be enter , they cause the old to be pull down , and put the new coverture upon the house of Abraham , and the old vesture be the eunuch which serve in the say mosquita , who after sell it unto the pilgrim at four or five serafine the pike : and happy do that man think himself , which can get never so little a piece thereof , to conserve ever after as a most holy relic : and they say , that put the same under the head of a man at the hour of his death , through virtue thereof all his sin be forgive . also they take away the old door , set in the place the new door , and the old by custom they give unto the Serifo . after have make their prayer with certain ordinary and wont ceremony , the Serifo remain in the city , and the captain of the pilgrimage return unto his pavilion . of the Serifo the king of Mecca . the Serifo be descend of the prophet Mahomet by Fatma daughter of that good prophet , and Alli husband to she , and son in law to Mahumet , who have no issue male , save this stock of the Serifo , to the elder son whereof the realm come by succession . this realm have of revenue royal , every year half a million of gold , or little more : and all such as be of the prophet kindred , or descend of that blood ( which be almost innumerable ) be call Emyri , that be to say , lord . Theise all go clothe in green , or at the least have their turban green , to be know from the other . neither be it permit that any of those Christians which 351 dwell or traffic in their country go clothe in green , neither may they have any thing of green about they : for they say it be not lawful for misbeleevers-to wear that colour , wherein that great friend and prophet of God Mahomet be wont to be apparel . of the city of Mecca . the ci tie of Mecca in the arabian tongue be call Macca , that be to say , a habitation . this city be environ about with exceed high and barren mountains , and in the plain between the say mountain . and the city be many pleasant garden , where grow great abundance of fig , grape , apple , and melon . there be also great abundance of good water and flesh , but not of bread . this city have no wall about it , and contain in circuit five mile . the house be very handsome and commodious , and be build like to the house in Italy . the palace of the Serifo be sumptuous and gorgeous adorn . the woman of the place be courteous , jocund , and lovely , fair , with allure eye , be hot and libidinous , and the most of they naughty pack . the man of this place be give to that abominable , curse , and opprobrious vice , whereof both man and woman make but small account by reason of the pond zun zun , wherein have wash themselves , their opinion be , that although like the dog they return to their vomit , yet they be cleanse from all sin whatsoever , of which sin we will hereafter more large discourse . in the midst of the city be the great mosquita , [ ii i . 208. ] with the house of Abraham stand in the very midst thereof , which mosquita be build in the time when their prophet live . it be four square , and so great , that it contain two mile in circuit , that be to say , half a mile each side . also it be make in manner of a cloister , for that in the midst thereof separate from the rest , be the abovesaid house of Abraham , also the gallery round about be in manner of 4. street , and the partition which divide the one street from the other be pillar , whereof 352 some be of marble , and other of lime and stone . this famous and sumptuous mosquita have 99 gate , and 5. steeple , from whence the Talismani call the people to the mosquita . and the pilgrim which be not provide of tent , resort hither , and for more devotion the man and woman lie together aloft and beneath , one upon another , so that their house of prayer become worse sometime than a den of thief . of the house of Abraham . the house of Abraham be also four square , and make of speckle stone , 20. pace high , and 40 in circuit . and upon one side of this house within the wall , there be a stone of a span long , and half a span broad , which stone ( as they say ) before this house be build , fall down from heaven , at the fall whereof be hear a voice , that wheresoever this stone fall , there shall be build the house of God , wherein God will hear sinner . Moreover , they say that when this stone fall from heaven , it be not black as now , but as white as the white snow , and by reason it have be so oft kiss by sinner , it be therewith become black : for all the pilgrim be bind to kiss this stone , otherwise they carry their sin home with they again . the entrance into this house be very small , make in manner of a window , and as high from the ground as a man can reach , so that it be painful to enter . this house have without 31. pillar of brass , set upon cubike or square stone be read and green , the which pillar sustain not aught else save a thread of copper , which reach from one to another , whereunto be fasten many burn lamp . Theise pillar of brass be cause to be make by sultan Soliman grandfather to sultan Amurath now emperor . after this , have enter with the difficulty abovesaid , there stand at the entrance two pillar of marble , to wit , on each side one . in the midst there be three of aloes-wood not very thick , and cover with tile of India of 1000 colour which serve to underprop the Terratza . it be five 353 z so dark , that they can hardly see within for want of light , not without a evil smell . without the gate five pase be the abovesaid pond zun zun , which be that bless pond that the angel of the lord show unto Agar while she go seek water for her son Ishmael to drink . of the ceremony of the pilgrim . in the beginning we have say how the mahometans have two feast in the year . the one they call Pascha the ramazatco , that be to say , the feast of fast , and this feast of fast be hold thirty day after the feast , wherein the Carovan travel to Mecca . the other be call the feast of the ram , wherein all they which be of ability be bind to sacrifice a ram , and this they call bane Bairam , that be to say , the great feast . and as the Carovan depart from Cairo thirty day after the little feast , so likewise they come hither five or six day before the great feast , to the end the pilgrim may have time before the feast to finish their rite and ceremony , which be these . depart from the Carovan , and be guide by such as be experience in the way , they go unto the city twenty or thirty in a company as they think good , walk through a street which ascend by little and little till they come unto a certain gate , whereupon be write on each side in marble stone , Babel Salema , which in the arabian tongue signifies , the gate of health . and from this place be descry the great mosquita , which environ the house of Abraham , which be descry , they reverent salute twice , say , Salem Alech Jara sul Alla , that be to say , peace to thou , ambassador of God . this salutation be end , proceed on the way , they find a arch upon their right hand , whereon they ascend five step , upon the which be a great void place make of stone : after , descend other five step , and proceed the space of a flight-shoot , they find another arch like unto the first , and this way from the one arch to the other 354 they go and come 7. time , say always some of their prayer , which ( they say ) the afflict Agar say , while she seek and find not water for her son Ishmael to drink . this ceremony be end , the pilgrim enter into the mosquita , and draw near unto the house of Abraham , they go round about it other seven time , always say : this be the house of God , and of his servant Abraham ; this do , they go to kiss that black stone abovesaid . after they go unto the pond zun zun , and in their apparel as they be , they wash [ ii i . 209. ] themselves from head to foot , say , Tobah Allah , Tobah Allah , that be to say , pardon lord , pardon lord , drink also of that water , which be both muddy , filthy , and of a ill savour , and in this wise wash and water , every one return to his place of abode , and these ceremony every one be bind to do once at the least . but those which have a mind to overgo their fellow , and to go into paradise before the rest , do the same once a day while the Carovan remain there . what the Carovan do after have rest at Mecca . the Carovan have abode within the city of Mecca five day , the night before the evening of their feast , the captain with all his company set forward towards the mountain of pardon , which they call in the the mountain arabian tongue , Jabel Arafata . this mountain be distant °f pard°ns-from Mecca 15. mile , and in the mid way thereto be a place call Mina , that be to say , the haven , and a little from thence be 4. great pillar , of which hereafter we will speak . now first touch the mountain of pardon , which be rather to be call a little hill , than a mountain , for that it be low , little , delightful and pleasant , contain in circuit two mile , and environ round about with the goodly plain that ever with man eye can be see , and the plain likewise compass with exceed high mountain , in such sort , that this be one of the goodly situation in the world : and it seem 355 very , that nature have therein show all her cunning , in make this place under the mountain of pardon so broad and pleasant . upon the side towards Mecca there be many pipe of water clear , fair , and fresh , and above all most wholesome , fall down into certain vessel make of purpose , where the people refresh and wash themselves , and water their cattle . and when Adam and Evah be cast out of paradise by the angel of the lord , the mahometans say , they come to inhabit this little mountain of pardon . also they say , that they have lose one another , and be separate for the space of 40. year , and in the end meet at this place with great joy and gladness , and build a little house upon the top of this mountain , the which at this day they call Beyt Adam , that be to say , the house of Adam . of the three Carovans . the same day that the Carovan of Cairo come to this place , hither come 2. Carovans also , one of Damascus , the other of Arabia , and in like manner all the inhabitant for ten day journey round about , so that at one time there be to be see above 200000. person , and more than 300000. cattle . now all this company meet together in this place the night before the feast , the three host cast themselves into a triangle , set the mountain in the midst of they : and all that night there be nothing to be hear nor see , but gunshot and firework of sundry sort , with such sing , sound , shout , hallow , rumour , feast , and triumph , as be wonderful . after this , the day of the feast be come , they be all at rest and silence , and that day they attend on no other thing , than to sacrifice oblation and prayer unto God , and in the evening all they which have horse mount thereon , and approach as nigh unto the mountain as they can , and those which have no horse make the best shift they can on foot , give ever unto the captain of Cairo the chief place , the second to the captain of Damascus , and the three to the captain 356 of Arabia , and be all approach as be abovesaid , there come a square squire , one of the Santones , mount on a camel well furnish , who at the other side of the mountain ascend five step into a pulpit make for that purpose , and all be silent , turn his face towards the people , he make a short sermon of the tenor follow . the sum of the Santones sermon . the sum of this double doctor sermon be thus much in brief . he show they how many and how great benefit God have give to the mahometan people by the hand of his belove friend and prophet Mahomet , have deliver they from the servitude of sin and from idolatry , in which before time they be drown , and how he give unto they the house of Abraham wherein they shall be hear , and likewise the mountain of pardon , by mean whereof they may obtain grace and remission of their sin : add , that the merciful God , who be a liberali giver of all good thing , command his secretary Abraham to build he a house in Mecca , where his successor may make their prayer unto he and be hear , at which time all the mountain in the world come together thither with sufficiency of stone for build hereof , except that little and low hill , which for poverty can not go to discharge this debt , for the which it become sorrowful , [ ii i . 210. ] weep beyond all measure for the space of thirty year , at the end whereof the eternal God have pity and compassion upon this poor mountain , say unto it : weep no more ( my daughter ) for thy bitter plaint have ascend up into my ear , therefore comfort thy self : for i will cause all those that shall go to visit the house of my friend Abraham , that they shall not be absolve from their sin , unless they first come to do thou reverence , and to keep in this place their holy feast . and this i have command unto my people by the mouth of my friend and prophet Mahumet . This say , 357 he exhort they unto the love of God , and to prayer and alm . the sermon be do at the sunsetting they make 3. prayer , namely , the first for the Serifo , the second for the grand signior with his host , and the three for all the people : to which prayer all with one voice cry say ; amni ja alla , amni ja alla , that be to say , be it so lord , be it so lord . thus have have the Santones blessing and salute the mountain of pardon , they return the way they come unto Mina , whereof we have make mention . in return at the end of the plain be the abovesaid 4. pillar , to wit , two on each side of the way , through the midst whereof they say it be needful that every one pass , say , that who so pass without lose all that merit which in his pilgrimage he have get . also from the mountain of pardon until they be pass the say pillar none dare look backward , for fear least the sin which he have leave in the mountain return to he again . be past these pillar every one light down , seek in this sandy field 50. or 60. little stone , which be gather , and bind in a handkerchief they carry to the abovesaid place of Mina , where they stay 5. day , because at that time there be a fair free and frank of all custom . and in this place be other 3. pillar , not together , but set in diverse place , where ( as their prophet say ) be the three apparition which the devil make unto Abraham , and to Ishmael his son ; for among they they make no mention of Isaac , as if he have never be bear . so they say , that the bless God have command Abraham his faithful servant to sacrifice his first beget Ishmael , the old Abraham go to do accord to god will , and meet with the infernal enemy in the shape of a man , and be of he demand whither he go , he answer , that he go to sacrifice his son Ishmael , as God have command he . against who the devil exclaim say : oh dote old man , sith God in thy old age have marvelous give thou this son ( in who all nation shall|be bless ) wherefore give credit unto 358 vain dream , will thou kill he who so much thou have desire , and so entire love . but Abraham shake he off proceed on his way , whereupon the devil see his word can not prevail with the father attempt the son , say ; Ishmael , have regard unto thy self betimes in this thing which be so dangerous . wherefore ? answer you child . because ( say the devil ) thy dote father seek to take away thy life . for what occasion , say Ishmael ? because ( say the enemy ) he say , that God have command he . which Ishmael hear he take up stone and throw at he , say , Auzu billahi minal scia itanil ragini , which be to say , i defend i with God from the devil the offender , as who will say , we ought to obey the commandment of God and resist the devil with all our force . but to return to our purpose , the pilgrim during their abode there go to visit these three pillar , throw away the little stone which before they gather , while they repeat the same word which they say , that Ishmael say to the devil , when he withstand he . from hence half a mile be a mountain , whither Abraham go to sacrifice his son , as be abovesaid . in this mountain be a great den whither the pilgrim resort to make their prayer , and there be a great stone natural separate in the midst ; and they say , that Ishmael , while his father Abraham be busy about the sacrifice , take the knife in hand to prove how it will cut , and make trial divide the stone into two part . the five day be expire , the captain arise with all the Carovan , and return again to Mecca , where they remain other five day . and while these rest , we will treat of the city and port of Grida upon the red sea of Grida . THereford we say that from Mecca to Grida they make two small day journey : and because in those place it be ill travel in the daytime by reason of the great heat of the sun , therefore they depart in the 359 Grida a port near Mecca . evening from Mecca , and in the morning before sunrising they be arrive half way , where there be certain habitation well furnish , and good inn to lodge in , but especial woman enough which voluntary bestow their alm upon the poor pilgrim : likewise depart the next evening , the morning after , they come unto Grida . this city be found upon the red sea bank , environ with wall and tower to the landward , but through continuance of time almost consume and waste : on the side to seaward it stand unwalled . Grida have three gate , one on each side , and the third in the midst toward the land , which be call , the port of Mecca , near unto which be 6. or 7. Turks upon [ ii i . 211. ] the old tower for guard thereof with four falcon upon one of the corner of the city to the landward . also to seaward where the wall join with the water , there be late make a fort like unto a bulwark , where they have plant 25 piece of the best ordinance that may be have , which be very well keep and guard . more outward towards the sea upon the far old tower be other five good piece with 30 man to guard they . on the other side of the city at the end of the wall there be late build a bulwark strong and well guard by a sanjaccho with 150 turk well provide with ordinance and all other necessary and munition , and all these fortifying be for none other cause then the Portugal ! for fear and suspicion of the Portugal . and if the port be g°°d all this be in vain : but the port cansea . not be worse nor more dangerous , be all full of rock and sand , in such wise , that the ship can come near , but perforce ride at the least two mile off . at forty or fifty this port arrive every year forty or fifty great ship rich ship lade with spice and other rich merchandise which yield at Grida . in custom 150000 ducat , the half whereof go unto the grand signior , and the other half to the Serifo . and because there be none other thing worthy mention in Grida we will return to our Carovan which have almost rest enough . 360 the Carovan depart for Medina return the same way they come unto bedrihonem abovesaid , where they leave their ordinance and other carriage , whereof they have no need , with the pilgrim which have see Medina aforetime , and desire not to see it again , but stay in that place , expect the carovan , and rest until the carovan go from bedrihonem to Medina , where they always find goodly habitation , with abundance of sweet water , and date enough , and be within fbureteene mile of Medina they come unto a great plain call by they Jabel el salema , that be to say , the mountain of health , from which they begin to descry the city and tomb of Mahomet , at which sight they light from their horse in token of reverence . And be ascend up the say mountain with shout which pierce the sky they say , Sala tuua salema alaccha Jarah sul Allah . Sala tuua Salema alaccha Janabi Allah , Sala tuua Salema allaccha jahabit Allah : which word in the arabian tongue signify : prayer and health be unto thou , oh prophet of God : prayer and health be upon thou , oh belove of God . and have pronounce this salutation , they proceed •on their journey , so that they lodge that night within three mile of Medina : and the next morning the •captaine of the pilgrimage arise , and proceed towards the city , and draw near , there come the governor under the Serifo , accompany with his people to receive the Carovan , have pitch their tent in the midst of a goodly field where they lodge . of Medina . MEdina be a little city of great antiquity , contain in circuit not above two mile , have therein but one castle , which be old and weak , guard by a aga with fifty piece of artillery , but not very good . the house thereof be fair and well situate , build of lime and stone , and in the midst of the city stand a foure-361 square mosquita , not so great as that of Mecca , but more goodly , rich , and sumptuous in building . within the same in a corner thereof be a tomb build upon four pillar with a vault , as if it be under a pavement , which bind all the four pillar together . the tomb be so high , that it far exceed in height the mosquita , be cover with lead , and the top all enamele with gold , with a half moon upon the top : and within the pavement it be all very artificial wrought with gold . below there , be round about very great stair of iron ascend up until the midst of the pillar , and in the very midst thereof be bury the body of Mahomet , and not in a chest of iron cleave to the adamant , as many affirm that know not the truth thereof . Moreover , over the body they have build a tomb of speckle stone | | or , a a two brace and a half high , and over the same another of fathom . legmame foursquare in manner of a pyramid . after this , round about the sepulture there hang a curtain of silk , which let the sight of those without , that they can see the sepulture . beyond this in the same mosquita be other two sepulchre cover with green cloth , and in the one of they be bury Fatma the daughter of Mahomet , and Alli be bury in the other , who be the husband of the say Fatma . the attendant upon these sepulchre be fifty eunuch white and tawny , neither be it grant to any of they to enter within the tomb , save to three white eunuch the old and best of credit ; unto who it be lawful to enter but twice in the day , to light the lamp , and to do other service . all the other eunuch attend without to the service of the mosquita , and the other two sepulchre of Fatma , and Alli , where every one may go and touch at his pleasure , and take of the earth for devotion , as many do . [ ii i . 212. ] of thing without the city . without the city and on every side be most fair garden , with many fountain of most sweet water , infinite pond , abundance of fruit , with much 362 honest live , so that this place be very pleasant and delightful . this city have three gate , one of which be a hospitali cause to be build by Cassachi , call the rose , who be wife to sultan Soliman grandfather to this emperor . the say hospitali have nought else worthy mention , save that it be fair build , and have large revenue belong thereunto , and nourish many poor people . a mile from the city be certain house whereof they affirm one to be the same , where Mahumet in his life-time dwell . this house have on every side very many fair date tree , among which there be two which grow out of one stock exceed high , and these , they say , their prophet graft with his own hand : the fruit thereof be always send to Constantinople , to be present unto the grand signior , and be say to be that bless fruit of the prophet . Nere unto the date tree be a fair fountain of clear and sweet water , the which by a conduct pipe be bring into the city of Medina . also there be a little mosquita , wherein three place be count holy , and great reverence : the first they affirm , that their prophet make his first prayer in , after he know God : the second be that whither he go when he will see the holy house of Abraham , where when he sit down to that intent , they say the mountain open from the top to the bottom to show he the house , and after close again as before : the three holy place be in the midst of the say mosquita , where be a tomb make of lime and stone foursquare , and full of sand , wherein , they say , be bury that bless camel which Mahumet be always wont to ride upon . on the other side of the city be other tomb of holy Mahumetans , and every one of they have a tomb build upon four pillar , among which three be the companion of Mahumet , to wit , abu-bacar , ottoman , and Omar ; all which be visit of the pilgrim as holy place . 363 [ the offer the offer of the vesture unto the sepulchre . the Carovan be come to Medina two hour before day , and rest there till the evening , the captain then with his company and other pilgrim set forward , with the great pomp possible : and take with he the vesture which be make in manner of a pyramid , with many other of gold and silk , depart , go through the midst of the city , until he come to the mosquita , where have pray , he present unto the tomb of his prophet ( where the eunuch receive hand , be ready ) the vesture for the say tomb : and certain eunuch enter in take away the old vesture , and lie on the new , burn the old one , and divide the gold thereof into equal portion . after this be present other vesture for the ornament of the mosquita . also the people without deliver unto the eunuch each man somewhat to touch the tomb therewith , which they keep as a relic with great devotion . this ceremony be end , the captain rest in Medina two day , to the end the pilgrim may finish their devotion and ceremony : and after they depart to Jambor . a good day journey thence be a steep mountain , over which be no passage , save by one narrow path call Demir Capi , which be in time past call the iron gate . of this gate the mahometans say , that ally the companion and son in law of Mahumet , be here pursue by many Christians , and come unto this mountain , not see any way whereby to flee , draw out his sword , and strike the say mountain , divide it in sunder , and pass through save his life on the other side . Moreover , this Alli among the persian be have in great reverence than Mahumet , who affirm , that the say Alli have do great thing and more miraculous than Mahumet , and therefore they esteem he for God almighty his fellow . but to return to our matter , the captain with the carovan within two day after return for Cairo , and come to Ezlem , find there a captain with threescore horse 364 come thither to bring refreshment to the say captain of the pilgrimage , as also to sell unto the pilgrim some victual . from thence they set forward , and commi hang to Birca within two league of Cairo , there be the master of the house of the Bassha of Cairo with all his horseman come thither to receive he , with a sumptuous and costly banquet make at the cost of the bassa for the captain and his retinue , who after he be well refresh depart towards the castle of Cairo to salute the bassa , who receive he with great joy and gladness in token of good will presents he with a garment of cloth of gold very rich : and the captain take the Koran out of the chest present it to the bassa , who have kiss it , commands to lay it up again . some there be which affirm , that be arrive at Cairo , they kill that goodly camel which carry the Koran , and eat he ; which be nothing so : for they be so superstitious to the contrary , that to gain all the world they will not kill he . [ ii i . 213. ] but if by casualty he shall die , in this case happy and bless they think themselves , which can get a morsel to eat . and thus much concern the voyage of the captain of the carovan of Cairo . 