a letter write from goa by master Ralph Fitch to master Leonard poor abovesaid . Oving friend master poor , etc since my departure from Aleppo , i have not write unto you any letter , by reason that at Babylon i be sick of the flux , and be sick , i go from thence for balsara , which be twelve day journey down the river Tigris , where we have extreme hot weather , which be good for my disease , ill fare , and worse lodging , by reason our boat be pester with people . in eight day , that which i do eat be very small , so that if we have stay two day long upon the water , i think i have die : but come to Balsara , present i mend , i thank God . there we stay 14 day , and then we embark our self for ormuz , where we arrive the five of September , and be put in prison the nine of the same month , where we continue until the 11 of October , and then be ship for this city of goa in the captain ship , with a 114 horse , and about 200 man : and pass by diu and Chaul , where we go on land to Diu. water the 20 of November , we arrive at goa the 29 chaul-of then say month , where for our better entertainment we be present put into a fair strong prison , where we continue until the 22 of December . it be the will of God that we find there 2 Padres , the one a Englishman , the other a Fleming . the englishmans name be Padre Thomas Stevens , the other Padre Marco , of the order of saint Paul . Theise do sue for we unto the viceroy and other officer , and stand we in as much 463 the italian our great enemy for the trade in the east . the english voyage stead , as our life and good be worth : for if they have not stick to we , if we have escape with our life , yet we have have long imprisonment . after 14 day imprisonment they offer we , if we can put in surety for 2000 ducat , we shall go abroad in the town : which when we can not do , the say Padres find surety for we , that we shall not depart the country without the licence of the viceroy . it do spite the italian to see we abroad : and many marvel at our delivery . the painter be in the cloister of saint Paul , and be of their order , and like there very well . while we be in prison , both at ormuz and here , there be a great deal of our good pilfer and lose , and we have be at great charge in gift and otherwise , so that a great deal of our good be consume . there be much of our thing which will sell very well , and some we shall get nothing for . i hope in God that at the return of the viceroy , which be go to Chaul and to diu , they say , to win a castle of the moor , who return be think will be about easter , than we shall get our liberty , and our surety discharge . than i think it will be our best way , either one or both to return , because our trouble have be so great , and so much of our good spoil and lose . but if it please God that i come into England , by god help , i will return hither again . it be a brave and pleasant country , and very fruitful . the summer be almost all the year long , but the chief at Christmas . the day and the night be all of one length , very little difference , and marvelous great store of fruit . for all our great trouble , yet be we fat and well like , for victual be here plenty and good cheap . and here i will pass over to certify you of strange thing , until our meeting , for it will be too long to write thereof . and thus i commit you to God , who ever preserve you and we all . from goa in the east Indies the 25 of Januarie 1584. you to command , Ralph Fitch . 464 