the voyage of m. John Eldred to Trypolis in Syria by sea , and from thence by land and river to Babylon and Balsara . 1583. depart out of London in the ship call the tiger , in the company of m. John Newberry , m. Ralph Fitch , and six or seven other honest merchant upon Shrove Monday 1583 , and arrive in Tripoli of Syria the first day of May next ensue : at our land we go on may upon s. George hand , a place where Christians die aboard the ship , be wont to be bury . in this city our english merchant have a Consuli , and our nation abide together in one house with he , call Fondeghi ingle , build of stone , square , in manner like a cloister , and every man have his several chamber , as it be the use of all other Christians of several nation . this town stand under a part of the mountain of Libanus two English mile distant from the port : on the side of which port , trending in form of a half moon , stand five block house or small fort , wherein be some very good artillery , and the fort be keep with about a hundred janissary . right before this town from the seaward be a bank of move sand , which gather and increase with the western wind , in such sort , that , accord to a old prophesy among they , this bank be like to swallow up and overwhelm the town : for every year it increase and eat up many garden , although they use all policy to diminish the same , and t© make it firm ground . the city be about the bigness vi 1 of the description of Tripoli in Syria . Cotton wool . gall tree .. Aleppo . [ il i . 269. ] the english voyage of Bristol , and wall about , though the wall be of no great force . the chief strength of the place be in a citadel , which stand on the south side within the wall , and overlook the whole town , and be strong keep with two hundred janissary and good artillery . a river pass through the midst of the city , wherewith they water their garden and mulberry tree , on which there grow abundance of silk woime , wherewith they make great quantity of very white silk , which be the chief natural commodity to be find in and about this place . This ride be more frequent with christian merchant , to wit , Venetians , Genouois , Florentines , marsilians , sicilian , raguse , and late with english man , than any other port of the turk dominion . from Tripoli i depart the 14 of may with a caravan , pass three day over the ridge of mount Libanus , at the end whereof we arrive in a city call hammah , which stand on a goodly plain replenish with corn and cotton wool . on these mountain which we pass grow great quantity of gall tree , which be somewhat like our oak , but lesser and more crooked : on the best tree a man shall not find above a pound of gall . this town of hammah be fall and fall more and more to decay , and at this day there be scarce one half of the wall stand , which have be very strong and fair : but because it cost many man life to win it , the Turk will not have it repair ; and have write in the arabian tongue over the castle gate , which stand in the midst of the town , these word : curse be the father and the son that shall lay their hand to the repair hereof . refresh our self one day here , we pass forward with camel three day more until we come to Aleppo , where we arrive the 21 of May . this be the great place of traffic for a dry town that be in all those part : for hither resort Jew , tartarian , persian , armenian , egyptian , Indian , and many sort of Christians , and enjoy freedom's of their conscience , and bring thither many kind of rich merchandise . in the midst of this town also stand a goodly castle raise on high , with a garrison of four or five hundred janissary . within four mile round about be goodly garden and vineyard and tree , which bear goodly fruit near unto the river side , which be but small ; the wall be about three english mile in compass , but the suburb be almost as much more . the town be great people . we depart from thence with our camel the last of may with m. John Newberry and his company , and come to birrah in three day , be a small town situate upon birrah . the river Euphrates , where it begin first to take his name , be here gather into one channel , whereas before it come down in manifold branch , and therefore be call by the people of the country by a name which signify a thousand head . here be plenty of victual , whereof we all furnish our self for a long journey down the aforesaid river . And accord to the manner of those that travel down by water , we prepare a small bark for the conveyance of our self and of our good . Theise boat be flat bottomed , because the river be shallow in many place : and when Euphrates man travel in the month of July , August , and Septem - shallow-b , the water be then at the low , they be constrain to carry with they a spare boat or two to lighten their own boat , if they chance to fall on the shold . we be eight and twenty day upon the water be - eisht and between birrah and Felugia , where we disimbark our ^es self and our good . Every night after the sun set , nver , we tie our bark to a stake , go on land to gather stick , and set on our pot with rice or bruise wheat , and have sup , the merchant lie aboard the bark , and the mariner upon the shore side as near as they can unto the same . in many place upon the river side we meet with troop of arabian , of who we buy arabian upon milk , butter , egg , and lamb , and give they in barter , ( for they care not for money ) glass , comb , coral , ' amber , to hang about their arm and neck , and for the arabian woman wear gold ring in their nostril . Euphrates describe . Felugia . the ruin of aid Babylon . the english voyage churn milk we give they bread and pomegranate peel , wherewith they use to tanne their goat skin which they churn withal . their hair , apparel , and colour be altogether like to those vagabond Egyptians , which heretofore have go about in England . their woman all without exception wear a great round ring in one of their nostril , of gold , silver , or iron , accord to their ability , and about their arm and smalle of their leg they have hoop of gold , silver or iron . all of they aswell woman and child as man , be very great swimmer , and often time swim they bring we milk to our bark in vessel upon their head . Theise people be very thievish , which i prove to my cost : for they steal a casket of i , with thing of good value in the same , from under my man head as he be asleep : and therefore traveller keep good watch as they pass down the river . Euphrates at birrah be about the breadth of the Thames at Lambeth , and in some place narrow , in some broad : it run very swift , almost as fast as the river of Trent : it have diverse sort of fish in it , but all be scale , some as big as salmon , like barbil . we land at Felugia the eight and twenty of June , where we make our abode seven day , for lack of camel to carry our good to Babylon : the heat at that time of the year be such in those part , that man be loath to let out their camel to travel . This Felugia be a village of some hundred house , and a place appoint for discharge of such good as come down the river : the inhabitant be arabian . not find camel here , we be constrain to unlade our good , and hire a hundred ass to carry our english merchandise only to new Babylon over a short desert , in cross whereof we spend eighteen hour travel by night , and part of the morning , to avoid the great heat . in this place which we cross over , stand the old mighty city of Babylon , many old ruin whereof be easy to be see by daylight , which i John Eldred have often behold at my good leisure , have make three voyage between the new city of Babylon and Aleppo over this desert . here also be yet stand the ruin of the old tower of Babel , which be upon a plain ground seem a far off very great , but the near you come to it , the lesser and lesser it appear ; sundry time i have go thither to see it , and find the remnant yet stand above a quarter of a mile in compass , and almost as high as the stonework of Paul steeple in London , but it show much big . the brick remain in this most ancient monument be half a yard thick , and three quarter of a yard long , be dry in the sun only , and between every course of brick there lie a course of mat make of cane , which remain sound and not perish , as though they have be lay within one year . the city of new Babylon join upon new Babylon . the aforesaid small desert where the old city be , and the river of Tigris run close under the wall , and nuum they may if they will open a sluice , and let the water tig ™ - of the same run round about the town . it be above two english mile in compass , and the inhabitant general speak three language , to wit , the persian , arabian and turkish tongue : the people be of the Spaniard complexion : and the woman general wear in one of the gristle of their nose a ring like a wed - [ ii i . 270. ] ding ring , but somewhat great , with a pearl and a turkish stone set therein : and this they do be they never so poor . this be a place of very great traffic , and a very great thorowfare from the east Indies to Aleppo . the town be very well furnish with victual which come down the river of Tigris from mosul which be call Ninive in old time . they bring these victual and diverse sort of merchandise upon raft bear upon baft bear goat skin blow up full of wind in manner of bladder . and when they have discharge their good , they sei the raft for fire , and let the wind out of their goat skin , and carry they home again upon their ass by land , to make other voyage down the river . the build here be most of brick dry in the sun , and very little or no stone be to be find : their house . be seidome rain . all flat-roofed and low . they have no rain for eight month together , nor almost any cloud in the sky , night nor day . their winter be in November , December , January and February , which be as warm as our summer in England in a manner . this i know by good experience , because my abode at several time in this city of Babylon have be at the least the space of two year . as we come to the city , we pass over the river of Tigris on a great bridge make with boat chain together with two mighty chain of iron . from thence we depart in flat bottomed bark more strong bite and si great than those of Euphrates , and be eight and twenty day twenty day also in pass down this river to Balsara , jfy^ver " from ^ut we m'ght have do it in eighteen or less , if the Babylon to water have be high . upon the water side stand by Balsara . the way diverse town resemble much the name of the old prophet : the first town they call Ozeah , and another Zecchiah . before we come to Balsara by one day journey , the two river of Tigris and Euphrates curnagastle . meet , and there stand a castle call Curna , keep by the turk , where all merchant pay a small custom . here the two river join together begin to be eight or nine mile broad : here also it begin to ebb and flow , and the water overflow make the country all about very fertile of corn , rice , pulse , and date . Balsara . the town of Balsara be a mile and a half in circuit : all the building , castle and wall , be make of brick dry in the sun the Turk have here five hundred janissaries , beside other soldier continual in garrison and pay , but his chief strength be of galley which be about five and twenty or thirty very fair and furnish with goodly ordinance . to this port of Balsara come monthly diverse ship from ormuz , lade with all sort of Indian merchandise , as spice , drug , indigo and calecut cloth . Theise ship be usual from forty to threescore ton , have their plank sow together with cord make of the bark of date tree , and in stead of Occam they use the shivering of the bark of the say tree , and of the same they also make their tackle . they have no kind of iron work belong to these vessel , save only their anchor . from this place six day sail down the gulf , they go to a place call Baharem in the mid way to ormus : there they fish for pearl four month in the year , to wit , in June , July , August , and September . my abode in Balsara be just six month , during which time i receive diverse letter from m. John Newberry from ormus , who as he pass that way with her majesty letter to Zelabdim echebar king of Cambaia , and unto the mighty emperor of China , be traitorous there arrest , and all his company , by the Portugal , and afterward send prisoner to goa : where after a long and cruel imprisonment he and his companion be deliver upon surety , not to depart the town without leave , at the suit of one father Thomas Stevens a english religious man , which they find there : but short after three of they escape , whereof one , to wit , m. Ralph Fitch , be since come into England . the four , which be a painter call John story , become religious in the college of saint Paul in goa , as we understand by their letter . i and my companion William shale have dispatch our business at Balsara , embark our self in company of seventy bark all lade with merchandise , have every bark 14 man to draw they , like our western bargeman on the Thames , and we be forty four day come up against the stream to Babylon , where arrive and pay our custom , we with all other sort of merchant buy we camel , hire we man to lade and drive they , furnish our self with rice , butter , blsket , honey make of date , onion and date : and every merchant buy a proportion of live mutton , and hire certain shepherd to drive they with we : we 7 A.D. 1584. ship make •without iron in the persian gulf . ' zelabdim echebar king of Cambaia . their provision of victual . he return from Balsara to Aleppo . also buy we tent to lie in , and to put our good at Caravan off under : and in this our caravan be four thousand c^meh . usab4 camel lade with spice and °ther rich marchandi . SeS‘ S‘ these camel will live very well two or three day without water : their feed be on thistle , wormwood , magdalene , and other strong weed which they find upon the way . the government and decide of all quarrel and duty to be pay , the whole caravan commit to one speciali rich merchant of the company , of who honesty they conceive best . in pass from Babylon to Aleppo , we spend forty day , travel twenty , or four and twenty mile a day , rest ourselves common from two of the clock in the afternoon , until three in the morning , at which time we begin to take our journey . eight day journey from Babylon towards Aleppo , near [ ii i . 271. ] unto a town call Heit , as we cross the river Euphrates by boat , about 3. mile from the town there be a valley wherein be many spring throw out abundant at great mouth , a kind of black substance like unto tar , which serve all the country to make staunch their bark and boat : every one of these spring make a noise like unto a smith forge in the blow and puff out of this matter , which never cease night nor day , and the noise may be hear a mile off continual . this vale swallow up all heavy thing that come upon it . the people of the country call it in their language Babil gehenham , that be to say , hell door . as we pass through these desert , we see certain wild beast , as wild ass all white , roebuck , wolf|be , leopard , fox , and many hare , whereof we chase and kill many . aborise the king of the wander arabian in these desert , have a duty of 40. S. sterling , upon every camel load , which he send his officer to receive of the Caravans , and in consideration hereof , he take upon he to conduct the say Caravans if they need his help , and to defend they against certain prowl thief . i and my companion William shale come to Aleppo with the Caravan the eleven of June , 1584. where we be joyful receive 20. mile distant from the town by m. William Barret our Consuli , accompany with his people and janissary , who fall sick immediate and depart this life within 8. day after , and elect before his death m. Anthony bate consul of our english nation in his place , who laudable supply the same room 3. year . in which mean time , i make two voyage more unto Babylon , and return by the way aforesaid , over the desert of Arabia . and afterward , as one desirous to see other part of the country , i go from Aleppo to Antioch , which be thence 60. English mile , and from thence go down to Tripoli , where go aboard a small vessel , i arrive at joppe , and travel to Rama , Lycia , Gaza , Jerusalem , Bethleem , to the river of Jordan , and the sea or lake of Zodome , and return back to joppe , and from thence by sea to Tripoli , of which place because many other have publish large discourse , i surcease to write . within few day after embark my self at Tripoli the 22. of December , i arrive ( God be thank ) in safety here in the river of Thames with diverse english merchant , the 26. of march , 1588 , in the Hercules of London , which be the rich ship of english merchant good that ever be know to come into this realm . A.D. I588 . William Barret consul in Aleppo . m. Wil. Barret . two voyage more make to Babylon . 