the money and measure of Babylon , Balsara , and the Indies , with the custom , etc write from Aleppo in Syria , An. 1584. by m. will . Barret . Babylon : the weight , measure , and money currant there , and the custom of merchandise . Mana of Babylon be of Aleppo baptize rove 5 ounce and a half : and 68 mana and three seven part , make a quintali of Aleppo , which be 494 livre . 8 ounce of London : and too mana be a quintali of Babylon , which make in Aleppo 146 rove , and of London 722 livre . and so much be the say quintail : but the merchant accord be by so much the mana , and in the say place they bate the tear in all sort of commodity , accord to the order of Aleppo touch they tear . the measure of Babylon be great than that of Aleppo 21 in you 100 for bring 100 pike of any measurable ware from Aleppo thither , there be find but 82 pike in Babylon , so that the 100 pike of Babylon be of Aleppo 121 pike , very little less . the currant money of Babylon be say , which say be 5 medines , as in Aleppo , and 40 medines be 8 say make a ducat currant , and 47 medines pass in value as the ducat of gold of Venice , and the dollar of the best sort be worth 33 medines . the royal of plate be sell by the 100 dram at prize , accord as they be in request : but among the merchant they bargain by the 100 metral , which be 150 dram of Aleppo , which 150 dram be 135 single royal of plate : but in the mint or castle , they take they by the 100 dram , which be 90 royal of plate , and those of the mint give 5 medines less in each 100 dram than they be worth to be sell among the merchant , and make payment at the term of 40 day in say . the custom in Babylon , as well inward as outward , be in this manner : small ware at 6 per 100 , coral and amber at 5 and a half per 100 , Venice cloth , english cloth , kersey , mockair , chamblet , silk , velvet , damask , satin and such like at 5 per 100 : and they rate the good without reason as they lust themselves . the Toafo , Boabo , and other exaction 6 medines per bale , all which they pay present in ready money , accord to the custom and use of the emperor . to the ermine of the mint you ordinary use be to give 30 say in courtesy , otherwise he will by authority of his office come aboard , and for despite make such search in the bark , that he will turn all thing topsy turvie . ball be a : the weight , measure , and money in the city of Balsara . a Mana of Balsara answer 5 rove 2 ounce and a half of Aleppo weight , and 19 mana and one 4 part of Balsara , answer the quintali of Aleppo , which be 494 rove , 8 ounce English , and 20 mana be the quintail of Balsara , which be 104 Alepine , and of London 514 livre . 8. ounce , and so much be the say quintali , but the merchant bargain at so much the mana or wolsene ( which be all one ) and they abate the tear in every mana , as the sort of spice be , and the order take therefore in that place . the measure of Balsara be call a pike , which be just as the measure of Babylon , to say , 100 pike of Balsara make of Aleppo 121 pike , ut supra in the rate of Babylon . the currant money of Balsara be as follow . there be a sort of fluss of copper call Estivi , whereof 12 make a mamedine , which be the value of one medine Aleppine , the say mamedine be of silver , have the 11 [ ii i . 272 ] Moresco stamp on both side , and two of these make a danine , which be 2 medines Aleppine . the say danine be of silver , have the Turkesco stamp on both side , and 2 and a half of these make a say , which be in value as the say of Aleppo . the say say be of the similitude and stamp of Aleppo , be ( as appear ) 60 estive . also one say and 20 estive make a larine , which be of Aleppo money 6 medines and a half . the say larine be a strange piece of money , not be round as all other currant money in Christianity , but be a small rod of silver of the greatness of the pen of a goose feather , wherewith we use to write , and in length about one eight part thereof , which be wrest , so that the two end meet at the just half part , and in the head thereof be a stamp Turkesco , and these be the best currant money in all the India , and 6 of these larines make a ducat , which be 40 medines or eight say of Aleppo . the ducat of gold be worth there 7 larine , and one danine , which be of Aleppo money 48 medines and a half . the venetian money be worth larines 88 per 100 meticals , which be 150 dram of Aleppo , ut supra . the royal of plate be worth 88 larine by the 100 meticals , and albeit among the merchant they sei by the 100 meticals , yet in the mint or castle , they sei by the too drams , have there less than the worth 5 medines in each hundred dram , and have their payment in 40 day make they in say or larine . the custom of the say place , aswell inward as outward , be alike of all sort of good , to say 6 by the 100 , and Toafo , Boabo , and scrivan medines 6 by the bale inward and outward , to say , 3 inward , and as much outward : but who so leave his good in the custom house pay nothing , where otherwise at the take thereof away , he shall pay 3 med . by the bale , and of the say good there be no other duty to pay , 12 and this come to pass when the customer esteem the good too high . for in such a case they may be drive to take so much commodity as the custom amount to , and not to pay they in money , for such be the order from the grand signior . have pay the custom , it behoove to have a quittance or cocket seal and firm with the customer hand , in confirmation of the dispatch and clear , and before departure thence , to cause the say customer to cause search to be make , to the end that at the voyage return there be no cavillation make , as it oftentimes happen . note that zoo meticals of Balsara weigh 17 ounce and a half sottile Venetian , and of Aleppo dram 150 , ut supra . the fraught of the bark from ormuz to Balsara , i will say from Balsara to Ormuz , they pay accord to the greatness thereof . to say , for carriage of 10 care 180 larine , those of 15 care 270 larine , those of 20 care 360 larine , those of 30 care 540 urine . note that a cara be 4 quintal of Balsara . they pay also to the pilot of the bark for his own carriage one care , and to all the rest of the mariner among they 3 care fraught , which be in they . whole 4 care , and pay the abovesaid prize and freight , they be at no charge of victual with they , but it be requisite that the same be declare in the charter party , with the condition that they lade not aboard one rotilo more than the fraught , under pain that find more in ormuz , it be forfeit , and beside that to pay the fraught of that which they have lade . and in this accord it behoove to deal wary , and in the presence of the ermine or some other honest man ( whereof there be but few ) for they be the worst people in all Arabia . and this diligence must be put in execution , to the end the bark may not be overlade , because they be to pass many sand betwixt Balsara and Ormuz . the weight , measure , and money currant in the kingdom of Ormuz : spice and drug they weigh by the bar , and of every sort of good the weight be different . to say , of some drug 3 quintal , and 3 erubi or rove , and other some 4 quintal 25 rotiloe , and yet both be call a bar , which bar , as well great as little , be 20 frasoli , and every frasoli be 10 mana , and every mana 23 chiansi , and every chianso 10 meticals and a half . note that every quintail make 4 erubi or rove , and every what antilo rove 32 rotiloe , and every rotilo 16 ounce , and every u - ounce 7 meticals , so that the quintali come to be 128 rotiloe , which be aleppine 26 rotiloe and one three part , which be 132 livre . english weight . and contrariwise you quintal of Aleppo ( which be 494 rotiloe 8 ounce english ) make 477 rotiloe and a half of ormuz , which be 3 quintal 2 rove , 29 rotiloe and a half . note that there be bar of diverse weight , ut supra , of which they bargain simple , accord to the sort of commodity , but if they bargain of the great bar , the same be 7 quintal and 24 rotiloe , which be 958 livre . 9 ounce of London weight , and of Aleppo 193 rotiloe and a half . touch the money of Ormuz , they bargain in merchandise at so many leche by the bar , which lech be 100 asary , and make larines 100 and a half , which make pardaos 38 , and larines one half , at larines 5 by the pardao . one asarie be sadines 10 , and every sadine be 100 danarie . the larine be worth 5 sadines and one four part , so that the sadine be worth of Aleppo money 1 medine and 1 four part , and the larine as in Balsara worth of Aleppo money 6 medines and a half . the pardao be 5 larine of Balsara . there be also stamp in Ormuz a seraphine of gold , 14 the money of ORMUZ which be iide and round , and be worth 24 sadines , which make 30 medines of Aleppo . the venetian money be worth in ormuz larines 88 per too meticals , and the royal be worth larine 86 less one sadine , which be every thousand meticals , 382 assure : but those that will not sei they , use to melt they , and make they so many larines in the king of Ormuz his mint , whereby they clear 2 per 100 , and somewhat more : and this they do because neither venetian money nor royal run as currant in ormuz , per advise . the measure of ormuz be of 2 sort , the one call codo which increase upon the measure of Aleppo 3 per 100 , for bring 100 pike of any measurable ware from Aleppo to Ormuz , it be find in ormuz to be 103 code . also these measure of ormuz increase upon those of Balsara and Babylon 25 and two three part per 100 : for bring 100 pike of any measurable ware from Balsara or Babylon , there be find in ormuz 125 code and two three part . the other measure be call a vare , which be send from the king of Portugal to the India , by which they sell thing of small value , which measure be of 5 palm or span , and be one code and two three part , so that buy 100 code of any measurable ware , and return to measure it by the say vare , there be find but 60 vare , contrary wise 100 vare make 166 code and two three part . note that all such ship as lade horse in ormuz for goa or any other place of India , lade 10 horse or upward , in what place soever the say horse be take a shore in the India , the merchandise which be to be discharge out of that ship wherein the say horse come , be bind to pay no custom at all , but if they lade one horse less than ten , than the good be bind to pay the whole custom . and this law be make by don Emanuel king of Portugal , but it be to be diligent foresee , whither all those horse lade be bind r5 to pay the king his custom : for many time by the king of Portugal his commandment , there be favour show to the king of Cochin his brother in arm , so that his horse that come in the same ship , be not to answer custom . as for example : if there be 4 horse lade in one ship , all which be to pay custom to the king , and one other of the king of cochin which be not to pay any custom , the same cause all the merchandise of that ship to be subject to pay custom , per advise . but if they lade ten horse upon purpose to pay the king his custom in goa , and in the voyage any of they shall die in that case , if they bring the tail of the dead horse to the custom in goa , than the merchandise be free from all custom , because they be lade in ormuz to pay custom in goa . Moreover , if the horse shall die before the midst of the voyage , they pay no custom at all , and if they die in the mid of the voyage , than they pay half custom , but if any horse die after the mid voyage , they pay custom no less then if they arrive safe . notwithstanding , the merchandise ( whether the say horse die before or in the mid voyage or after the mid voyage ) be free from all custom . the custom of ormuz be eleven in the 100 , to say , 10 for the king , and encage for the arm of the foist : but for small ware as glass , and look glass of all sort , and such like , make for apparel , pay no custom . but cloth of wool , kersey , mockaire , chamlet , and all sort of silk , saffron , and such like , pay custom , be esteem reasonable . there be also another custom , which they call caida , which be , that one bring his good into Ormuz , with purpose to send you same further into India , the same be bind to pay 3 by the 100 , but none other be bind to pay this custom , except the armenian , Moores , and Jew : for the Portugal and venetian pay nothing thereof . note y‘ in ormuz they abate tear of all sort of commodity , by a order observe of custom . the fraught from ormuz to Chaul , goa , and Cochin , be as follow : mokaire larine 6 per table of 60 pike . Aquariosa 8 larines by ordinary chest , raisin io by chest , which be a quintail of rove 128. Ruvia of Chalangi larines 10 per quintali , glass larine 8 per chest , of 4 foot and a half , glass in gr^at chist 14 and 15 larine by chest . small ware larine 12 by chest of five foot . Tamari for Maschat sadines 2 and a half , and 3 by the farthel . Tamarie for diu and Chaul 4 sadines , and 4 and a half by bale . other drug and thing which come from Persia pay accord to the greatness of the bale . the fraught mention , they pay as appear , when they ship the say good in ship where horse go : otherwise not have horse , they pay somewhat less , because of the custom which they be to pay . the use of the India ship be , that the patroness thereof be not at any charge neither with any passenger , nor yet with any mariner in the ship , but that every one at the begin of the voyage do furnish to maintain his own table ( if he will eat ) and for drink they have a great jar of water , which be guard with great custody . goa . the weight , measure , and money currant in goa . the quintail of goa be 5 mana , and 8 larine , and the mana be 24 rotilo , so that the quintal of goa be 128 rot . and every rot . be 16 ounce , which be of Venice weight 1 livre . and a half , so that the quintal of goa be 192 livre . sotile Venice , which be 26 rotiloe 8 ounce Aleppine , and of London weight 132 livre . English , as the weight of Ormuz . all the merchandise , spice and drug , be sell by this quintal , except some drug , as lignum de China , Galanga , and other , whereof they bargain at so much per candill , vi 17 b musk oftar-tarie by you way of China . the english voyage advertise that there be two sort of candill , one of 16 mana , the other of 20 mana , that of 16 mana come to be just 3 quintal , and that of 20 mana , 3 quintal , 3 rove . note that 4 rove make a quintail , and the rove be 32 rotiloe , as in ormuz . there be also another weight which they call Marco , which be eight ounce or half a rotilo of goa , and 9 ounce of Venice sotile : with this they weigh amber , corail , musk , ambracan , civet , and other fine ware . there be also another sort of weight call man-giallino , which be 5 grain of Venice weight and therewith they weigh diamond and other jewel . note that in goa they use not to abate any tear of any good , except of sack or wrap , and therefore it require great advisement in buy of the good , especial in the musk of Tartary which come by way of China in bladder , and so weigh it without any tear rebate . the measure of goa be call a toad , which increase upon the measure of Babylon and Balsara after the rate of 17 and one eight part by the 100 , so that bring 100 pike of any measurable ware from thence to goa , it be find 117 pike 7 eight part , and bring 100 code from ormuz to goa , there be find but 93 code and one four part . there be also the vare in goa , which be just as the vare of Ormuz , and therewith they measure only thing that be of small value . for the money of goa , there be a kind of money make of lead and tin mingle , be thick and round , and stamp on the one side with the sphere or globe of the world , and on the other side two arrow and 5 round : and this kind of money be call Basaruchi , and 15 of these make a vinton of naughty money , and 5 vinton make a tangam , and 4 vintena make a tangam of base money : so that the tangam of base money be 60 basaruchy , and the tangam of good money 75 basaruchy , and 5 tangas make a seraphine of gold , which in merchandise be worth 5 tangas good money : but if one will 18 1584. change they into basaruchy , he may have 5 tangas , and 16 basaruchy , which overplus they call cerafagio , and when they bargain of the pardaw of gold , each pardaw be mean to be 6 tangas good money , but in merchandise they use not to demand pardawe of gold in goa , except it be for jewel and horse , for all the rest they take of seraphin of silver , per adviso . the royal of plate , i say , the royal of 8 be worth per custom and commandment of the king of Portugal 400 rey , and every rey be one basaruchie and one four part , which make tangas 6 , and 53 basaruchy as their just [ ii i . 275. ] value , but for that the say royal be excellent silver and currant in diverse place of the India , and chief in Malacca , when the ship be to depart at their due time ( call Monsons ) every one to have the say royal pay more than they be worth , and the overplus , as be abovesaid they call serafagio . and first they give you just value of the 100 royal of 8 , and 5 tangas 50 basaruchy a piece , which do , they give seraphin 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 12 , 15 , until 22 by the 100 , accord as they be in request . the ducat of gold be worth 9 tangas and a half good money , and yet not stable in price , for that when the ship depart from goa to Cochin , they pay they at 9 tangas and 3 four part , and 10 tangas , and that be the most that they be worth . the larine be worth by just value basaruchy 93 and 3 four part , and 4 larine make a seraphine of silver , which be 5 tangas of good money , and these also have serafagion of 6 , 7 , 8 , 10 , until 16 , by the 100 , for when the ship depart for the north , to say , for Chaul , diu , Cambaia , or bassaim , all carry of the same , because it be money more currant than any other . there be also a sort of seraphin of gold of the stamp of ormuz , whereof there be but few in goa , but be there , they|be worth five larine and somewhat more , accord as they be in request . there be also another iide sort of money , round , have on the one side a cross , and on the other side a crown , which be worth one half a tangam of good money , and another of the same stamp less than that which they call imitivo de buona moneda , which be worth 18 basaruches 3 four part a piece . note that if a man bargain in merchandise , it behoo-veth to demand tangas of good money : for by nominate tangas only , be understand to be base money of 60 basaruche , which want of the good money ut supra . the custom of goa be 8 in the 100 inward , and as much outward , and the good be esteem just rather to the merchant advantage then the king . the custom they pay in this order . come with a ship from ormuz to goa without horse , they pay 8 in the 100 whether they sell part or all , but if they will carry of the say merchandise to any other place , they pay none other custom , except other buy it and carry it forth of the country , and then they pay it 8 in the 100 and if one have pay the custom shall sell to another with composition to pass it forth as for his proper account to save the custom , this may not be , because the seller be put to his oath , whether he send the good for his own account , or for the account of any other that have buy the same , and be find to the contrary , they pay custom as abovesaid . and in this order the merchant pay pf all the good which come from any part of the Indies . but if they come from Ormuz to goa with horse , they be not subject to pay any custom inward , notwithstanding if they send all or any part thereof for any other place , or return it to ormuz , they pay the custom outward , although they can not sell . they use also in goa among the common sort to bargain for coal , wood , lime and such like , at so many braganines , account 24 basaruche for one braganine , albeit there be no such money stamp . the custom of the Portugal be , that any moor or gentle , of what 20 1584. condition or state soever he be , may not depart from goa to go within the land , without licence of certain deputy depute for that office , who ( if they be moor or Gentiles ) do set a seal upon the arm , have thereon the arm of Portugal , to be know of the porter of the city , whether they have the say licence or no . Cochin . the weight , measure , and money , currant in Cochin . a li the merchandise which they sell or buy within the say city , they bargain for it at so many serafine per quintal , which be 128. rotilo of just weight with you quintal and rotilo of goa and ormuz : advertise that there be diverse sort of bar accord to the sort of commodity , and in traffic , they reason at so much the bar . note that there be bar of 3 quintal and 3 quintal and half , and 4 quintal . they abate a use tear of all merchandise , accord to the sort of good , and order take for the same . the measure of goa and Cochin be all one . the money of Cochin be all the same sort which be currant in goa , but the ducat of gold in value be 10 tangas of good money . the custom of Cochin as well inward as outward for all stranger , be eight in the hundred , but those that have be marry four year in the country pay but four in the hundred , per adviso . Malacca . [ li . i . 276. ] the weight , measure , and money of Malacca . for the merchandise buy and sell in the city they reckon at so much the bar , which bar be of diverse sort , great and small , accord to the ancient custom of the say city , and diversity of the good . but for the clove they bargain at so much the bar , which bar be 3 quintal , 2 rove and 10 rotilo . as i have abovesaid , all kind of drug have their sort of 21 bar limit . note that every quintal be 4 rove , and every rove 32 rotilo , which be 128 rotilo the quintali , the which answer to Aleppo 95 rotilo , and to London 472 livre . per quintal . the measure of Malacca be as the measure of goa . in Malacca they abate tear accord to their distinction and agreement , for that there be no just tear limit .. for the money of Malacca , the least money currant be of tin stamp with the arm of Portugal , and 12 of these make a chazza . the chazza be also of tin with the say arm , and 2 of these make a challaine . the challaine be of tin with the say arm , and 40 of these make a tangam of goa good money , but not stamp in Malacca . there be also a sort of silver money which they call patachines , and be worth 6 tangas of good money , which be 360 reye , and be stamp with two letter , saint T. which be S. Thomas on the one side , and the arm of Portugal on the other side . there be also a kind of money call cruzado stamp with the arm of Portugal , and be worth 6 tangas good money , the larine be every 9 of they worth 2 cruzado , which be 12 tangas good money , and these larines be of those which be stamp in Balsara and Ormuz . the royal of 8 they call pardaos de Reales , and be worth 7 tangas of good money . the custom of Malacca be 10 in the 100 as well inward as outward , and those which pay the custom inward , if in case they send the same good for any other place within term of a year and a day , pay no custom for the same . 