the voyage of Macham a english man , wherein [ ii two . i . ] he first of any man discover the hand of Madera , record verbatim in the Portugal history , write by Antonio Galvano . n the year 1344 , king Peter the four of that name reign in Aragon , the chronicle of his age write that about this time the hand of Madera , stand in 32 degree , be discover by a english man , which be name Macham , who sail out of England into Spain , with a woman that he have steal , arrive by tempest in that hand , and do cast anchor in that haven or bay , which now be call Machico after the name of Macham . Madera first discover by one Macham a Englishman and because his lover be seasick , he go on land with some of his company , and the ship with a good wind make sail away , and the woman die for thought . Macham make Macham , which love she dear , build a chapel , or hermitage , to bury she in , call it by the name of Jesus chapel . Jesus , and cause his name and she to be write or grave upon the stone of her tomb , and the occasion of their arrival there . and afterward he ordain a boat make of one tree ( for there be tree of a great compass about ) and go to sea in it , with those man that he have , and be leave behind with he , and come upon the coast of Africa , without sail or oar . and the moor which see it take it to be a marvellous thing , and present he unto the king of that country for a wonder , and that king also send he and his companion for a miracle unto the king of Castille . in the year 1395 , king Henry the three of that name reign in Castille , the information which Macham give of this hand , and also the ship of his company , move many of France and Castille to go and discover it , and also the great Canaria , etc in the year 1417 , king John the second reign in Castille , and his mother lady Katherine be regent , one Monsieur Ruben of Bracamont , which be admiral of France , demand the conquest of the hand of the canary , with the title of king , for a kinsman of his name Monsieur John Betancourt , after that the queen have give he they , and help he , he depart from Sivil with a good army . and they affirm also , that the principali cause which move he to this , be to discover the hand of Madera , which Macham have find , etc ibidem page . 2. of Anthonio Galvano . 