the three and last voyage of m. William [ H. two . 44 - ] towrson to the coast of guinie , and the castle de Mina , in the year 1577. he thirty day of January , the year abovesaid , we depart out of the sound of Plymouth , with three ship , and a pinnace , whereof the name be these : 1 the minion admiral of the fleet . 2 than Christopher vice-admiral . 3 the tiger . 4 a pinnace call the unicorn : be all bind for the canary , and from thence , by the grace of God , to the coast of guinie . the next day , be the last of this month , we meet with two hulk of Dantzick , the one call the rose , a ship of four hundred ton , and the other call the unicorn , of a hundred and fifty ton , the master it be to be understand , that at this time there be war betwixt of the rose be call Nicholas mass , and the master England and of the unicorn Melchior white , both lade at bour - france-deaux , and for the most part with wine . when we come to they , we cause they to hoist forth their boat , and to come and speak with we , and we examine every one of they apart , what french man good they have in their ship , and they say they have none : but by the contrariety of their tale , and by the suspicion which we gather of their false chartar-party , we perceive that they have french man good in they : we therefore cause one of they to fetch up his bill of 231 lade , and because he deny that he have any , we send certain with he , who cause he to go to the place where he have hide they , and by the difference of his bill of lade , and his talk , we gather , as before , that they have frenchmens good . whereupon we examine they straight , and first the purser of the unicorn , which be the small ship , confess that they have two and thirty ton and a hogshead of a french man . than we examine the master in like case , and he acknowledge the same to be true . than we examine also the master of the great ship , and he confess that he have a hundred and eight and twenty ton of the same french man , and moor they will not confess , but say that all the rest be lade by Peter lewgue of Hamburg , to be deliver to one Henry summer of camphire , notwithstanding all their letter be direct to Hamburg , and write in dutch without , and within in french . when they have confess that they have thus much french man good within their ship , we confer together what be best to be do with they . William Cretton and Edward Selman be of the opinion , that it shall be good either to carry they into Spain , and there to make sale of the good , or else into Ireland , or to return back again into England with they , if the wind will permit it . but i , weigh what charge we have of our master , first by mouth , and afterward by writing , that for no such matter we shall in any case prolong the time , for fear of lose the voyage , and consider that the time of the year be very far spend , and the money that we shall make of the wine not very much , in respect of the commodity which we hope for by the voyage , persuade they that to go into Ireland , the wind be easterly as it be , may be a occasion that we shall be lock in there with that wind , and so lose our voyage : and to carry they into Spain , see they sail so ill , that have all their sail abroad , we keep they company only with our foresaile , 232 and without any top sail abroad , so that in every two day sail they will have hinder we more than one ; and beside that ( the wind be easterly ) we shall not be able to seize the coast with they : beside all this the loss of time when we come thither be to be consider , whereupon i think it not good to carry they any further . and as for carry they into England , although the wind have be good , as it be not , consider what charge we have of our master , to shift we out of the way for fear of a stay by reason of the war , i hold it not in any wise convenient . but notwithstanding all this , certain of our company not be herewith satisfy go to our master to know his opinion therein , who make they a plain answer , that to carry they into any place , it be not the best the french way nor the profit of their master . and he tell they further , that if the time be prolong one month sfime long before they pass the cape , but a few man war upon will go the voyage . all these thing consider , we the loss of all pause , and determine at the last , that every man cales-should take out of the hulk so much as he can well bestow for necessary , and the next morning to conclude what shall be further do with they . so we take out of they for we fourteen ton and a half of wine , and one ton we put into the pinnace . moor we take out one hogshead of aquavitae . six cake of rosin . a small hals for tie : and certain chestnut . the Christopher take out , [ ii two . 45. ] ten ton of wine , and one hogshead . a quantity of aquavitae . shall-line . chestnut . six double base with their chamber . and their man break up the hulk chest , and take out their compass , and run glass , the sound lead and line , and candle : and cast some of their beef over 233 board , and spoil they so much , that of very pity we give they a compass , a run glass , a lead and a line , certain bread and candle , and what apparel of they we can find in their ship , we give they again , and some money also of that which William Crompton take for the ransom of a poor Frenchman , who be their pilot down the river of Bordeux , they be not able to set he a shore again , by reason of the foul weather . the tiger also take out of the small hulk six or seven ton of wine , one hogshead of aquavitae , and certain rosin , and two base he take out of the great hulk . the first day of February in the morning we all come together again save W. Crompton who send we word that he be content to agree to that order which we shall take . now Edward Selman be of this opinion , that it be not best to let the ship depart , but put man into they to carry they into England , which thing neither we nor our master will agree unto , because we think it not good to unman our ship go outward , consider how dangerous the time be : so that in fine we agree to let they depart , and give they the rest of the wine which they have in their ship of the frenchmens for the fraught of that which we have take , and for their ordinance , rosin , aquavitae , chestnut , and other thing which the company have take from they . so we receive a bill of their hand , that they confess how much frenchmens good they have , and then we let they depart . the io day we reckon our self to be 25 league from the grand canary , and this day about nine of the clock our pinnace break her rudder , so that we be force to tow she at the stern of the minion , which we be able to do , and yet keep company with the rest of our ship . about eleven of the clock this day we have sight of the grand canary . 234 the 11 day when we come to the hand we perceive that it be the he of tenerif , 8c then in deed we have sight of the grand canary , which lie 12 league to the eastwards of tenerif : and because the road of tenerif be foul ground , and nothing be there to be get for the help of our pinnace , have the wind large , we agree to go with the grand canary . the 12 day we come into the road of the town of Canarie , which lie one league from the same town . and after we have shoot off diverse piece of ordinance to salute the town and the castle , the governor and captain of the hand send to we which be the captain , of the ship , require we to come a shore . and when we come to they they receive we very friendly , offer we their own jennet to ride to the town , and what other friendship they can show we : and we go to the town with two english merchant which lie there , and remain in their house that day . the second day follow we come aboard to deliver our merchandise , and to get our pinnace mend . the 14 day come into the road the spanish fleet which be bind to the emperor Indies , which be in number nineteen sail , whereof six be ship of four hundred and five hundred a piece , the rest be of two hundred , a hundred and fifty , and of a hundred . when they be come to a anchor they salute we with ordinance , and so we do they in like case . and afterward the admiral ( who be a knight ) send his pinnace to desire i to come to he ; and when i come to he he receive i friendly , and be desirous to hear somewhat of the state of England and Flanders . and after he have make i a banquet , i depart ; and i be go unto the boat , he cause one of his gentleman to desire Francisco the Portugal , which be my interpreter , to require i to furle my flag , declare that he be general of the emperor fleet . which thing ( be come aboard ) Francisco show i : and because i refuse to furle it , and keep it forth still , 235 A.D. ! 577 - two english merchant liter in the grand canary . the spanish west Indian fleet of nineteen sail . certain of the soldier in the ship shoot diverse harquebus shoot about the ship , and over the flag : and at the same time there come certain gentleman aboard our ship to see she : to who i say , that if they will not cause those their man to leave shoot , i will shoot the best ordinance i have through their side . and when they perceive that i be offend , they depart , and cause their man of war and soldier to shoot no more , and afterward they come to i again , and tell i that they have punish their man . that do , i show they the ship , and make they such cheer as i can , which they receive very thankful : and the day follow they send for i to dine with they , and send i word that their general be very sorry that any [ ii two . 46. ] man shall require i to furle my flag , and that it be without his consent : and therefore he request i not to think any ungentleness to be in he , promise that no man of he shall misdemean himself . the 17 day we set sail in the road of grand canary , and proceed on our voyage . the 20 in the morning we have sight of the coast of Barbary , and run along the shore we have sight Rio del Oro. of Rio del oro , which lie almost under the tropic of cancer . the 21 day we find ourselves to be in 20 degree and a half , which be the heighth of cape blank . the 25 we have sight of the land in the bay to the northward of cape Verde . Francis the 26 i take Francisco and Francis Castelin with Castehn . i , anj went ; unto p [ nnessej anj so go to the tiger which be near the shore then the other ship , and go aboard she , and with she and the other ship we run west and by south , and westsouthwest , until about four of the clock , at which time we be cape verde . hard aboard the cape , and then we run in Southwest , and beyond the cape about four league we find a four hand , fair hand , and beside that two or three hand , which 236 be of very high rock , be full of diverse sort of seafowl , and of pigeon , with other sort of land-fowl , and so many , that the whole hand be cover with the dung thereof , and seem so white as if the whole hand have be of chalk ; and within those hand be a very fair bay , and hard aboard the rock eighteen fathom water , and fair ground . and when we perceive the bay , and understand that the Frenchman have a great trade there , which we be desirous to know , we come to a anchor with the tiger . and after that the minion and the Christopher anchor in like case : than we cause the pinnace to run beyond another cape of land , to see if there be any place to trade in there . it be near night i take our cock and the tiger skiff , and go to the hand , where we get certain fowl like unto Gannards : and then . i come a great trade of the Frenchman at Cape verde . aboard again and take two of the gannard which we have take , and carry they to the captain of the Christopher , and when i have talk with he , i find he not willing to tarry there , neither be i desirous to spend any long time there , but only to attempt what be to be do . the master of the Christopher tell i he will not tarry , be not bind for that place . the 27 the captain of the tiger and Edward Selman come to i , and John Makeworth from the Christopher , and then we agree to take the pinnace , and to come along the shore , because that where we rid no negro come to we , and the night before our pinnace bring we word that there be a very fair fare hand hand . and when i come beyond the point i find it v^re^c^ietrade so , and withal a goodly bay , and we see upon the main > a e ' certain negro which wave we on shore , and then we come to a anchor with the pinnace , and go a shore with our cock , and they show we where their trade be , and that they have elephant tooth , musk , and hide , and elephant offer we to fetch down their captain , if we will ‘ send a man with they , and they will leave a pledge for ' 237 the english voyage he : than we ask they when any ship have be there ; and some of they say not in eight month , other , in six month , and other in four , and that they be Frenchmen . than we perceive the Christopher not will to tarry , depart from they , and set sail with the pinnace and go aboard the tiger . the io day of march we fall with the coast of Guinea , five league to the eastward of cape de monte , beside a river call Rio das Palmas . the two we go to the shore , and find one man that can speak some portuguise , who tell we that there be three french ship pass by ; one of they two month past , and the other one month past . at this place i receive nineteen elephant tooth , and two ounce and half a quarter of gold . the 12 we set sail to go to the river de Sestos . the 13 at night we fall with the same river . the 14 day we send in our boat to take water , and rummage our ship , and deliver such ware to the Christopher and tiger , as they have need of . the 15 we come together , and agree to send the tiger to another river to take in her water , and to see what she can do for grain . after that we take merchandise with we , and go into the river , and there we find a negro which be bear in Lisbon , leave there by a ship of Portugal which be burn the last year at this river in fight with three Frenchman ; and he tell we further , that two month pass there be three Frenchman at this place ; and six week pass there be two french ship at the river ; and fifteen day pass there be one . all which ship be go towards the Mina . this day we take but few grain . the 19 day consider that the Frenchman be go before we , and that by reason of the unwholesome air of this place fourteen of our man in the minion be fall sick , we determine to depart , and with all speed to go to the Mina . 238 the 2i we come to the river de Potos , where some [ ii two . 47. ] of our boat go in for water , and i go in with Rio de Potos . our cock , and take 12 small elephant tooth . the 23. day , after we have take as many tooth as we can get , about nine of the clock we set sail to go towards the Mina . the 31 we come to Hanta , and make sale of certain manillio . the first April we have sight of five sail of Portugal , they descry whereupon we set sail and go off to sea to get the s^ile °f wind of they , which we shall have have if the wind * e ortu^a have keep his ordinary course , which be all the day at the southwest , and westsouthwest : but this day with a flaw it keep all the day at the east , and eastsoutheast , so that the Portugal have the wind of we , and come room with the tiger and we until night , and bring themselves all save one , which sail not so well as the rest , within shot of we : than it fall calm , and the wind come up to the southwest , howbeit it be near night , and the Christopher , by mean of her boat , be about four league to the leeward of we . we tack and run into the weather of the admiral , and three more of his company , and when we be near he we speak to he , but he will not answer . than we cast about and lay the fight . in the weather of he ; and cast about he shoot at we , and then we shoot at he , and shoot he four or five time thorough . they shoot diverse time through our sail , but hurt no man . the tiger and the pinnace , because it be night , keep out their sail , and will not meddle with they . after we have thus fight together 2 hour or more , and will not lay he aboard because it be night , we leave shoot one at the other , and keep still the weather of they . then the tiger and the pinnace keep about and come to we , and afterward be near the shore , we three keep about and lay to the sea , and shoot off a piece to give warning to the Christopher . this night about 12 of the clock , be very little wind , and the master of the tiger asleep , by the ill 239 work of his man the ship fall aboard of we , and with her shear-hook cut our main sail , and her boat be betwixt we be break and sink , with certain merchandise in she , and the ship wale be break with her outleger : yet in the end we clear she without any more hurt , but she be in hazard to be break down to the water . the second day we have sight of the Christopher , and be near unto she , so that i take our boat and go to she . and when i come thither , they show i , that after the Portugal have leave we , they go all room with he , and about twelve a clock at night meet he , and shoot at he , and he at they , and they shoot he through the sail in diverse place , and do not other great hurt . and when we have understand that they have be with he as well as with we , we agree altogether to seek they ( if we may find they ) and keep a weather our place of traffic . the three day we run all day to the southwestwards to seek the Portugal , but can have no sight of they , and hail into the shore . the four day , when we have sight of land , we find that the currant have set we thirty league to the eastwards of our reckon , which we wonder at : for the Lagua . first land we make be Lagua . than i cause our boat to be man , and then Christopher also , and go to the shore and take our negro with we . and on shore we learn that there be four french ship upon the perinnen . coast ; one at perinnen , which be six league to the weamba . Westward of Laguoa : another at Weamba , which be four league to the eastward of Laguoa : a three at Perecow . Perecow , which be four league to the eastward of Egrand . Weamba : and the four at Egrand , which be four league to the eastward of Perecow . when we have intelligence of these news we agree to go to the eastwards with the french man to put they from their traffic , and shoot off two or three piece in our boat to cause the ship to way : and have be 340 about one hour under sail , we have sight of one of the french man under sail , hail off from Weamba to who we give chase , and agree in the night for fear of overshoot they , that the minion shall first come to anchor , and after that about three hour , the tiger and the Christopher to bear along all night . the 5. day we find three of the french ship at anchor : one call la foye de Honfleur , a ship of 220 ton , another call the Ventereuse or small roebarge of Honfleur , of 100 ton , both appertain to Shawdet of Honfleur , the three be call the mulet de Batuille a ship of 120 ton , and this ship belong to certain merchant of roan . when we come to they , we determine to lay the admiral aboard , the Christopher the vice-admiral , and the tiger the small : but when we come near they they weigh , and the Christopher be the headmost and the weathermost man , go room with the admiral : the roebarge go so fast that we can not fetch she . the first that we come to be the mulet , and she we lay aboard , and our man enter and take she , which ship be the rich except the admiral : for the admiral have take about 80 pound of gold , and the Roeberge have take but 22 pound ; and all this we learn of the Frenchman , who know it very well : for they be all in consort together , and have be upon the coast of Mina two month and odd day : howbeit the Roeberge have be there before they with another ship of diepe , and a caravel , which have beat all the coast , and be depart one month before our arrive there , and they three have take about 700 pound of gold . assoon as we have lay the ship aboard , and leave certain man in she to keep she , we set sail and give chase to the other two ship , and chase they all day and night , and the next day until three a clock in the afternoon , but we can not fetch they : and therefore see that we bring our self very far to vi 241 q A.D. 1511 - the english board the Frenchman . [ ii two . 48. ] fifty pound of glide take in the french prize . Benin . our man die ofsicknesse . the english voyage leeward of our place , we leave the chase , and keep about again to go with the shore . the 7 day i send for the captain , merchant and master of the other ship , and when they come we weigh the gold which we have from the Frenchman , which weigh fifty pound and five ounce of gold : this do , we agree to put man out of every ship into the prize to keep she . the 12 day we come to the further place of the Mina call Egrand , and be come to a anchor , discharge all the merchant good out of the prize , and will have sell the ship with the victual to the Frenchman , but because she be leak they will not take she , but desire we to save their life in take they into our own ship : than we agree to take out the victual and sink the ship , and divide the man among our ship . the 15 at night we make a end of discharge the prize , and divide all the Frenchman except four which be sick and not able to help themselves ; which four both the Christopher and the tiger refuse to take , leave they in their ship alone in the night , so that about midnight i be force to fetch they into our ship . the 15 of April , move our company for the voyage to Benin , the most part of they all refuse it . the 16 , see the unwillingness of the company to go thither , we determine to spend as much time upon the coast as we can , to the end we may make our voyage , and agree to leave the minion here at Egrand , the tiger to go to pericow which be four league off , and the Christopher to go to Weamba , which be ten league to the weatherward of this place : and if any of they both shall have sight of more sail than they think good to meddle withal , to come room with their fellow : to wit , first the Christopher to come with the tiger , and then both they to come with we . we remain in this place call Egrand , until the last day of April , in which time many of our man fall 242 sick ; and six of they die . and here we can have no traffic with the negro but three or four day in the week , and all the rest of the week they will not come at we . the 3 of may not have the pinnace send we with cloth from the other ship , as they promise , we sell french cloth , and give but three yard thereof to every fuffe . the 5 day the negro depart , and tell we they will come to we again within four day , which we determine there to tarry , although we have diverse of our man sick . the 8 day , all our cloth in the minion be sell , i call the company together , to know whether they will tarry the sale of the cloth take in the prize at this place or no : they answer , that in respect of the death of some of their man , and the present sickness of twenty sickness . more , they will not tarry , but repair to the other ship , of who they have hear nothing since the 27 of April : and yet they have our pinnace with they , only to carry news from one to another . the 9 day we determine to depart hence to our fellow , to see what they have do , and to attempt what be to be do at the town of don John. the 10 day in the morning we sit sail to seek the Christopher and the tiger . the 11 day the captain of the Christopher come to we , and tell we that they can find small do at the place where they have be . the 12 William Crompton and i in our small pinnace go to the tiger and the Christopher at perenine . the 13 we send away the tiger to Egrand , because we find nothing to do at perenine , worth the tarry for . the 14 our great pinnace come to we , and present we put cloth into she , and send she back to Weamba , where she have be before , and have take there ten pound of gold . 243 the 15 the minion come to we , and the next day we go a shore with our boat , and take but one ounce of gold . the 19 day have set sail we come to a anchor before mowre . mowre , and there we tarry two day , but take not a ounce of gold . [ ii two . 49. i the 21 we come to a anchor before don Johns town . the 22 we man our boat and go to shore , but the negro will not come at we ; then the captain of the Christopher and i take a skiff and eight man with we , and go and talk with the negro , and they say the great that they will send a man to the great town , where ‘ john m don John himself lie , to advertise he of our come . ’ the 23 we go a shore again , and the negro tell we that this day the merchant of don John will come down : so we tarry there until night , and no man will come to we : but diverse of the negro make we sign to depart . the 24 the captain of the Christopher take his boat and go to mowre , and when he come thither , certain negro come to he to know the price of his ware , but in the end there come a almade , which he judge come from the castle , and cause all the negro to depart from he : and when he see they will come no more to he , he go a shore and take certain man with he , and then the negro cast stone at they , and will not suffer they to come up to their town . and when they see that , they take certain of the Almades , and put they to the sea , and afterward depart . the same morning i go a shore at don Johns town , and take a white flag with i , but none of the negro can come to i , which cause we to judge that the Portugal be in the town . after this , our boat come to we well man , and i send one man up to the town with a white flag in his hand , but when he be come thither , all the negro go away and will not speak with he . than i send one alone into the wood after they , but 244 they in no case will come to we . when we see that , we take twelve goat and fourteen hen , which we find in the town , and go aboard without do any further hurt to the town : and when i come aboard , i find our pinnace come from Cormatin , which have take Cormatin . there two pound and five ounce of gold . then after much ado with the froward mariner , we go thitherwards with our ship , and the Christopher go to mowre . the 25 day the master of the Christopher send his boat to the shore for ballast , and the negro will have beat the company from the shore , whereupon then the company resist they , and slay and hurt diverse of they , and have put they to flight , burn their town , and break all their boat . the 26 day our pinnace come to we from Cormatin , and have take two pound and eleven ounce of gold : and John sheriff tell we that the negro of that place be very desirous to have a ship come back again to their town . the 27 we weigh and go to Cormatin . the 28 the Christopher come to we from mowre , and traffic there two day . the second day of June the tiger come to we from Egrand , and the pinnace from Weamba , and they two have take about fifty pound of gold since they depart from we . the 4 day we depart from Cormatin to ply up to Shamma , be not able to tarry any long upon the coast for lack of victual , and special of drink . the 7 day we have sight of five of the king of Portugal ship , which come to a anchor beside the castle . the 8 day George and Binny come to we , and bring with they about two pound of gold . the 10 day in the morning i take our small pinnace , and the captain of the Christopher with i , and man she well , and go to the castle to view the Portugal ship , and there we find one ship of about 300 ton , and four caravel : when we have well view 24 they , we return back again to our ship which we find seven league at sea . the 11 day in the morning we find our self well shoot towards Shamma , and the tiger with we , but the minion and the pinnace have not weigh that night , so that we be out of sight of they : and have bring our self in the weather of the Portugal ship , we come to a anchor to tarry for the minion , or else we may have fetch Shamma . at night the minion and the pinnace come up to we , but can not fetch so far to the weatherward as we , and therefore they anchor about a league a weather the castle , and we weigh in the Christopher , and go room with she . the 12 day the tiger come room with we , and she and the Christopher find themselves to stand in great need of victual , will have go with the Portugal ship to have fetch some of they forth : but our master and company will in no case consent to go with they , for fear of hang when we come home : and the other two ship be folly mind to have go , and fear that their own company will accuse they , dare not go to they . after this , by reason of the want of victual in the pinnace , which can receive no victual from the other ship , but from we only , we take out all our man , and put twelve Frenchman into she , and give they victual to bring they to Shamma . [ ii two . 50. ] the 19 day the tiger and minion arrive at Shamma , note - and then Christopher within two league off they , but can not fetch the wind by reason of the scantness of the wind , which have be so scant , that in fifteen day we have ply to the windward but twelve league , which before we do in one day and a night . the 20 day i take our pinnace , and go to the town of Shamma to speak with the captain , and he tell i that there be no gold there to be have , nor so much as a hen to be buy , and all by reason of 246 the accord which he have make with the Portugal , and i see that depart peaceable from he . the 2i i put such thing as we have into our small pinnace , and take one merchant of our ship , and another of the tiger , and send she to Hanta , to attempt , if she can do any thing there . that night they can do nothing but be promise to have gold the next day . the next day ( which be the 22 ) be come , we send our pinnace to Hanta again , but there neither the captain nor the negro dare traffic with we , but entice we from place to place , and all to no purpose . this day we put away our pinnace , with five and they put the twenty Frenchman in she , and give they such victual Trenchmen as we can spare , put fifteen of they to the ransom then of six crown a man . pinnace . the 23 of June our pinnace come to we from Hanta , and tell we that the negro have deal very ill with they , and will not traffic with they to any purpose . the 24 we take our boat and pinnace and man they well , and go to the town of Shamma , and Shamma burn because the captain thereof be become subject to the tyk english . Portugal we burn the town , and our man seek the spoil of such trifle as be there find a Portugal chest , wherein be some of his apparel , and his weight , and one letter send to he from the castle , whereby we gather that the Portugal have be there of a long time . the 25 day , about three of the clock at afternoon , their retume we set sail , and put into the sea , for our return to homewardEngland . the last day of this month we fall with the shore again , and make our reckon to be eighteen league to the weatherward of the place where we set off " . when we come to make the land , we find our self to be eighteen league to the leeward of the place , where we set off , which come to pass , by reason of the extreme currant that run to the eastward : when we perceive the currant . 247 the description of the lie of 8. Thome . the english voyage our self so abuse , we agree to cast about again , and to lie as near the wind as we can , to fetch the line . the seven of July we have sight of they he of saint Thome , and think to have seek the road to have anchor there : but the next morning the wind come about , and we keep our course . the nine , the wind vary , we keep about again , and fall with the hand of S. Thome , and seek the road , be becalm near the hand , and with the currant be put near the shore , but can have no ground to anchor : so that we be force to hoist out our pinnace , and the other ship their skif to tow from the hand , which do little good , but in the end the wind put we three league off the shore . the ten day the Christopher and the tiger cast about , whereby we judge they to have agree together , to go seek some ship in the road , and to leave we : our man be not willing to go after they , for fear of run in with the hand again , and of put our self into the same danger that we be in the night before : but we shoot off a piece , and put out two light , and they answer we with light again : whereupon we keep our course , and think that they have follow we , but in the morning we can not see they , so that they leave we willing , and we determine to follow they no more . but the eleven day we alter our opinion and course , and consent to cast about again for the hand , to seek our ship ; and about four of the clock in the afternoon we meet with they . the 13 we fall again with the hand of S. Thome ; and the same night we find our self direct under the line . this hand be a very high hand , and be upon the west side of it , you shall see a very high pike , which be very small , and straight , as it be the steeple of a church , which pike lie direct under the line , and at the same south end of the hand to the westward thereof lie a small hand , about a mile from the great hand . 248 the three of August we depart from the he of saint Thome , and meet the wind at the southwest . the 12 day we be in the height of cape verde . the 22 day we fall with one of the isle of Cape verde , call the he of salt , and be inform by a Scotish °f man that we take among the Frenchman upon the salt ' coast , that there be fresh victual to be have , we come to a anchor there . the 23 day in the morning we man our skiff , and go a shore , and find no house , but we see four man , which keep themselves always far from we , as for cattle we can find none , but great store of goat , [ ii two . 51. ] and they be so wild , that we can not take above three or four of they : but there we have good store of fish , and upon a small hand which lie by the same we have great store of sea-bird . at night the Christopher break her cable , and lose a anchor , so that she can tarry no long , so we all weigh , and set sail . upon the same hand we leave the Scotish man , which be the occasion of our go aland at that place , but how he be leave we can not tell : but , as we judge , the people of the hand find he sleep , and so carry he away : for at night i go my self to the hand to seek he , but can hear nothing of he . the 24 day the master of the tiger come aboard we , and tell we that his man be so weak , and the ship so leak , that he be not able to keep she above the water , and therefore request we to go back again to the hand , that we may discharge she , and give she up : but we entreat he to take pain with she a while , and we put a french carpenter into she , to see if he can find the leak . this day we take a view of all in our man , both those that be hole , and the sick also , and we find that in all the three ship , be not above the coast thirty sound man . of guinie . the 25 we have sight of they he of saint Nicholas , and the day follow , of the other isle , saint Lucia , saint Vincent , 249 and S. Anthony ; which four isle lie the one from the other northwest and by west , southeast and by east . the 26 we come again with the hand of S. Anthony , and can not double the cape . this day Philip Jones , the master of the Christopher , come aboard we , who have be aboard the tiger , and tell we that they be not able to keep the tiger , because she be leak , and the master very weak , and say further , he have agree with the master and the company , that if the next day we can double the hand , we shall run to the leeward of it , and there discharge she : but if we can not double it , than to put in betwixt the hand of S. Vincent and S. Anthony , to see if we can discharge she . the three day of September i go aboard the tiger , with the master and merchant with i , to view the ship and man : and we find the ship very leak , and only six labour man in she , whereof one be the master gunner : so that we see that they be not able to keep the ship , agree to take in the man , and of the good what we can save , and then to put the ship away . the five day we go to discharge the tiger . the eight day , have take out the artillery , good , the tiger victual , and gold of the tiger , we give she up 25 give up . degree by north the line . the 27 we have sight of two of the isle of the azore , s. mary , and saint Michael . the four of October we find our self to be 41 degree and a half from the line . the sixth day the Christopher come to we , and will we to put with the cape , for they also be so weak , that they be not able to keep the sea , and we be weak also , agree to go for Vigo , be a place which many english man frequent . the 10 day the Christopher go room with the cape , but we have a merry wind for England , and fear the danger of the enemy , which ordinary lie 25° about the cape : beside , not know the state of ’ our country and Spain , and although it be peace , yet there be little hope of friendship at their hand , consider the voyage that we have make , and we also be so weak , that by force and violence we can come by nothing , and doubt also that the king of Portugal know of our be there , may work some way with the council of Spain to trouble we : and further , consider that if we do put in with any harbour , we shall not be able to come out again , till we send for more man into England , which will be a great charge , and loss of time , and mean of many danger . all these thing ponder , we agree to shoot off two piece of ordinance , to warn the Christopher , and then we go our course for England : she hear our piece follow we , and we carry a light for she , but the next day in the morning it be thick , and we can not see she in the afternoon neither , so that we suspect that either she be go with Spain , or else that she shall put forth more sail than we in the night , and be shoot a head of we , so that than we put forth our topsail , and go our course with England . at the time when the Christopher leave we , we be within 120 league of England , and 45 league northwest and by west from cape Finister : and at the same time in our ship we have not above six mariner and six merchant in health , which be but a weak company for such a ship to seek a foreign harbour . the 16 day , about six of the clock at night , we meet with a great storm at the westsouthwest , and west , and our man be weak , and not able to extreme handle our sail , we lose the same night our main « eaineueof sail , foresail , and spreetsaile , and be force to lie a mrman ' hull , until the eighteenth day , and then we make ready a old course of a foresail , and put it to the yard , and therewith find our self far shoot into the [ ii two . 52. ] sleeve , we bear with our own coast ; but that fore - ’S1 sail continue not above two hour , before it be blow from the yard with a fret , and then we be force to lie a hull again , until the nineteenth day of October in the morning , and then we put a old bonnet to our foreyard , which , by the good blessing and providence of God , bring we to the he of wight , where we arrive the 20 of October in the afternoon . 