the second voyage to Barbary in the year 1552. set forth by the right worshipful sir John York , sir William Gerard , sir Thomas wroth , master Frances Lambert , master Cole , and other ; write by the relation of master James Thomas then page to master Thomas Windham chief captain of this voyage . he ship that go on this voyage be three , whereof two be of the river of Thames , that be to say , the lion of London , whereof master Thomas Windham be captain and part owner , of about a hundred and fifty ton : the other be the buttolfe about fourscore ton , and a Portugal caravel buy of certain portu-gals in Newport in Wales , and freight for this voyage , of sum sixty ton . the number of man in the fleet be a hundred and twenty . the master of the lion be one John Kerry of Mynhed in Somersetshire , his mate be David Landman . the chief captain of this small fleet be master Thomas Windham a Norffolke gentleman bear , but dwell at marshfield-parke in Somerset shire . this fleet depart out of king-rode near Bristol about the begin of May 1552. being on a Monday in the morning : and the Monday fortnight next ensue in the evening come to a anchor at their first port in the road of Zafia , or Asafi on the coast of Barbary , stand in 32. degree of latitude , and there put on land part of our merchandise to be convey by land to the city of Morocco : which be do , and have refresh our self with victual and water , we go to the second port call Santa Cruz , where we discharge the rest of our good , be good quantity of linen and woollen cloth , corail , amber , jet , and diverse other thing well accept by the moor . in which road we find a french ship , which not know whether it be war or peace between England and France , draw her self as near under the town wall as she can possible , crave aid of the town for her defence , if need be , which in deed see we draw near , shoot at we a piece from the wall , which come over the lion our admiral , between the main mast and her foremast . whereupon we come to a anchor , present come a pin aboard we to know what we be , who understand that we have be there the year before , and come with the good english leave of their king in merchant wise , be full satisfy , and give we good leave to bring our good peaceable year before on shore , where the viceroy , who name be Sibil be xyfo . Manache , within short time after come to visit we , and use we with all courtesy . but by diverse occasion we spend here very near three month before we can get in our lade , which be sugar , date , almond , and malassos or sugar syrup . and for all our be here in the heat of the summer , yet none of our company perish by sickness . our ship be lade , we draw into the sea for a western wind for England . but be at sea , a great leak fall upon the lion , so that we be drive to Lancerota , and Forteventura , where , between the two hand , we come to a road , whence we put on land out of our say ship 70. chest of sugar upon Lancerota , with some dozen or sixteen of our company , where the inhabitant suppose we have make a wrongful prize of our caravel , sudden come with force upon our people , among who i my self be one , take we prisoner , and spoil the sugar : which thing be perceive from our ship , they man [ ii two . 9 ] out three boat , think to rescue we , and drive the Spaniard to flight , whereof they slay eighteen , and take their governor of the hand prisoner , who be a very age gentleman about 70. year of age . but chase the enemy so far , for our recovery , as powder and arrow want , the Spaniard perceive this , return , and in our man retire they slay six of they . 139 then a parley grow , in the which it be agree , that we the prisoner shall be by they restore , and they receive their old governor , give we a testimony under his and their hand , what damage we have there receive , the which damage be here restore , and make good by the king of Spain his merchant upon our return into England . after we have search and mend our leak , be return aboard , we come under sail , and as we be go to the sea on the one side of the hand , the cacafuego and other ship of the king of Portugal armada enter at the other , and come to anchor in the road from whence we be but new depart , and shoot off their great ordinance in our hear . and here by the way it be to be understand that the Portugal be much offend with this our new trade into Barbary , and both in our voyage the year before , as also in this they give out in England by their merchant , that if they take we in those part , they will use we as their mortali enemy , with great threat and menace . but by God and good providence we escape their hand . from this hand shape our course for England , we be seven or eight week before we can reach the coast of England . the first port we enter into be the haven of plymouth , from whence within short time we come into the Thames , and land our merchandise at London , about the end of the month of October , 1552. 