a brief relation of the great magnificence and [ ii two . 102. ] rich traffic of the kingdom of Pegu beyond the east India , write by Frey Peter of Lisbon , to his cousin Frey Diego of Lisbon , from Cochin . receive your letter in the harbour of Damaon by a caravel of advice that come from Malacca , which bring shot , powder , and other provision for the furnish of four galley and a great gallion , which be now in building , to keep our coast for fear of great store of man of war , be moor , which trouble we very sore . at that instant when i receive your letter i be new come from the kingdom of Pegu , where i have remain one year and a half , and from thence i depart to the city of Cochin in October 1587. the news which i can certify you of concern these vi 385 2 b the coast of India great trouble with Moores . country be : that this king of Pegu be the mighty king of man , and the rich that be in these part of the world : for he bring into the field at any time , when he have war with other prince , above a million of fight man : howbeit they be very lean and small people , and be bring unto the field without good abundant of order . he be lord of the elephant , and of all the gold gold , silver , ancj si | ver mine , and of all the pearl and precious ppredous^tones stone : so that he have the great store of treasure in Pegu. that ever be hear of in these part . the country people call he the god of truth and of justice . i have great conference with this king , and with the head captain of the Portugal , which be one of the country . they demand of i many question as touch the law and faith of Jesus Christ , and as touch the ten commandment . and the king give his consent that our order shall build a church in his country , which be half build ; but our perverse and malicious Portugal pluck it down again : for whereas it be a country wherein our nation gain very much by their commodity , they fear that by the build of this church there will be great resort thither , and so tie great their trade shall be impair , if their great gain gain of they shall be know unto other then those which find PeguSa 5 wonderful this country out first , therefore they be so unwilling ' that the build of this church shall go forward . our Portugal which be here in this realm be worse people than the gentile . i preach diverse time among those heathen people ; but be obstinate they say , that as their father believe so they will believe : for if their forefather go to the devil so they will . whereupon i return back again to our monastery to certify our father provinciali of the estate of this new find Pegu the best country . it be the best and rich country in all this tun ? iSin all eat ind ; isthought to be rich than china . theEastlndia . / be atrayd that the war which his majesty have with England will be the utter undo and spoil of Spain : for these country likewise be almost spoil 386 r . .... with civil war , which the moor have against the gentile : for the king here be up in arm all the country over . here be a Indian which be count a prophuie prophet , which have prophesy that there will a dragon arise in a strange country , which will do great hurt to a&ams ? mn ' Spain . how it will fall out , only God do know . and thus i rest : from this monastery of Cochin the 28 of December , 1589. your good cousin and assure friend friar Peter of Lisbon . 