of the hand Japan , and other little isle in the east ocean . by R. will . he extreme part of the know world unto we be the noble hand Giapan , write otherwise japon and Japan . this island stand in the east ocean , beyond all Asia , betwixt Cathayo and the west Indies six and thirty degree northward from the equinoctial line , in the same clime with the south part of Spain and portugal , distant from thence by sea six thousand league : the travail thither , both for civil discord , great piracy , and often shipwrack be very dangerous . this country be hilly and pester with snow , wherefore it be neither so warm as Portugal ! , nor yet so wealthy , so far as we 327 can learn , want oil , butter , cheese , milk , egg , sugar , honey , vinegar , saffron , cinnamon and pepper . barley-bran the hander do use in stead of salt : medi-cinable thing wholesome for the body have they none at all . nevertheless in that hand sundry fruit do grow , not much unlike the fruit of Spain : and great etore of great store of silver mine be therein to be see . Stiver mine . people be tractable , civil , witty , courteous , without deceit , in virtue and honest conversation exceed all other nation late discover , but so much stand upon their reputation , that their chief idol may be think honour . the contempt thereof cause among they much discord and debate , manslaughter and murde : even for their reputation they do honour their parent , keep their promise , abstain from adultery and robbery , punish by death the least robbery do , hold for a principle , that whosoever steal a trifle , will , if he see occasion , steal a great thing . it may be theft be so severe punish of they , for that the nation be oppress with scarcity of all thing necessary , and so poor , that even for misery they strangle their own child , prefer death before want . Theise fellow do neither eat nor kill any foul . they live chief by fish , herb , and fruit , so healthful , that they die very old . of rice and wheat there be no great store . no man be ashamed there of his poverty , neither be their gentleman therefore less honour of the mean people , neither will the poor gentleman there match his child with the base sort for any gain , so much they do make more account of gentry then of wealth . the great delight they have be in armour , each boy at fourteen year of age , be he bear gende or otherwise , have his sword and dagger : very good archer they be , contemn all other nation in comparison of their manhood and prowess , put not up one injury be it never so small in word or deed , among themselves . they feed moderate , but they drink large . the use of vine they know not , their 328 drink they make of rice , utter they do abhor dice , and all game , account nothing more vile in a man , than to give himself unto those thing that make we greedy and desirous to get other man good . if at any time they do swear , for that seidome they be wont to do , they swear by the sun : many of they be teach good letter , wherefore they may so much the soon be bring unto Christianity . each one be content with one wife : they be all desirous to learn , and natural incline unto honesty and courtesy : godly talk they listen unto willing , especial when they understand it thorough . their government consist of 3 estate . the first place be due unto the high priest , by who law and decree all public and private matter appertain to religion be decide . the sect of their clergy man , who they do call Bonzi , be of no estimation or authority except the high priest by letter patent do confirm the same : he confirm and allow of their tundi , who be as it be bishop , although in many place they be nominate by sundry prince . Theise tundi be great honour of all sort : they do give benefice unto inferior minister , and do grant licence for many thing as to eat flesh upon those day they go in pilgrimage to their idol with such like privilege . final , this high priest wont to be choose in China for his wisdom and learning , make in Japan for his gentry and birth , have so large a dominion and revenue so great , that eftsoon he beard the petty king and prince there . their second principal magistrate , in their language vo , be the chief herehaught , make by succession and birth , honour as a God . this gentleman never touch the ground with his foot without forfeit of his office , he never go abroad out of his house , nor be at all time to be see . at home he be either carry about in a litter , or else he go in wooden chopine a foot high from the ground : common he sit in his chair with a sword in one side , and a bow and arrow in the 329 [ ii two . 81. ] other , next his body he wear black , his outward garment be read , all shadow over with cypress , at his cap hang certain Lambeaux much like unto a bishop miter , his forehead be paint white and red , he eat his meat in earthen dish . this herehaught determine in all Japan the diverse title of honour , whereof in that hand be great plenty , each one particular know by his badge , common see in seal up their letter , and daily alter accord to their degree . about this vo every noble man have his soliciter , for the nation be so desirous of praise and honour , that they strive among themselves who may bribe he best . by these mean the herehaught grow so rich , that although he have neither land nor any revenue otherwise , yet may he be account the wealthy man in all Japan . for three cause this great magistrate may loose his office : first , if he touch the ground with his foot , as it have be already say : next , if he kill any body : three , if he be find a enemy unto peace and quietness , howbeit neither of these aforesaid cause be sufficient to put he to death . their three chief officer be a judge , his office be to take up and to end matter in controversy , to determine of war and peace , that which he think right , to punish rebel , wherein he may command the noble man to assist he upon pain of forfeit their good : nevertheless at all time he be not obey , for that many matter be end rather by might and arm , then determine by law . other controversy be decide either in the temporali court , as it seem good unto the prince , or in the spirituali consistory before the tundi . rebels be execute in this manner , especial if they be noble man or officer . the king look what day he give sentence against any one , the same day the party , wheresoever he be , be advertise thereof , and the day tell he of his execution . the condemn person ask of the messenger whether it may be lawful for 33° he to kill himself : the which thing when the king do grant , the party take it for a honour , put on his best apparel and lance his body a cross from the breast down all the belly , murder himself . this kind of death they take to be without infamy , neither do their child for their father crime so punish , loose their good . but if the king reserve they to be execute by the hangman , then flock he together his child , his servant , and friend home to his house , to preserve his life by force . the king commit the fetch of he out unto his chief judge , who first set upon he with bow and arrow , and afterward with pike and sword , until the rebel ! and all his family be slay to their perpetuali ignominy and shame . the indy-writer make mention of sundry great city in this hand , as cangoxima a haven town in the south part thereof , and Meaco distant from thence three hundred league northward , the royal seat of the king and most wealthy of all other town in that hand . the people thereabouts be very noble , and their language the best japonish . in Meaco be say to be ninety thousand house inhabit and upward , a famous university , and in it five principali college , beside close and cioyster of Bonzi , leguixil , and Hamacata , that be , priest , monk and nun . other five notable university there be in Japan , namely , Coia , Negru , Homi , Frenoi , and Bandu . the first four have in they at the least three thousand and five hundred scholar : in the five be many more . for bandu province be very great and possess with six prince , five whereof be vassal unto the sixth , yet he himself subject unto the japonish king , usual call the great king of Meaco : lesser school there be many in diverse place of this island . and thus much special concern this glorious hand , among so many barbarous nation and rude region , have i gather together in one sum , out of sundry letter write from thence into Europe , by no less faithful reporter 331 Petrus Ma^eius de rebusx Japonicis . the english voyage than famous traveller . for confirmation whereof , as also for the knowledge of other thing not contain in the premise , the curious reader may peruse these 4 volume of Indian matter write long ago in italian , and of late compendious make latin , by Petrus Maffeius my old acquaint friend , entitle the same , de rebus Japonicis . one whole letter out of the five book thereof , special entreat of that country , i have do into English word for word in such wise as follow . Aloisius froes to his companion in Jesus Christ that remain in China and India . the last year , dear brethren , i write unto you from Firando , how Cosmus Turrianus have appoint i to travail to Meaco to help Gaspar Vilela , for that there the harvest be great , the labourer few , and that i shall have for my companion in that journey Aloisius Almeida . it seem now my part , have by the help of God end so long a voyage , to signify unto you by letter such thing special as i may think you will most delight to know . and because at the beginning Almeida and i so part the whole labour of write letter betwixt we , that he shall speak of our voyage , and such thing as happen therein , i shall make relation of the meachians estate , and write what i can well learn of the japans manner and condition : set aside all discourse of our voyage , that which stand i upon i will discharge in this epistle , that you consider how artificial , how cunning , under the pretext of religion , that crafty adversary of mankind lead and draw unto perdition the japanish mind , blind with many superstition and ceremony , may the more pity this nation . the inhabiter of Japan , as man that never have great to do with other nation , in their Geography divide the whole world into three part , Japan , Sian , and China . and albeit the japans receive out of sian and China 332 their superstition and ceremony , yet do they nevertheless contemn all other nation in comparison of themselves , and stand in their own conceit do far prefer themselves before all other sort of people in wisdom and policy . touch the situation of the country and nature of the soil , unto the thing eftsoon erst write , this one thing i will add : in these hand , the summer to be most hot , the winter extreme cold . in the kingdom of Canga , as we call it , fall so much snow , that the house be bury in it , the inhabitant keep within door certain month of the year , have no way to come forth except they break up the tile . whirlwind most vehement , earthquake so common , that the japans dread such kind of fear little or nothing at all . the country be full of silver mine otherwise barren , not so much by fault of nature , as through the slothfulness of the inhabitant : howbeit ox they keep and that for tillage sake only . the air be wholesome , the water good , the people very fair and well body : bare head common they go , procure baldness with sorrow and tear , eftsoon root up with pinsar all the hair of their head as it grow , except it be a little behind , the which they knot and keep with all diligence . Even from their childhood they wear dagger and sword , the which they use to lay under their pillow when they go to bed : in show courteous and affable , in deed haughty and proud . they delight most in warlike affair , and their great study be arm . Mens apparel diverse colour be wear down half the leg and to the elbow : woman attire make handsome like unto a veil , be somewhat long : all manner of dice and theft they do eschew . the merchant , although he be wealthy , be not account of . Gentlemen , be they never so poor , retain their place : most precise they stand upon their honour and worthiness , ceremonious strive among themselves in courtesy and fair speech . wherein if any one happy be less careful than he shall be , even 333 for a trifle many time he get evil will . want , though it trouble most of they , so much they do detest , that poor man cruel take pity of their infant new bear , especial girl , do many time with their own foot strangle they . noble man , and other likewise of mean calling general have but one wife a piece , by who although they have issue , yet for a trifle they diverse themselves from their wife , and the wife also sometime from their husband , to marry with other . after the second degree cousin may there lawful marry . adoption of other man child be much use among they . in great town most man and woman can write and read . this nation feed spare , their usual meat be rice and salad , and near the sea side fish . they feast one another many time , wherein they use great diligence , especial in drink one to another , insomuch that the better sort , lest they may rude commit some fault therein , do use to read certain book write of . duty and ceremony appertain unto banquet . to be delicate and fine , they put their meat into their mouth with title fork , account it great rudeness to touch it with their finger : winter and summer they drink water as hot as they may possible abide it . their house be in danger of fire , but fine make and clean , lay all over with straw-pallet , whereupon they do both sit in stead of stool , and lie in their clothes with billet under their head . for fear of defile these pallet , they go either barefoot within door , or wear straw pantofle on their buskin when they come abroad , the which they lie aside at their return home again . Gentlemen for the most part do pass the night in banquete , music , and vain discourse , they sleep the day time . in Meaco and Sacaio there be good store of bed , but they be very little , and may be compare unto our pue . in bring up their child they use word only to rebuke they , admonish as diligent and advise 334 1565. boy of six or seven year of age , as though they be old man . they be give very much to entertain stranger , of who most curious they love to ask even in trifle what foreign nation do , and their fashion . such argument and reason as be manifest , and be make plain with example , do great persuade they . they detest all kind of theft , whosoever be take in that fault may be slay free of any body . no public prison , no common gayle , no ordinary justicer : private each householder have the hear of matter at home in his own house , and the punish of great crime that deserve death without delay . thus usual the people be keep in awe and fear . about four hundred year past ( as in their old record we find ) all Japan be subject unto one emperor who royal seat be Meaco , in the japonish language call Cubucama . but the nobility rebel against he , by little and little have take away the great part of his dominion , howbeit his title continual remaineth , and the residue in some respect do make great account of he still , acknowledge he for their superior . thus the empire of Japan , in time pass but one alone , be now divide into sixty six kingdom , the only cause of civil war continual in that hand , to no small hindrance of the gospel , while the king that dwell near together invade one another , each one covet to make his kingdom great . Furthermore in the city Meaco be the palace of the high priest , who that nation honour as a God , he have in his house 366 idol , one whereof by course be every night set by his side for a watchman . he be think of the common people so holy , that it may not be lawful for he to go upon the earth : if happy he do set one foot to the ground , he lose his office . he be not serve very but his alm sumptuous he be maintain by alm . the head and be beard|have - of his minister be shave , they have name cangue , and their authority be great throughout all Japan . the Cubucama use they for ambassador to 335 the english voyage decide controversy betwixt prince and to end their war , whereof they be wont to make very great gain . it be now two year since or there about , that one of they come to Bungo , to entreat of peace betwixt the king thereof and the king of Amanguzzo . this agent favour the king of Bungo his cause more than the other , bring to pass that the foresay king of Bungo shall keep two kingdom , the which he have take in war from the king of Amanguzzo . wherefore he have for his reward of the king of Bungo above 30000 ducat . and thus far hereof . i come now to other superstition and ceremony , that you may see , dear brethren , that which i say in the beginning , how subtle the devil have deceive the japonish nation , and how diligent and ready they be to obey and worship he . and first , all remembrance and knowledge not only of Christ our redeemer , but also of that one God the maker of all thing be clean extinguish and utter abolish out of the japans heart . Moreover their superstitious sect be many , whereas it be lawful for each one to follow that which like he best : but the principali sect be two , namely the amidan and xacaians . wherefore in this country shall you see many monastery , not only of Bonzii man , but also of Bonziae woman diverse attire , for some do wear white under , and black upper garment , other go apparel in ash colour , and their idol have to name Denichi : from these the Amidanes differ very much . again the man Bonzii for the most part dwell in sumptuous house , and have great revenue . Theise fellow be chaste by commandment , marry they may not upon pain of death . in the midst of their temple be erect a altar , whereon stand a wooden idol of Amida , naked from the girdle upward , with hole in his ear after the manner of italian gentlewoman , sit on a wooden rose goodly to behold . they have great library , and hall for they all to dine and sup together , and bell wherewith they be at certain hour call to 336 prayer . in the evening the superintendent give each one a theme for meditation . after midnight before the altar in their temple they do say matin as it be out of Xaca his last book , one quire one verse , the other quire a other . early in the morning each one give himself to meditation one hour : they shave their head and beard . their cioyster be very large , and within the precinct thereof , chapel of the fotoquiens , for by that name some of the japanish saint be call : their holiday yearly be very many . most of these Bonzii be gentleman , for that the japanish nobility charge with [ ii two . 84. ] many child , use to make most of they Bonzii , not be able to leave for each one a patrimony good enough . the Bonzii most covetous bend , know all the way how to come by money . they sell unto the people many scroll of paper , by the help whereof the common people think it self warrant from all power of the devil . they borrow likewise money to be repay with great usury in a other world , give by obligation unto the lender a assurance thereof , the which depart out of this life he may carry with he to hell . there be another great company of such as be call inambuxu . inambuxu , with curl and stare hair . they make profession to find out again thing either lose or steal , after this sort . they set before they a child who the devil invade , call up thither by charm : of that child then do they ask that which they be desirous to know . Theise man prayer both good and bad be think great to prevail , insomuch that both their blessing and their curse they sell unto the people . the novice of this order , before they be admit , go together two or three thousand in a company , up a certain high mountain to do penance there , threescore day voluntary punish themselves . in this time the devil show himself unto they in sundry shape : and they like young graduat , admit as it be fellow into some certain company , be set forth with vi 337 five the english voyage white tassel hang about their neck , and black bonnet that scarce cover any more than the crown of their head . thus attire they range abroad in all Japan , to set out themselves and their cunning to sale , each one beat his basin which he carry always about with he , to give notice of their come in all town where they pass . there be also a other sort call genguis , that make profession to show by soothsay where steal thing be , and who be the thief . Theise dwell in the top of a high mountain , black in the face : for the continual heat of the sun , for the cold wind , and rain they do continual endure . they marry but in their own tribe and line : the report go that they be horn beast . they climb up most high rock and hill , and go over very great river by the only art of the devil , who to bring those wretch the more into error , bid they to go up a certain high mountain , where they stand miserable gaze and earnest look for he as long as the devil appoint they . at the length at nonetide or in the evening come that devil , who they call Amida among they to show himself unto they : this show breed in the brain and heart of man such a kind of superstition , that it can by no mean be root out of they afterward . the devil be wont also in another mountain to show himself unto the japanish nation . who so be more desirous than other to go to heaven and to enjoy paradise , thither go he to see that sight , and have see the devil follow he ( so by the devil persuade ) into a den until he come to a deep pit . into this pit the devil be wont to leap , and to take with he his worshipper who he there murder . this deceit be thus perceive . a old man blind with this superstition , be by his son dissuade from thence , but all in vain . wherefore his son follow he privy into that den with his bow and arrow , where the devil gallant appear unto he in the shape of a man . while the old man 338 fall down to worship the devil , his son speedy shoot a arrow at the spirit so appear , strike a fox in stead of a man , so sudden be that shape alter . this old man his son track the fox so run away , come to that pit whereof i speak , and in the bottom thereof he find many bone of dead man , deceive by the devil after that sort in time past . thus deliver he his father from present death , and all other from so pestilent a opinion . there be furthermore a place bear name Coia , very famous for you multitude of abbey which the Bonzii have therein . the beginner and founder whereof be think to be one Combendaxis a subtle crafty fellow , that get the name of holiness by cunning speech , although the law and ordinance he make be altogether devilish : he be say to have find out the japanish letter use at this day . in his latter year this Sim subtle bury himself in a fou resquare grave , four cubit deep , severe forbid it to be open , for that then he die not , but rest his body weary with continual business , until many thousand thousand of year be pass , after the which time a great learned man name Mirozu shall come into Japan , and then will he rise up out of his grave again . about his tomb many lamp be light , send thither out of diverse province , for that the people be persuade that whosoever be liberali and beneficial towards the beautify of that monument shall not only increase in wealth in this world , but in the life to come be safe through Combendaxis help . such as give themselves to worship he , live in those monastery or abbey with shave head , as though they have forsake all secular matter , whereas in deed they wallow in all sort of wickedness and lust . in these house , the which be many ( as i say ) in number , do remain 6000 Bonzii , or thereabouts beside the multitude of lay man , woman be restrain from thence upon pain of death . another company of Bonzii dwell at Fatonochaiti . they teach a great multitude 339 [ ii two . 8$ . ] a warlike people 300 league to the north of Meaco . the japanish funeral . the english voyage of child all trick and sleight of guile and theft : who they do find to be of great towardness , those do they instruct in all the petigrue of prince , and fashion of the nobility , in chivalry and eloquence , and so send they abroad into other province , attire like young prince , to this end , that feign themselves to be noble bear , they may with great sum of money borrow under the colour and pretence of nobility return again . wherefore this place be so infamous in all Japan , that if any scholar of that order be happy take abroad , he incontinent die for it . nevertheless these cozener leave not daily to use their wont wickedness and knavery . north from Japan , three hundred league out of Meaco , lie a great country of savage man clothe in beast skin , rough body , with huge beard and monstrous muchache , the which they hold up with little fork as they drink . Theise people be great drinker of wine , fierce in war , and much fear of the japans : be hurt in fight , they wash their wound with salt water , other surgery have they none . in their breast they be say to carry look glass : their sword they tie to their head , in such wise , that the handle do rest upon their shoulder . service and ceremony have they none at all , only they be wont to worship heaven . to aquita a great town in that japonish kingdom , which we call Gevano , they much resort for merchandise , and the aquitane likewise do travel into their country , howbeit not often , for that there many of they be slay by the inhabiter . much more concern this matter i have to write : but to avoid tediousness i will come to speak of the japans madness again , who most desirous of vain glory do think then special to get immortali fame , when they procure themselves to be most sumptuous and solemn bury : their burial and obsequy in the city Meaco be do after this manner . about one hour before the dead body be bring forth , a great multitude of his friend apparel in their best array go before unto the 340 fire , with they go their kinswoman and such as bee of their acquaintance , clothe in white ( for that be the mourn colour there ) with a changeable colour veil on their head . each woman have with she also , accord to her ability , all her family trim up in white mockado : the better sort and wealthy woman go in litter of cedar artificial wrought and rich dress . in the second place march a great company of footman sumptuous apparel . then afar off come one of these Bonzii master of the ceremony for that superstition , brave clad in silk and gold , in a large and high litter excellent well wrought , accompany with 30 other Bonzii or thereabouts , wear hat , linen albe , and fine black upper garment . then attire in ash colour ( for this colour also be mourning ) with a long torch of pineapple , he show the dead body the way unto the fire , lest it either stumble or ignorant go out of the way . Well near 200 Bonzii follow he sing the name of that devil the which the party decease chief do worship in his life time , and therewithal ! a very great basin be beat even to the place of fire in stead of a bell . then follow two great paper basket hang open at staff end full of paper rose diverse colour , such as bear they do march but slow , shake ever now and then their staff , that the aforesaid flower may fall down by little and little as it be drop of rain : and be whirl about with wind . this shower say they be a argument that the soul of the dead man be go to paradise . after all this , eight beardy Bonzii orderly two and two drag after they on the ground long spear , the point backward , with flag of one cubit a piece , wherein the name also of that idol be write . than there be carry 10 lantern trim with the former inscription , overcast with a fine veil , and candle burn in they . beside this , two young man clothe in ash colour bear pineapple torch , not light , of three foot length , the which torch serve to kindle the fire wherein the dead corpse be to be burn . in the 341 they burn their dead . same colour follow many other that be on the crown of their head fair , little , threesquare , black lethren cap tie fist under their chin ( for that be honourable among they ) with paper on their head , wherein the name of the devil i speak of , be write . and to make it the more solemn , after come a man with a table one cubit long , one foot broad , cover with a very fine white veil , in both side whereof be write in golden letter the aforesaid name . at the length by four man be bring forth the corpse sit in a gorgeous litter clothe in white , hang down his head and hold his hand together like one that pray : to the rest of his apparel may you add a upper gown of paper , write full of that book the which his god be say to have make , when he live in the world , by who help and merit common they do think to be save . the dead man his child come next after he most gallant set forth , the young whereof carry likewise a pineapple torch to kindle the fire . last of all follow a great number of people in such cap as i erst speak of . when they be all come to you place appoint for the obsequy , all the Bonzii wl the whole multitude for the space of one hour , beat pan and bason with great clamour , call upon the name of that devil , the which be end , the obsequy be do in this manner . in the midst of a great quadrangle rail about , hang with course linen , and agreeable unto the four part of the world make with four gate to go in and out at , be dig a hole : in the hole be lay good store of wood , whereon be raise gallant a wave roof : before that stand two table furnish with diverse kind of meat , especial dry fig , pomegranate and tart good store , but neither fish nor flesh : upon one of they stand also a chaffer with coal , and in it sweet wood to make perfume . when all this be ready , the cord wherewith the litter be carry , be throw by a long rope into the fire : as many as be present strive to take the rope in their hand , use their aforesaid clamour , which do , 342 they go in procession as it be round about the quadrangle thrice . then set the litter on the wood build up ready for the fire that Bonzius who then be master of the ceremony , say a verse that no body there understand , whirl thrice about over his head a torch light , to signify thereby that the soul of the dead man have neither any beginning , ne shall have at any time a end , and throw away the torch . two of the dead man his child , or of his near kin , take it up again , and stand one at the east side of the litter , the other at the west , do for honour and reverence reach it to each other thrice over the dead corpse , and so cast it into the pile of wood : by and by they throw in oil , sweet wood , and other perfume , accord as they have plenty , and so with a great flame bring the corpse to ash : his child in the mean while put sweet wood into the chaffer at the table with odour , do solemn and religious worship their father as a saint : which be do , the Bonzii be pay each one in his degree . the master of the ceremony have for his part five ducat , sometime ten , sometime twenty , the rest have ten julies a piece , or else a certain number of other present call Caxae . the meat that be ordain , as soon as the dead corpse friend and all the Bonzii be go , be leave for such as serve at the obsequy , for the poor and impotent lazar . the next day return to the place of obsequy the dead man his child , his kindred and friend , who gather up his ash , bone , and tooth , do put they in a gild pot , and so carry they home , to be set up in the same pot cover with cloth , in the midst of their house . many Bonzii return likewise to these private funeral , and so do they again the seven day : then carry they out the ash to be bury in a place appoint , lay thereupon a foursquare stone , wherein be write in great letter draw all the length of the stone , the name of that devil the which the dead man worship in his life time . Every day afterward his 343 A.D. I565 - child resort unto the grave with rose and warm water that the dead corpse thirst not . nor the seven day only , but the seven month and year , within their own house they renew this obsequy , to no small commodity and gain of the Bonzii : great rich man do spend in these their funeral 3000 ducat or thereabouts , the mean sort two or three hundred . such as for poverty be not able to go to that charge , be in the night time darkelong without all pomp and ceremony bury in a dunghill . they have another kind of burial , especial near the sea side , for they that be not yet dead . Theise fellow be such , as have religious with much devotion worship Amida , now desirous to see he , do slay themselves . and first they go certain day beg alm , the which they thrust into their sleeve , then preach they in public a sermon unto the people , declare what they mind to do , with the great good like of all such as do hear they : for every body wonder at such a kind of holiness . then take they hook to cut down brier and thorn that may hinder they in their way to heaven , and so embark themselves in a new vessel , tie great stone about their neck , arm , loin , thigh , and foot : thus they launch out into the main sea be either drown there , their ship bouge for that purpose , or else do cast themselves overboard headlong into the sea the empty bark be out of hand set a fire for honour sake by their friend that follow they in another boat of their own , think it blasphemy that any mortali creature shall afterward once touch the bark that have be so religious hallow . Truly when we go to Meaco , eight day before we come to the he of Hiu at before town , six man and two woman so die . to all such as die so the people erect a chapel , and to each of they a pillar and a pole make of pineapple for a perpetuali monument , hang up many shred of paper in stick all the roof 344 over , with many verse set down in the wall in commendation of that bless company . wherefore unto this place both day and night many come very super-stitiously in pilgrimage . it happen even then as Aloisius Almeida and i go to christen a child we travel that way at what time four or five old woman come forth out of the aforesaid chapel with bead in their hand ( for in this point also the devil counterfeit Christianity ) who partly scorn at we for [ ii two . 87. ] folly , partly frown and taunt at our small devotion , for pass by that holy monument without any reverence or worship do thereunto at all . it remain now we speak two or three word of those sermon the Bonzii be wont to make , not so many as we in number , but assure very well provide for . the pulpit be erect in a great temple with a silk canopy over it , therein stand a costly seat , before the seat a table with a bell and a book . at the hour of sermon each sect of the japans resort to their own doctor in diverse temple . up go the doctor into the pulpit , and be set down , after that he have lordlike look he about , signify silence with his bell , and so read a few word of that book we speak of , the which he expound afterward more at large . Theise preacher be for the most part eloquent , and apt to draw with their speech the mind of their hearer . wherefore to this end chief ( such be their greediness ) tend all their talk , that the people be bring under the colour of godliness to enrich their monastery , promise to each one so much the more happiness in the life to come , how much the great cost and charge they be at in church matter and obsequy : notwithstanding this multitude of superstitious sect and company , and the diversity thereof among themselves : yet in this principal all their superintendents do travel so to persuade their novice in their own tale and lie , that they think nothing else truth , nothing else sure to 345 come by everlasting salvation , nothing else worth the hear . whereunto they add other subtlety , as in go gravity , in countenance , apparel , and in all outward show , comeliness . whereby the japans mind be so nousle in wicked opinion , and do conceive thereby such trust and hope of everlasting salvation , that not only at home , but also abroad in every corner of the town continual almost they run over their bead , humble ask of Amida and Xaca , wealth , honour , good health , and everlasting joy . thus then , dear brethren , may you think how great they need the help of God , that either do bring the gospel into this country , or receive it bring unto they , do forsake idolatry and join themselves with Christ , be assault by so many snare of the devil , trouble with the daily dissuasion of their Bonzii , and final , so injurious , so hardly , so sharp vex of their kindred and friend , that except the grace of God obtain by the sacrifice and prayer of the catholique church do help we , it can be choose but that the faith and constancy of many , if not of all , in these first beginning of our church , will great be put in j eopardie . so much the more it stand you upon that so earnest long for the health of soul , to commend special these japanish flock unto our lord . we come to Sacaio the eight and twenty day of January : Aloisius Almeida first for business , but afterward let by sickness , stay there some while , but i part the next day from thence come thirteen league off to Meaco the last of Januarie . of my come all the christian take great comfort , but special Gaspar Vilela who in 6 year have see none of our company at Meaco : he year be not yet forty , but his grey hair show he to be seventie , so vehement be his little body afflict and wear with extreme cold . he speak japanish so skilful after the phrase of Meaco ( the which for the renown of this people and royal seat of the king be best account of ) that he do 346 both confess and preach in that language . certain godly book also he have do into that speech , not omit to translate other as laisure suffer he . to make a end , our lord for his goodness vouchsafe to preserve we all continual , and to give we aid both right to interpret his will , and well to do the same . from Meaco the 19 of February 1565. other such like matter be handle both in other his letter , and also in the epistle write by his companion to be see at large in the aforesaid volume . among the rest this seem in my judgement one of the principali , and therefore the rather i take upon i to do it into english . of the isle beyond Japan in the way from China to the Moluccas . a among other isle in the asian sea betwixt Cantan both a chinish haven in Cathaio and the Moluccas , much speak of in the Indian history and paint out in map , Ainan and Santianum be very famous . Ainan Ainan . stand 19 degree on this side of the equinoctial line near China , from whence the chinish nation have their provision for ship and other necessary requisite for their navy . there stay Balthasar Gagus a great traveller 5 month , who describe that place after this de reb . jap . manner . Ainan be a goodly country full of Indian fruit 4-& all kind of victual , beside great store of jewel and pearl , well inhabit , the town build of stone , the people rude in condition , apparel in diverse colour rug , with two ox home , as it be , make of fine cypress hang down about their ear , and a pair of sharp cyzer at their forehead . the cause wherefore they go in such attire i can not [ ii two . 88 ] understand , except it be for that they do counterfeit the devil in the form of a brute beast , offer themselves up to he . Santianum be a he near unto the haven Cantan in Santianum . the confine likewise of China , famous for the death 347 of that worthy traveller and godly professor and painful doctor of the Indian nation in matter concern religion , Francis Xavier , who after great labour , many injury , and calamity infinite sufired with much patience , singular joy and gladness of mind , depart in a cabben make of bow and rush upon a desert mountain , no less void of all worldly commodity , then endue with all spirituali blessing , out of this life , the 2 day of December , the year of our lord 1552. after that many thousand of these Easterling be bring by he to the knowledge of Christ . of this holy man , his particular virtue , and special travel , and wonderful work in that region , of other many little isle ( yet not so little , but they may right well be write of at laisure ) all the latter history of the Indian region be full . 