the valiant fight perform in the strait of Gibraltar , by the centurion of London , against five spanish galley , in the month of April 159i - in the month of November 1590 , there be sundry ship appertain to several merchant of London , which be rig and fraught forth with merchandise , for sundry place within the strait of Gibraltar : who , together have wind and weather , which ofttime fall out very uncertain , arrive safe in short space , at such place as they desire . among who be the centurion of London , a very tall ship of burden , yet but weak man , as appear by this discourse follow . this aforesaid ship call the centurion safe arrive at Marseils , where after they have deliver their good , they stay about the space of five week , and better , and then take in lade , intend to return to England . now when the centurion be ready to come away from Marseils , there be sundry other ship of small burden which entreat the master thereof , ( who name be Robert Bradshaw , dwell at limehouse ) to stay a day or two for they , until they be in a readiness to depart with they , thereby persuade they , that it will be far better for they to stay and go together in respect of their assistance , than to depart of themselves without company , and so happy for want of aid fall into the hand of their enemy in the spanish galley . upon which reasonable persuasion , notwithstanding that this ship be of such sufficiende as they may hazard she in the clanger of the sea , yet they stay for those little ship , accord to their request , who together do put to sea from Marseils , and vow in generail not to 35 fly one from another , if they shall happen to meet with any spanish galley . Theise small ship , accompany with the centurion , sail along the coast of Spain , be upon easter day in the strait of Gibraltar sudden becalm , where immediate they see sundry galley make towards they , in very valiant and courageous sort : the chief leader and soldier in those galley brave apparel in silk coat , with their silver whistle about their neck , and great plume of feather in their hat , who with their caliver shoot at the centurion so fast as they may : so that by 10. of the clock and somewhat before , they have board the centurion , who before their come have prepare for they , and intend to give they so sour a welcome as they may . and thereupon have prepare their close fight , and all thing in a readiness , they call upon God , on who only they trust : and have make their prayer , and cheer up one another to fight so long as life endure , they begin to discharge their great ordinance upon the galley , but the little ship dare not come forward , but lie aloof , while five galley have board they , yea and with their grapple iron make their galley fast to the say ship call the centurion . the galley be grapple to the centurion in this manner , two lay on one side , and two on another , and the admiral lie full in the stern , which gall and batter the centurion so sore , that her main mast be great weaken , her sail fill with many hole , and the mizzen and stern make almost unserviceable . during which time there be a sore and deadly fight on both side , in which the trumpet of the centurion sound forth the deadly point of war , and encourage they to fight manful against their adversary : on the contrary part , there be no warlike music in the [ ii two . 169. i Spanish galley , but only their whistle of silver , which they sound forth to their own contentment : in which fight many a Spaniard be turn into the sea , and they 36 in multitude come crawl and hang upon the side of the ship , intend to have enter into the same , but such be the courage of the Englishman , that so fast as the Spaniard do come to enter , they give they such entertainment , that some of they be glad to tumble alive into the sea , be remediless for ever to get up alive . in the centurion there be in all , of man and boy , fourty and eight , who together fight most valiant , and so gall the enemy , that many a brave and lusty Spaniard lose his life in that place . the centurion be fire five several ! time , with wild fire and other provision , which the Spaniard throw in for that purpose : yet , God be thank , by the great and diligent foresight of the master it do not harm at all . in every of the galley there be about 200. soldier : who together with the shot , spoil , rend , and batter the centurion very sore , shoot through her main mast , and slay 4. of the man in the say ship , the one of they be the master ' mate . ten other person be hurt , by mean of splinter which the Spaniard shot : yea , in the end when their provision be almost spend , they be constrain to shoot at they hammer , and the chain from their slave , and yet God be thank , they receive no more damage : but by spoil and overweary of the Spaniard , the Englishman constrain they to ungrapple themselves , and get they go : and sure if there have be any other fresh ship or succour to have relieve and assist the centurion , they have slay , sink , or take all those galley and their soldier . the dolphin lie a loof off and dare not come near , while the other two small ship flee away , so that one of the galley go from the centurion and set upon the dolphin , which ship immediate be set on fire with their own powder , whereby both man and ship perish : but whether it be with their good will or no , that be not know unto the cen - the english voyage turion , but sure , if it have come forward , and be a aid unto the centurion , it be to be suppose that it have not perish . five hour and a half this fight continue , in which time both be glad to depart only to breathe themselves , but when the Spaniard be go , they never dare return to fight : yet the next day six other galley come and look at they , but dare not at any hand meddle with they . thus God deliver they from the hand of their enemy , and give they the victory : for which they hearty praise he , and not long after safe arrive in London . there be present at this fight master John Hawes merchant , and sundry other of good account . 