a report of the truth of the fight about the isle of azore , the last of August 1591. betwixt the revenge , one of her majesty ship , and a armada of the king of Spain ; pen by the honourable sir Walter Ralegh knight . ecause the rumour be diverse spread , as well in England as in the low country and elsewhere , of this late encounter between her majesty ship and the armada of Spain ; and that the Spaniard accord to their usuali manner , fill the world with their vainglorious vaunt , make great appearance of victory , when on the contrary , themselves be most common and shameful beat and dishonour ; thereby hope to possess the ignorant multitude by anticipate and forerun false report : it be agreeable with all good reason , for manifestation of the truth , to overcome falsehood and untruth ; that the beginning , continuance and success of 38 the last fight of the ‘ revenge ’ a.d. .... is9r this late honourable encounter of sir Richard greenvil , and other her majesty captain , with the armada of Spain ; shall be true set down and publish without partiality or false imagination . and it be no marveile that the Spaniard shall seek by false and slanderous pamphlet , advise and letter , to cover their own loss , and to derogate from other their due honour , especial in this fight be perform far off : see they be not ashamed in the year 1588. when they purpose the invasion of this land , to publish in sundry language in print , great victory in word , which they plead to have obtain against this realm ; and spread the same in a most false sort over all part of France , Italy , and elsewhere . when short after it be happy manifest in very deed to all nation , how their navy which they term invincible , consist of 140. sail of ship , not only of their own kingdom e , but strengthen with the great argosy , Portugal carrack , Florentines , and huge hulk of other country , be by 30. of her majesty own ship of war , and a few of our own merchant , by the wise , valiant , [ ii two . 170. ] and advantageous conduct of the lord Charles Howard high admiral of England , beat and shuffle together ; even from the lizard in Cornwall first to Portland , where they shameful leave don Pedro de Valdes , with his mighty ship ; from Portland to Cales , where they lose Hugo de Moncado , with , the gallia of which he be captain , and from Cales , drive with squib from their anchor , be chase out of the sight of England , round about Scotland and Ireland . where for the sympathy of their barbarous religion , hope to find succour and assistance , a great part of they be crush against the rock , and those other that land , be very many in number , be notwithstanding break , slay , and take , and so send from village to village couple in halter , to be ship into England . where her majesty of her princely and invincible disposition , disdain to put they to death , and scorn either to retain or entertain they : they be all send back again to their country , to witness and recount the worthy achievement of their invincible and dreadful navy : of which the number of soldier , the fearful burden of their ship , the commander name of every squadron , with all other their magasines of provision , be put in print , as a army and navy unresistable , and disdain prevention . with all which so great and terrible a ostentation , they do not in all their sail round about England , so much as sink or take one ship , bark , pinnace , or cockbote of we : or ever burn so much as one sheepecote of this land . whenas on the contrary , sir Francis Drake , with only 800. soldier not long before , land in their Indies , and force Sant-Iago , Santo Domingo , Cartagena , and the fort of Florida . and after that , sir John Norris march from Peniche in Portugal , with a handful of soldier , to the gate of Lisbon , be above 40 english mile . where the earl of Essex himself and other valiant gentleman brave the city of Lisbon , encamp at the very gate ; from whence , after many day abode , find neither promise party , nor provision to batter ; they make retreat by land , in despite of all their garrison , both of horse and foot . in this sort i have a little digress from my first purpose , only by the necessary comparison of they and our action : the one covetous of honour without vaunt of ostentation ; the other so greedy to purchase the opinion of their own affair , and by false rumour to resist the blast of their own dishonour , as they will not only not blush to spread all manner of untruth : but even for the least advantage , be it but for the take of one poor adventurer of the english , will celebrate the victory with bonfire in every town , always spend more in faggot , than the purchase be worth they obtain . when as we never think it worth the consumption of two billet , when we have take eight or ten of their Indian ship at one time , and twenty of the Brasill fleet . such be the difference between true valour , and ostentation : and between honourable action , and frivolous vainglorious vaunt . but now to return to my purpose . the lord Thomas Howard with six of her majesty ship , six victualler of London , the bark Ralegh , and two or three other pinnace ride at anchor near unto Flores , one of the westerly hand of the azore , the last of August in the afternoon , have intelligence by one captain Middleton of the approach of the spanish armada . which Middleton be in a very good sailer have keep they company three day before , of good purpose , both to discover their force the more , as also to give advise to my lord Thomas of their approach . he have no soon deliver the news but the fleet be in sight : many of our ship company be on shore in the island ; some provide ballast for their ship ; other fill of water and refresh themselves from the land with such thing as they can either for money , or by force recover . by reason whereof our ship be all pester and rummage every thing out of order , very light for want of ballast , and that which be most to our disadvantage , the one half part of the man of every ship sick , and utter unserviceable : for in the revenge there be ninety disease : in the Bonaventure , not so many in health as can handle her main sail . for have not twenty man be take out of a bark of sir George Careys , his be command to be sink , and those appoint to she , she have hardly ever recover England . the rest , for the most part , be in little better state . the name of her majesty ship be these as follow , the defiance , which be admiral , the revenge vice-admiral , the Bonaventure command by captain cross , the lion by George Fenner , the foresight by m. Thomas Vavasour , and the crane by Duffild . the foresight and the crane be but small ship ; only the other be of the middle size ; the rest , beside the bark Ralegh , command by captain thin , be victualler , and of small force or none . the spanish fleet have shroud their approach by reason of the island ; be now so soon at hand , as our ship have scarce time to way their anchor , but some of they be drive to let slip their cable and set sail . sir Richard Grinvile be the last that weigh , to recover the man that be upon the island , which otherwise have be lose . the lord Thomas with the rest very hardly recover the wind , which sir Richard Grinvile not be able to do , [ ii two . 171. ] be persuade by the master and other to cut his main sail , and cast about , and to trust to the sail of the ship ; for the squadron of Sivil be on his weather bow . but sir Richard utter refuse to turn from the enemy , allege that he will rather choose to die , than to dishonour himself , his country , and her majesty ship , persuade his company that he will pass through the two squadron , in despite of they , and enforce those of Sivil to give he way . which he perform upon diverse of the foremost , who , as the mariner term it , spring their luff , and fall under the lee of the revenge . but the other course have be the better , and may right well have be answer in so great a impossibility of prevail . notwithstanding out of the greatness of his mind , he can not be persuade . in the mean while as he attend those which be near he , the great San Philip be in the wind of he , and come towards he , becalm his sail in such sort , as the ship can neither make way , nor feel the helm : so huge and high carge be the spanish ship , be of a thousand and five hundred tun . who after lay the revenge aboard . when he be thus bereave of his sail , the ship that be under his lee luff up , also lay he aboard : of which the next be the admiral of the Biscayne , a very mighty and puissant ship command by Brittandona . the say fillip carry three tire of ordinance on a side , and eleven piece in every tire . she shoot eight forth right out of her chase , beside those of her stern port . after the revenge be entangle with this fillip , 42 four other board she ; two on she larboard , and two on her starboard . the fight thus begin at three of the clock in the afternoon , continue very terrible all that evening . but the great San Philip have receive the low tire of the revenge , discharge with crossebarshot , shift her self with all diligence from her side , utter mislike her first entertainment . some say that the ship founder , but we can report it for truth , unless we be assure . the spanish ship be fill with company of soldier , in some two hundred beside the mariner ; in some five , in other eight hundred . in we there be none at all beside the mariner , but the servant of the commander and some few voluntary gentleman only . after many interchanged voly of great ordinance and small shot , the Spaniard deliberate to enter the revenge , and make diverse attempt , hope to force she by the multitude of their arm soulder and musketeer , but be still repulse again and again , and at all time beat back into their own ship , or into the sea . in the begin of the fight , the George noble of London have receive some shot through she by the armada , fall under the lee of the revenge , and ask sir Richard what he will command he , be but one of the victualler and of small force : sir Richard bid he save himself , and leave he to his fortune . after the fight have thus , without intermission , continue while the day last and some hour of the night , many of our man be slay and hurt , and one of the great galleon of the armada , and the admiral of the hulk both sink , and in many other of the spanish ship great slaughter be make . some write that sir Richard be very dangerous hurt almost in the begin of the fight , and lie speechless for a time ere he recover . but two of the revenge own company , bring home in a ship of lime from the island , examine by some of the lord , and other , affirm that he be never so wound as that he forsake the upper deck , till a hour before midnight ; and then be shoot into the body with a musket as he be a dress , be again shoot into the head , and withal his chirurgeon wound to death . This agree also with a examination take by sir Francis Godolphin , of four other mariner of the same ship be return , which examination , the say sir Francis send unto master William Killegrue , of her majesty privy chamber . but to return to the fight , the spanish ship which attempt to board the revenge , as they be wound and beat off , so always other come in their place , she have never less than two mighty galleon by her side , and aboard she : so that ere the morning , from three of the clock the day before , there have fifteen several armada assail she ; and all so ill approve their entertainment , as they be by the break of day , far more willing to hearken to a composition , then hasty to make any more assault or entry . but as the day increase , so our man decrease : and as the light grow more and more , by so much more grow our discomfort . for none appear in sight but enemy , save one small ship call the pilgrim , command by Jacob Whiddon , who hover all night to see the success : but in the morning bear with the revenge , be hunt like a hare among many ravenous hound , but escape . all the powder of the revenge to the last barrel be now spend , all her pike break , forty of her best man slay , and the most part of the rest hurt . in the begin of the fight she have but one hundred free from sickness , and fourscore and ten sick , lay in hold upon the ballast . a small troup to man such a ship , and a weak garrison to resist so mighty a army . by those hundred all be sustain , the volei , boording , and entering of fifteen ship of war , beside those which [ ii two . 172. ] beat she at large . on the contrary , the spanish be always supply with soldier bring from every squadron : all manner of arm and powder at will . the last fight of the ‘ revenge ’ a.d. I59I - unto we there remain no comfort at all , no hope , no supply either of ship , man , or weapon ; the mast all beat over board , all her tackle cut asunder , her upper work altogether raze , and in effect even she be with the water , but the very foundation or bottom of a ship , nothing be leave over head either for flight or defence . sir Richard find himself in this distress , and unable any long to make resistance , have endure in this fifteen hour fight , the assault of fifteen several armada , all by turn aboard he , and by estimation eight hundred shot of great artillery , beside many assault and entry ; and that himself and the ship must needs be possess by the enemy , who be now all cast in a ring round about he . ( the revenge not able to move one way or other , but as she be move with the wave and billow of the sea ) command the master gunner , who he know to be a most resolute man , to split and sink the ship ; that thereby nothing may remain of glory or victory to the Spaniard : see in so many hour fight , and with so great a navy they be not able to take she , have have fifteen hour time , above ten thousand man , and fifty and three sail of man of the spanish war to perform it withal : and persuade they come - 5 3saile-pany , or as many as he can induce , to yield themselves unto God , and to the mercy of none else ; but as they have , like valiant resolute man , repulse so many enemy , they shall not now shorten the honour of their nation , by prolong their own life for a few hour , or a few day . the master gunner ready condescend and diverse other ; but the captain and the master be of another opinion , and beseech sir Richard to have care of they : allege that the Spaniard will be as ready to entertain a composition , as they be willing to offer the same : and that there be diverse sufficient and valiant man yet live , and who wound be not mortal , they may do their country and prince acceptable service hereafter . and whereas sir Richard have allege that the Spaniard shall never glory to have take one ship of her majesty , see they have so long and so notable defend themselves ; they answer , that the ship have six foot water in hold , three shot under water , which be so weak stop , as with the first work of the sea , she must needs sink , and be beside so crush and bruise , as she can never be remove out of the place . and as the matter be thus in dispute , and sir Richard refuse to hearken to any of those reason : the master of the revenge ( while the captain win unto he the great party ) be convoy aboard the general don Alfonso ba^an . who ( find none over hasty to enter the revenge again , doubt lest sir Richard will have blow they up and himself , and perceive by the report of the master of the revenge his dangerous disposition ) yield that all their life shall be save , the company send for England , and the better sort to pay such reasonable ransom as their estate will bear , and in the mean season to be free from Gaily or imprisonment . to this he so much the rather condescend as well , as i have say , for fear of further loss and mischief to themselves , as also for the desire he have to recover sir Richard greenvil ; who for his notable valour he seem great to honour and admire . when this answer be return , and that safety of life be promise , the common sort be now at the end of their peril , the most draw back from sir Richard and the master gunner , be no hard matter to dissuade man from death to life . the master gunner find himself and sir Richard thus prevent and master by the great number , will have slay himself with a sword , have he not be by force withhold and lock into his Cabben . then the general send many boat aboard the revenge , and diverse of our man fear sir Richard disposition , steal away aboard then the last fight of the ‘ revenge ’ a.d. ... ’591 - general and other ship . sir Richard thus overmatch , be send unto by Alfonso ba^an to remove out of the revenge , the ship be marvelous unsavoury , fill with blood and body of dead , and wound man like a slaughter house . sir Richard answer that he may do with his body what he list , for he esteem it not , and as he be carry out of the ship he swoon , and revive again desire the company to pray for he . the general use sir Richard with all humanity , and leave nothing unattempted that tend to his recovery , high commend his valour and worth inesse , and great bewail the danger wherein it he be , be unto they a rare spectacle , and a resolution seldom approve , to see one ship turn towards so many enemy , to endure the charge and board of so many huge armada , and to resist and repel the assault and entry of so many soldier . all which and more be confirm by a spanish captain of the same armada , and a present actor in the fight , who be sever from the rest in a storm , be by the lion of London a small ship take , and be now prisoner in London . the general commander of the armada , be don Alphonso ba ? a , brother to the mark of Santa Cruz. the admiral of the Biscaine squadron , be Britandona . of the squadron of Sivil , the mark of arumburch . [ ii two . 173. ] the hulk and Flybotes be command by Luis Coutinho . there be slay and drown in this fight , well near one thousand of the enemy , and two speciali commander don Luis de sant John , and don George de Prunaria de Mallaga , as the spanish captain confesses , beside diverse other of speciali account , whereof as yet report be not make . the admiral of the hulk and the ascension of Sivil be both sink by the side of the revenge ; one other recover the road of saint Michael , and sink also there ; a four run her self with the shore to save her man . sir Richard die as it be say , the second 47 or three day aboard the general , and be by they great bewail . what become of his body , whether it be bury in the sea or on the land we know not : the comfort that remain to his friend be , that he have end his life honourable in respect of the reputation win to his nation and country , and of the same to his posterity , and that be dead , he have not outlive his own honour . for the rest of her majesty ship that enter not so far into the fight as the revenge , the reason and cause be these . there be of they but six in all , whereof two but small ship ; the revenge engage past recovery : the hand of Flores be on the one side , 53 sail of the spanish , divide into squadron on the other , all as full fill with soldier as they can contain : almost the one half of our man sick and not able to serve : the ship grow foul , unroomage , and scarce able to bear any sail for want of ballast , have be six month at the sea before . if all the rest have enter , all have be lose : for the very hugeness of the spanish fleet , if not other violence have be offer , will have crush they between they into shiver . of which the dishonour and loss to the queen have be far great than the spoil or harm that the enemy can any way have receive . notwithstanding it be very true , that the lord Thomas will have enter between the squadron , but the rest will not condescend ; and the master of his own ship offer to leap into the sea , rather than to conduct that her majesty ship and the rest to be a prey to the enemy , where there be no hope nor possibility either of defence or victory . which also in my opinion have ill sort or answer the discretion and trust of a general , to commit himself and his charge to a assure destruction , without hope or any likelihood of prevail : thereby to diminish the strength of her majesty navy , and to enrich the pride and glory of the enemy . the foresight of the queen command by m. Thomas vavisor perform a very great fight , and stay two hour as near the revenge as the weather will permit he , not forsake the fight , till he be like to be encompass by the squadron , and with great difficulty clear himself . the rest give diverse volei of shot , and enter as far as the place permit , and their own necessity , to keep the weather gage of the enemy , until they be part by night . a few day after the fight be end , and the english prisoner disperse into the spanish and Indie ship , there arise so great a storm from the west and northwest , that all the fleet be disperse , as well the Indian fleet which be then come unto they , as the rest of the armada that attend their arrival , of which 14. sail together with the revenge , and in her 200 Spaniard , be cast away upon the isle of S. Michael . so it please they to honour the burial of that renown ship the revenge , not suffer she to perish alone , for the great honour she achieve in her life time . on the rest of the island there be cast away in this storm , 15 or 16 more of the ship of war : and of a hundred and odd sail of the Indie fleet , expect this year in Spain , what in this tempest , and what before in the bay of Mexico , and about the Bermuda , there be 70 and odd consume and lose , with those take by our ship of London , beside one very rich Indian ship , which set her self on fire , be board by the pilgrim , and five other take by master wat his ship of London , between the Havana and Cape S. Antonio . the four of this month of November we receive letter from the Tercera , affirm that there be 3000 body of man remain in that hand , save out of the perish ship : and that by the Spaniard own confession , there be 10000 cast away in this storm , beside those that be perish between the hand and the main . thus it have please God to fight for we , and to defend the justice of our cause , against the ambitious and bloody pretence of the Spaniard , who seek to devour un 49 d all nation , be themselves devour . a manifest testimony how injust and displease , their attempt be in the sight of God , who have please to witness by the success of their affair , his mislike of their bloody and injurious design , purpose and practise against all christian prince , over who they seek unlawful and ungodly rule and empery . one day or two before this wrack happen to the spanish fleet , when as some of our prisoner desire to be set on shore upon the island , hope to be from thence transport into England , which liberty be former by the general promise : one Morice Fitz John , son of old John of Desmond , a notable traitor , cousin germane to the late earl of Desmond , be send to the english from ship to ship , to persuade they to serve the king of Spain . the argument he use [ ii two . 174. ] to induce they be these . the increase of pay which he promise to be treble : advancement to the better sort : and the exercise of the true catholique religion , and safety of their soul to all . for the first , even the beggarly and unnatural behaviour of those english and irish rebel , that serve the king in that present action , be sufficient to answer that first argument of rich pay . for so poor and beggarly they be , as for want of apparel they strip their poor country man prisoner out of their ragged garment , wear to nothing by six month service , and spare not to despoil they even of their bloody shirt , from their wound body , and the very shoe from their foot ; a notable testimony of their rich entertainment and great wage . the second reason be hope of advancement if they serve well , and will continue faithful to the king . but what man can be so blockish ignorant ever to expect place or honour from a foreign king , have no other argument or persuasion than his own disloyalty ; to be unnatural to his own country that breed he ; to his parent that beget he , and rebellious to his true prince , to who obedience he be bind by oath , by 50 nature , and by religion ? no , . they be only assure to be employ in all desperate enterprise , to be hold in scorn and disdain ever among those who they serve . and that ever traitor be either trust or advance i can never yet read , neither can i at this time remember any example . and no man can have less become the place of a orator for such a purpose , than this morris of Desmond . for the earl his cousin be one of the great subject in that kingdom of Ireland , have almost whole country in his possession ; so many goodly manor , castle , and lordship ; the count palatine of Kerry , five hundred gentleman of his own name and family to follow he , beside other ( all which he possess in peace for three or four hundred year ) be in less than three year after his adhere to the Spaniard and rebellion , beat from all his hold , not so many as ten gentleman of his name leave live , himself take and behead by a soldier of his own nation , and his land give by a parliament to her majesty , and possess by the english : he other cousin sir John of Desmond take by master John zouch , and his body hang over the gate of his native city to be devour by raven : the third brother sir James hang , draw , and quarter in the same place . if he have withal vaunt of his success of his own house , no doubt the argument will have move much , and wrought great effect : which because , he for that present forget , i think it good to remember in his behalf . for matter of religion it will require a particular volume , if i shall set down how irreligious they cover their greedy and ambitious pretence , with that veil of piety . but sure i be , that there be no kingdom or commonwealth in all Europe , but if they be reform , they then invade it for religion sake : if it be , as they term catholique , they pretend title ; as if the king of Castille be the natural heir of all the world : and so between both , no kingdom be unsought . where they dare not with their own force to invade , they base entertain the traitor and vagabond of all nation : seek by those and by their runagate Jesuit to win part , and have by that mean ruin many noble house and other in this land , and have extinguish both their life and family . what good , honour , or fortune ever man yet by they achieve , be yet unheard of , or unwritten . and if our english papist do but look into Portugal , against which they have no pretence of religion , how the nobility be put to death , imprison , their rich man make a prey , and all sort of people captive ; they shall find that the obedience even of the Turk be easy and a liberty , in respect of the slavery and tyrannic of Spain . what have they do in Sicill , in Naples , Milan , and in the low country ; who have there be spare for religion at all ? and it come to my remembrance of a certain Burger of Antwerp , who house be enter by a company of spanish soldier , when they first sack the city , he beseech they to spare he and his good , be a good catholic , and one of their own party and faction . the Spaniard answer , that they know he to be of a good conscience for himself , but his money , plate , jewel , and good , be all heretical ! , and therefore good prize . so they abuse and torment the foolish Fleming , who hope that a Agnus dei have be a sufficient target against all force of that holy and charitable nation . neither have they at any time as they protest invade the kingdom of the Indies and Peru , and elsewhere , but only lead . thereunto , rather to reduce the people to Christianity , then for either gold or empery . when as in one only island call Hispaniola , they have waste thirty hundred thousand of the natural people , beside many million else in other place of the Indies : a poor and harmless people create of God , and may have be win to his knowledge , as many of they be , and almost as many as ever be persuade thereunto . the story whereof be at large write by a bishop of their own nation call Bartholomew de las Casas , and trans - the last fight of the revenge ’ a.d. .... I591 ' late into english and many other language , entitle the spanish cruelty . who will therefore repose trust in such a nation of ravenous stranger , and especial in those Spaniards which more greedy thirst after english blood , then after the life of any other people of [ ii two . 175. ] Europe , for the many overthrow and dishonour they have receive at our hand , who weakness we have discover to the world , and who force at home , abroad , in Europe , in India , by sea and land , we have even with handful of man and ship , overthrow and dishonour . let not therefore any english man , of what religion soever , have other opinion of the Spaniard , but that those who he seek to win of our nation , he esteem base and traitorous , unworthy person , or unconstant fool : and that he use his pretence of religion , for no other purpose but to bewitch we from the obedience of our natural prince , thereby hope in time to bring we to slavery and subjection , and then none shall be unto they so odious , and disdain as the traitor themselves , who have sell their country to a stranger , and forsake their faith and obedience contrary to nature and religion ; and contrary to that humane and general honour , not only of Christians , but of heathen and irreligious nation , who have always sustained what labour soever , and embrace even death it self , for their country , prince , or commonwealth . to conclude , it have ever to this day please God to prosper and defend her majesty , to break the purpose of malicious enemy , of forswear traitor , and of injust practise and invasion . she have ever be honour of the worthy king , serve by faithful subject , and shall by the favour of God , resist , repel , and confound all whatsoever attempt against her sacred person or kingdom . in the mean time let the Spaniard and traitor vaunt of their success , and we her true and obedient vassal , guide by the shine light of her virtue , shall always love she , serve she , and obey she to the end of our life . 