the voyage of m. hoar and diverse other gentleman , to Newfoundland , and cape Briton , in the year 1536 and in the 28 year of king Henry the 8. ne master hoar of London , a man of goodly stature and of great courage , and give to the study of cosmography , in the 28 year of king Henry the 8 and in the year of our lord 1536 encourage diverse gentleman and other , be assist by the king favour and countenance , to accompany he in a voyage of discovery upon the northwest part of America : wherein his persuasion take such effect , that within short space many gentleman of the inn of court , and of the chancery , and diverse other of good worship , desirous to see the strange thing of the world , very willing enter into the action with he , some of who name be as follow : m. week a gentleman of the west country of five hundred mark by the year live . m. Tuck a gentleman of Kent . m. Tuckfield . m. Thomas butt the son of sir William butt knight , of Norfolk , which be late live , and from who mouth i write most of this relation . m. hardy , m. Byron , m. carter , m. Wright , m. rastall sergeant rastal brother , m. Ridley , and diverse other , which all be in the admiral call the Trinity , a ship of seven score ton , wherein m. Hore himself be embark . in the other ship who name be the minion , go a very learned and virtuous gentleman [ three . 130. ] one m. Armigil wade , afterwards clerk of the m. jrmi^l counsel of king Henry the 8 and king Edward the Wadesixth , father to the worshipful m. William wade now clerk of the privy counsel , m. Oliver Dawbeney merchant of London , m. joy afterward gentleman of the king chapel , with diverse other of good account . the island of penguinstand-eth about the latitude of 30. degree . m. Dawbenys report to m. Richard Hakluyt of the temple . they behold the savage of Newfoundland . the english voyage the whole number that go in the two tall ship aforesaid , to wit , the Trinity and the minion , be about six score person , whereof thirty be gentleman , which all we muster in warlike manner at gravesend , and after the receive of the sacrament , they embark themselves in the end of April . 1536. from the time of their set out from Gravesend , they be very long at sea , to wit , above two month , and never touch any land until they come to part of the west Indies about Cape briton , shape their course thence northeastwardes , until they come to the island of Penguin , which be very full of rock and stone , whereon they go and find it full of great fowl white and grey , as big as goose , and they see infinite number of their egg . they drive a great number of the fowl into their boat upon their sail , and take up many of their egg , the fowl they flay and their skin be very like honey comb full of hole be flay off : they dress and eat they and find they to be very good and nourish meat . they see also store of bear both black and white , of who they kill some , and take they for no bad food . m. Oliver Dawbeny , which ( as it be before mention ) be in this voyage , and in the minion , tell m. Richard Hakluyt of the middle temple these thing follow : to wit , that after their arrival ! in Newfoundland , and have be there certain day at anchor , and not have yet see any of the natural people of the country , the same Dawbeney walk one day on the hatch , spy a boat with savage of those part , row down the bay towards they , to gaze upon the ship and our people , and take view of their come aloof , he call to such as be under the hatch , and will they to come up if they will see the natural people of the country , that they have so long and so much desire to see : whereupon they come up , and take view of the savage row towards they and their ship , and upon the view they man out a ship-boat to meet they and to take they . but they spy our ship-boat make towards they , return with main force and flee into a island that lie up in the bay or river there , and our man pursue they into the island , and the savage flee and escape : but our man find a fire , and the side of a bear on A.D. 1536. a wooden spit leave at the same by the savage that be flee . there in the same place they find a boot of leather garnish on the outward side of the calf with certain brave trade , as it be of raw silk , and also find a certain great warm mitten : and these carry with they , they return to their ship , not find the savage , nor see any thing else beside the soil , and the thing grow in the same , which chief be store of fir and pine tree . and further , the say m. Dawbeny tell he , that lie there they grow into great want of victual , and that there they find small relief , more than that they have from the nest of a osprey , that bring hourly to her young great plenty of diverse sort of fish . but such be the famine that increase among they from extreme day to day , that they be force to seek to relieve famine-themselves of raw herb and root that they seek on the main : but the famine increase , and the relief of herb be to little purpose to satisfy their insatiable hunger , in the field and desert here and there , the fellow kill his mate while he stoop to take up a root for his relief , and cut out piece of his body who he have murder , broil the same on the coal and greedy devour they . by this mean the company decrease , and the officer know not what be become of they ; and it fortune that one of the company drive with hunger to seek abroad for relief find out in the field the savour of oh « r man eat broil flesh , and fall out with one for that he will suffer he and his fellow to starve , enjoy plenty as jor a tn ’ he think : and this matter grow to cruel speech , he that have the broil meat , burst out into these word : if thou will needs know , the broil meat that i have be a piece of such a man buttock . the report of this bring to the ship , the captai ne find what become of those that be miss , and be persuaded that some of they be neither devour with wild beast , nor yet destroy with savage : and thecaptaine hereupon he stand up and make a notable oration , qrati < m . contain , how much these deal offend the almighty , and vouch the scripture from first to last , what God have in case of distress do for they that call upon he , and tell they that the power of the almighty be then no less , than in all former time it have be . And add , that if it have not please God to have help they in that distress , that it have be better to have perish in body , and to have live everlasting , than to have relieve for a poor time their mortal body , and to be condemn everlasting both body and soul to the unquenchable fire of hell . and thus [ three . 131. ] have end to that effect , he begin to exhort to repentance , and beseech all the company to pray , that it may please God to look upon their miserable present state , and for his own mercy to relieve the same . the famine increase , and the inconvenience of the man that be miss be find , they agree among themselves rather then all shall perish , to cast lot who the english shall be kill : and such be the mercy of God , that ’french shit t^e same arrive a french ship in that port , wherein they we^ furnish with victual , and such be the policy of retumedhome . the english , that they become master of the same , and change ship and vittail they , they set sail to come into England . in their journey they be so far northwards , that they see mighty island of ice in the summer season , on hawk and which be hawk and other fowl to rest themselves otherfoule . be ; hang weary of fly over far from the main . they see also certain great white fowl with red bill and red 6 leg , somewhat big than herons , which they suppose fowl sup-to be stork . they arrive at saint Ives in Cornwall be about the end of October . from thence they depart sores‘ unto a certain castle belong to sir John Luttrell , where m. Thomas butt , and m. rastall and other gentleman of the voyage be very friendly entertain : after that they come to the earl of bath at bath , and thence to Bristol , so to London . m. butt be so change in the voyage with hunger and misery , that sir William his father and my lady his mother know he not to be their son , until they find a secret mark which be a wart upon one of his knee , as he tell i Richard Hakluyt of Oxford himself , to who i ride 200. mile only to learn the whole truth of this voyage from his own mouth , as be the only man now alive that be in this discovery . certain month after , those Frenchmen come into England , and make complaint to king Henry the 8 : the king cause the matter to be examine , and find the great distress of his subject , and the cause of the deal so with the french , be so move with pity , that he punish not his subject , but of his own purse make full and royal recompense unto the french . in this distress of famine , the english do somewhat relieve their vital spirit , by drink at the spring the fresh water out of certain wooden cup , out of which they have drink their aqua composita before . the french royal recommence by king Henry the 8. 