a relation of Richard clarke of Weymouth , master of the ship call the delight , go for the discovery of Norembega , with sir Humphrey Gilbert 1583. write in excuse of that fault of cast away the ship and man , impute to his oversight . epart out of saint Johns harbour in the newfound land the 20. of August unto cape Raz , from thence we direct our course unto the lie of Sablon or the isle of sand , which the general sir Humphrey Gilbert will willing have see . but when we come within twenty league of the isle of Sablon , we fall to contro - 2o-versie of our course . the general come up in his frigate and demand of i Richard Clarke master of 7 ’ the admiral what course be best to keep : i say that Westsouthwest be best : because the wind be at south and night at hand and unknown sand lie off a great way from the land . the general command i to go westnorthwest . i tell he again that the isle of Sablon be westnorthwest and but 15. [ ni - i64-1 league off , and that he shall be upon the island before day , if he go that course . the general say , my off Jablon . reckon be untrue , and charge i in her majesty hereinclarke name , and as i will show my self in her country , untrue to follow he that night . i fear his threaten , si > because he present her majesty person , do follow Gilbert . his commandment , and about seven of the clock in the ship cast the morning the ship stroke on ground , where she ay on be cast away . then the general go off to sea , the 2 course that i will have have they go before , and August^ see the ship cast away man and all , and be not able 1583. to save a man , for there be not water upon the sand for either of they much less for the admiral , that draw fourteen foot . now as God will the day sixteen gate into the ship-boat . master hed-lyes ungodly proposition . the english voyage before it be very calm , and a soldier of the ship have kill some foul with his piece , and some of the company desire i that they may hoist out the boat to recover the foul , which i grant they : and when they come aboard they do not hoist it in againb that night . and when the ship be cast away the boat be a stern be in burden one ton and a half : there be leave in the boat one oar and nothing else . some of the company can swim , and recover the boat and do hale in out of the water as many man as they can : among the rest they have a care to watch for the captain or the master : they happen on my self be the master , but can never see the captain : then they hail into the boat as many man as they can in number 16. who name hereafter i will rehearse . and when the 16. be in the boat , some have small remembrance , and some have none : for they do not make account to live , but to prolong their life as long as it please God , and look every moment of a hour when the sea will eat they up , the boat be so little and so many man in she , and so foul weather , that it be not possible for a ship to brook half a coarse of sail . thus while we remain two day and two night , and that we see it please God our boat live in the sea ( although we have nothing to help we withal but one oar , which we keep up the boat withal upon the sea , and so go even as the sea will drive we ) there be in our company one master hed that put forth this question to i the master . i do see that it do please God , that our boat live in the sea , and it may please God that some of we may come to the land if our boat be not overlade . let we make sixteen lot , and those four that have the four short lot we will cast overboard preserve the master among we all . i reply unto he , say , no , we will live and die together . master hed ask i if my remembrance be good : i answer i give God praise it be good , and know how far i be off the land , and be in hope to come to the land within two or three day , and say they be but threescore league from the land , ( when they be seventie ) all to put they in comfort . thus we continue the three and four day without any sustenance , save only the weed that swim in the sea , and salt water to drink . the five day hed dye and another moreover : than we desire all to die : for in all these five day and five night we see the sun but once and the star but one night , it be so foul weather . thus we do remain the sixth day : than we be very weak and wish all to die save only my self which do comfort they and promise they shall come soon to land by the help of God : but the company be very importunate , and be in doubt they shall never come to land , but that i promise they the seven day they shall come to shore , or else they shall cast i over board : which do happen true the seven day , for at eleven of the clock we have sight - of the land , and at 3. of they come on the clock at afternoon we come on land . all these land they day seven day and seven night , the wind keep continual south . if the wind have in the mean time shift upon any other point , we have never come to land : we be no soon come to the land , but the wind come clean contrary at north within half a hour after our arrival . but we be so weak that one can scarce help another of we out of the boat , yet with much ado be come all on shore we kneel down upon our knee and give God praise that he have deal so merciful with we . afterwards those which be strong help their fellow unto a fresh brook , where we satisfy our self with water and berry very well . there thefruitfal-were of all sort of berry plenty , and as goodly a Coun - ness^ trey as ever i see : we find a very raire plain ^ewfoun / champion ground that a man may see very far every land . way : by the sea side be here and there a little wood with goodly tree as good as ever i see any in Norway , able to mast any ship , of pine tree , spruce tree , fourteen of our man bring out of new fund land in a ship of saint John the lui , . the english voyage fir , and very great birch tree . where we come on land we make a little house with bough , where we rest all that night . in the morning i divide the company three and three to go every way to see what food they can find to sustain themselves , and appoint they to meet there all again at noon with such food as they can get . as we go aboard we find great store of peason as good as any we have in England : a man will think they have be sow there . we rest there three day and three night and live very well with pease and berry , we name the place saint Laurence , because it be a very goodly river like the river of saint Laurence in Canada , and we find it very full of salmon . when we have well rest our self we row our boat along the shore , think to have go to the grande bay to have come home with some Spaniard which be yearly there to kill the whale : and when we be hungry or a thirst we put our boat on land and gather pease and berry . thus we row our boat along the shore five day : about which time we come to a very goodly river that run far up into the country and see very goodly grow tree of all sort . there we happen upon a ship of saint John de Luz , which ship bring we into Biskay to a harbour call the passage . the master of the ship be our great friend , or else we have be put to death if he have not keep our counsel . for when the visitor come aboard , as it be the order in Spain , they demand what we be , he say we be poor fisherman that have cast away our ship in newfound land , and so the visitor inquire no more of the matter at that time . assoon as night be come he put we on land and bid we shift for our self . then have we but ten or twelve mile into France , which we go that night , and then care not for the Spaniard . and so short after we come into England towards the end of the year 1583. 