the five voyage of m. John white into the west Indies and part of America call Virginia , in the year 1590. the 20 of march the three ship the Hopewell , the John Evangelist , and the little John , put to sea from Plymmouth with two small shallop . the 25 at midnight both our shallop be sink be tow at the ship stearne by the boatswain negligence . on the 30 we see a head we that part of the coast of Barbary , lie east of cape Cantyn , and the bay of Asaphi . the next day we come to the he of mogador , where ride , at our pass by , a pinnace of London call the moonshine . [ Iii . 289. ] April . on the first of April we ankor in Santa Cruz ride , where we find two great ship of London lade in sugar , of who we have 2 shipboat to supply the loss of our shallop . 406 on the 2 we set sail from the road of Santa Cruz , for the canary . on Saturday the 4 we see Alegranza , the east lie of the canary . on Sunday the 5 of April we give chase to a double flyboat , the which , we also the same day fight with , and take she , with loss of three of their man slay , and one hurt . on Monday the 6 we see grand canary , and the next day we land and take in fresh water on the southside thereof . on the 9 we depart from grand canary , and . frame our course for Dominica . the last of April we see Dominica , and the same night we come to a anchor on the southside thereof . May . the first of May in the morning many of the savage come aboard our ship in their canow , and do traffic with we ; we also the same day land and enter their town from whence we return the same day aboard without any resistance of the savage ; or any offence do to they . the 2 of May our admiral and our pinnace depart from Dominica leave the John our viceadmiral play off and on about Dominica , hope to take some Spaniard outward bind to the Indies ; the same night we have sight of three small hand call los Santos , leave Guadalupe and they on our starboard . the 3 we have sight of saint Christopher hand , bear Northeast and by east off we . on the 4 we sail by the virgin , which be many break hand , lie at the east end of saint Johns hand : and the same day towards evening we land upon one of they call Blanca , where we kill a incredible number of fowl : here we stay 4°7 but three hour , and from thence stand into the shore northwest , and have bring this hand southeast off we , we put towards night through a open or swatch , call the passage , lie between the virgin , and the east end of saint John : here the pinnace leave we and sail on the south side of saint John. the 5 and 6 the admiral sail along the northside of saint John , so near the shore that the Spaniard discern we to be man of war ; and therefore make fire along the coast as we sail by , for so their custom be , when they see any man of war on their coast . the 7 we land on the northwest end of saint John , where we water in a good river call Yaguana , and the same night follow we take a frigate of ten tun come from Gwathanelo lade with hide and ginger . in this place Pedro a Mollato , who know all our state , run from we to the Spaniard . on the 9 we depart from Yaguana . the 13 we land on a hand call Mona , whereon be 10 or 12 house inhabit of the Spaniard ; these we burn and take from they a pinnace , which they have draw a ground and sink , and carry all her sail , mast , and rudder into the wood , because we shall not take he away ; we also chase the Spaniard over all the hand ; but they hide they in cave , hollow rock , and bush , so that we can not find they . on the 14 we depart from Mona , and the next day after we come to a hand call Saona , about 5 league distant from Mona , lie on the southside of Hispaniola near the east end : between these two hand we lie off and on 4 or 5 day , hope to take some of the Domingo fleet double this hand , as a near way to Spain then by cape Tyburon , or by cape S. Anthony . on Thursday be the 19 our vice-admiral , from who we depart at Dominica , come to we at Saona , 408 with who we leave a spanish frigate , and appoint he to lie off and on other five day between Saona and Mona to the end aforesaid ; then we depart from they at Saona for cape Tyburon . here i be inform that our man of the vice-admiral , at their departure from Dominica bring away two young savage , which be the chief cacique son of that country and part of Dominica , but they short after run away from they at Santa Cruz hand , where the vice-admiral land to take in ballast . on the 21 the admiral come to the cape Tyburon , where we find the John Evangelist our pinnace stay for we : here we take in two Spaniard almost starve on the shore , who make a fire to our ship as we pass by . those place for a 100 mile in length be nothing else but a desolate and mere [ three . 290. ] wilderness , without any habitation of people , and full of wild bull and boar , and great serpent . the 22 our pinnace come also to a anchor in aligato bay at cape Tyburon . here we understand of m. lane , captain of the pinnace ; how he be set William upon with one of the king galley belong to Santo lay ' Domingo , which be man with 400 man , who after he have fight with he 3 or 4 hour , give over the fight and forsake he , without any great hurt do on either part . the 26 the John our vice-admiral come to we to cape Tyburon , and the frigate which we leave with he at Saona . this be the appoint place where we shall attend for the meeting with the Santo Domingo fleet . on Whitsunday even at cape Tyburon one of our boy run away from we , and at ten day end return to our ship almost starve for want of food . in sundry place about this part of cape Tyburon we find the bone and carcase of diverse man , who have perish ( as we think ) by famine in those wood , be either straggle from their company , or land there by some man of war . 409 on the 14 of June we take a small spanish frigate which fall among we so sudden , as he double the point at the bay of cape Tyburon , where we ride , so that he can not escape we . this frigate come from Santo Domingo , and have but 3 man in she , the one be a expert pilot , the other a mountainer , and the three a vintner , who escape all out of prison at Santo Domingo , purpose to fly to Yaguana which be a town in the west part of his-spanishfap - paniola where many fugitive Spaniard be gather together . the 17 be Wednesday captain lane be send to Yaguana with his pinnace and a frigate to take a ship , which be there take in fraught , as we understand by the old pilot , who we have take three day before . the 24 the frigate return from captain lane at Yaguana , and bring we word to cape Tyburon , that captain lane have take the ship , with many passenger and negro in the same ; which prove not so rich a prize as we hope for , for that a Frenchman of war have take and spoil she before we come . nevertheless her load be think worth 1000 or 1300 pound , be hide , ginger , cannafistula , copper-pan , and Casavi . July - Edward t^he second of July Edward Spicer who we leave in Spicer . 1 England come to we at cape Tyburon , accompany with a small pinnace , whereof one m. harp be captain . and the same day we have sight of a fleet of 14 sail all of Santo Domingo , to who we present give chase , but they upon the first sight of we flee , and separate themselves scatter here and there : wherefore we be force to divide our self and so make after they until 12 of the clock at night . 410 but then by reason of the darkness we lose sight of each other , yet in the end the admiral and the moonlight happen to be together the same night at the fetch up of the vice-admiral of the spanish fleet , against who the next morning we fight and this fight take he , with loss of one of our man and two hurt , and of they 4 slay and 6 hurt . but what be become of our vice-admiral , our pinnace , and prize , and two frigate , in all this time , we be ignorant . the 3 of July we spend about rifle , rummage and fit the prize to be sail with we . the 6 of July we see Jamayca then which we leave on our larboard , keep Cuba in sight on our starboard . upon the 8 of July we see the hand of Pinos , which lie on the southside of Cuba nigh unto the west end or cape call cape S. Anthony . and the same day we give chase to a frigate , but at night we lose sight of she , partly by the slow sail of our admiral , and lack of the moonlight our pinnace , who captain Cooke have send to the cape the day before . on the both we come to cape S. Anthony , where we find our consort the moonlight and her pinnace abide for our come , of who we understand that the day before there pass by they 22 sail , some of they of the burden of 300 and some 400 ton load with the king treasure from the main , bind for Havana ; from this 11 of July until 22 we be much becalm : and the wind be very scarce , and the weather exceed hot , we be much pester with the Spaniard we have take : wherefore we be drive to land all the Spaniard save three , but the place where we land they be of their own choice on the southside of Cuba near unto the organ and Rio de puercos . the 23 we have sight of the cape of Florida , and the break hand thereof call the martyr . 411 the state of the current from the cape of Florida to Vir^nia . the english voyage the 25 be s. James day in the morning , we fall with the matan^as , a headland 8 league towards the east of Havana , where we purpose to take fresh water in , and make our abode two or three day . on Sunday the 26 of July ply too and fro between the matan^as and Havana , we be espy of three small pinnace of saint John de ullua bind for Havana , which be exceed rich load . Theise 3 pinnace come very bold up unto we , and so continue until they come within musket shoot of we . and we suppose they to be captain harp pinnace , and two small frigate take by captain harp : wherefore we show our flag . but they present upon the sight of it turn about and make all the sail they can from we towards the shore , and keep themselves in so shallow water , that we be not able to follow they , and therefore give they over with expense of shot and powder to no purpose . but if we have not so rash set out our flag , we may have take they all three , for they will not have know we before they have be in our hand . this chase bring we so far to leeward as Havana : wherefore not find any of our consort at you Matan^as , we put over again to the cape of Florida , and from thence through the chanel of Bahama . on the 28 the cape of Florida bear west of we . the 30 we lose sight of the coast of Florida , and stand to sea for to gain the help of the current which run much swift a far off then in sight of the coast . for from the cape to Virginia all along the shore be none but eddy current , set to the south and Southwest . the 31 our three ship be clear disbock , the great prize , the admiral , and the moonshine , but our prize be thus disbock depart from we without take leave of our admiral or consort , and sail direcdy for England . 412 on the first of August the wind scant , and from thence forward we have very foul weather with much rain , thunder , and great spout , which fall round about we nigh unto our ship . the 3 we stand again in for the shore , and at midday we take the height of the same . the height of that place we find to be 34 degree of latitude . towards night we be within three league of the low sandy hand west of Wokokon . but the weather sandy hand continue so exceed foul , that we can not come to a anchor nigh the coast : wherefore we stand off it again to sea until Monday the 9 of August . on Monday the storm cease , and we have very great likelihood of fair weather : therefore we stand in again for the shore : and come to a anchor at 11 fathom in 3 5 tty in degree of latitude , within a mile of the shore , where degree , we go on land on the narrow sandy hand , be one of the island west of Wokokon : in this hand we take in some fresh water and catch great store of fish in the shallow water . between the main ( as we suppose ) and that hand it be but a mile over and three or four foot deep in most place . on the 12 in the morning we depart from thence and towards night we come to a anchor at the north-east end of the island of croatoan , by reason of a breach 2 which we perceive to lie out two or three league into ° . rSagues the sea : here we ride all that night . tn ° ea ' the 13 in the morning before we weigh our anchor , our boat be send to sound over this breach : our ship ride on the side thereof at 5 fathom ; and a ship length from we we find but 4 and a quarter , and then deep and shallow for the space of two mile , so that sometime we find 5 fathom , and by great diverge by 7 , and within two cast with the lead 9 , and then ! Ounci ' 8 , next cast 5 , and then 6 , and then 4 , and then 9 again , and deep ; but 3 fathom be the last , 2 league off 413 from the shore . this breach be in 35 degr . and a half , and lie at the very north-east point of croatoan , whereas go a fret out of the main sea into the inner water , which part the island and the main land . the 15 of August towards evening we come to a Hatorask in anchor at Hatorask , in 36 degr . and one three , in five 36 degr . in a fajom water , three league from the shore . at our ierce ’ first come to anchor on this shore we see a great smoke rise in the he Raonoak near the place where i leave our colony in the year 1587 , which smoke put we in good hope that some of the colony be there expect my return out of England . the 16 and next morning our 2 boat go a shore , and captain cook , and Cap. Spicer , and their company with i , with intent to pass to the place at Raonoak where our countryman be leave . at our put from the ship we command our master gunner to make ready 2 minion and a falkon well load , and to shoot they off with reasonable space between every shot , to the end that their report may be hear to the place where we hope to find some of our people . this be accord perform , and our twoe boat put [ three . 292. ] off unto the shore , in the admiral boat we sound all the way and find from our ship until we come within a mile of the shore nine , eight , and seven fathom : but before we be half way between our ship and the shore we see another great smoke to the southwest of kindriker mount : we therefore think good to go to that second smoke first : but it be much further they land . from the harbour where we land , than we suppose it to be , so that we be very sore tire before we come to the smoke . but that which grieve we more be that when we come to the smoke , we find no man nor sign that any have be there late , nor yet any fresh water in all this way to drink . be thus weary with this journey we return to the harbour where we leave our boat , who in our absence have bring their cask a shore for fresh water , so we defer our 414 i59°-going to Roanoak until the next morning , and cause some of those sailor to dig in those sandy hill for fresh water whereof we find very sufficient . that water night we return aboard with our boat and our tn san whole company in safety . the next morning be the 17 of August , our boat and company be prepare again to go up to Roanoak , but captain Spicer have then send his boat ashore for fresh water , by mean whereof it be ten of the clock aforenoon before we put from our ship which be then come to a anchor within two mile of the shore . the admiral boat be half way towards the shore , when captain Spicer put off from his ship . the admiral boat first pass the breach , but not without some danger of sink , for we have a sea break into our boat which fill we half full of water , but by the will of God and careful styrage of captain cook we come safe ashore , save only that our furniture , victual , match and powder be much wet and spoil . for at this time the wind blue at Northeast and direct into the harbour so great a gale , that the sea break extreme on the bar , and the tide go very forcible at the entrance . by that time our admiral boat be hail ashore , and most of our thing take out to dry , captain Spicer come to the entrance of the breach with his mast stand up , and be half pass over , but by the rash and undiscreet styrage of Ralph Skinner his master mate , a very dangerous sea break into their boat and overset they quite , the man keep the boat some in it , and some hang on it , but the next sea set the boat on ground , where it beat so , that some of they be force to let go their hold , hope to wade ashore ; but the sea still beat they down , so that they can neither stand nor swim , and the boat twice or thrice be turn the keel upward , whereon captain Spicer and captain Skinner hang until they sink , and be see no more . but four that can swim a little keep themselves in ' deep water and be save by captain cook mean , 415 who so soon as he see their oversetting , strip himself , and four other that can swim very well , and with all haste possible row unto they , and save four . they be a 11 in all , and 7 of the chief be drown , who name be Edward Spicer , Ralph Skinner , Edward Kelley , Thomas Bevis , Hance the surgeon , Edward Kelborne , Robert Coleman . this mischance do so much discomfort the sailor , that they be all of one mind not to go any further to seek the planter . but in the end by the commandment and persuasion of i and captain cook , they prepare the boat : and see the captain and i so resolute , they seem much more willing . our boat and all thing fit again , we put off from Hatorask , be the number of 19 person in both boat : but before we can get to the place , where our planter be leave , it be so exceed dark , that we overshoot the place a quarter of a mile : there we espy towards the north end of the hand you light of a great fire through the wood , to the which we present row : when we come right over against it , we let fall our Grapnel near the shore , and sound with a trumpet a call , and afterwards many familiar english tune of song , and call to they friendly ; but we have no answer , we therefore land at daybreak , and coming to the fire , we find the grass and sundry rot tree burn about the place . from hence we go through the wood to that part of the hand direct over against Dasamongwepeuk , and from thence we return by the water side , round about the north point of the hand , until we come to the place where i leave our colony in the year 1586. in all this way we see in the sand the print of the savage foot of 2 or 3 sort tread you night , and as we enter up the sandy bank upon a tree , in the very brow thereof be curious carve these fair roman letter c r o : which letter present we know to signify the place , where i shall find the planter seat , accord to a secret token agree upon between they and i at my last departure 416 from they , which be , that in any way they shall not fail to write or carve on the tree or post of the door the name of the place where they shall be seat ; for at my come away they be prepare to remove from Roanoak 50 mile into the main . therefore at my departure from they in An. 1587 i will they , that if they shall happen to be distress in any of those place , that than they shall carve over the letter or name , a cross and in this form , but we find no such sign of distress . and have well consider of this , we pass towards the place where they be leave in [ three . 293. ] sundry house , but we find the house take down , and the place very strong enclose with a high palisado of great tree , with cortynes and flanker very fort-like , and one of the chief tree or post at the right side of the entrance have the bark take off , and 5 foot from the ground in fair capitali letter be grave croatoan without any cross or sign of distress ; this do , we enter into the palisado , where we find many bar of iron , two pig of lead , four iron fowler , iron sacker-shotte , and such like heavy thing , throw here and there , almost overgrow with grass and weed . from thence we go along by the water side , towards the point of the creek to see if we can find any of their boat or pinnisse , but we can perceive no sign of they , nor any of the last falcon and small ordinance which be leave with they , at my departure from they . at our return from the creek , some of our sailor meet we , tell we that they have find where diverse chest have be hide , and long sithence dig up again and break up , and much of the good in they spoil and scatter about , but nothing leave , of such thing as the savage know any use of , undefaced . present captain cook and i go to the place , which be in the end of a old trench , make two year pass by captain Amadas : wheere we find five chest , that have be careful hide of the planter , and of the same chest three be my own , and about the place Viii 417 2d many of my thing spoil and break , and my book tear from the cover , the frame of some of my picture and map rot and spoil with rain , and my armour almost eat through with rust ; this can be no other but the deed of the Savages our enemy at Dasamongwepeuk , who have watch the departure of our man to croatoan ; and assoon as they be depart , dig up every place where they suspect any thing to be bury : but although it much grieve i to see such spoil of my good , yet on the other side i great joy that i have safe find a certain token of their safe be at croatoan , which be the place where Manteo be bear , and the savage of the hand our friend . when we have see in this place so much as we can , we return to our boat , and depart from the shore towards our ship , with as much speed as we can : for the weather begin to overcast , and very likely that a foul and stormy night will ensue . therefore the same evening with much danger and labour , we get our self aboard , by which time the wind and sea be so great rise , that we doubt our cable and anchor will scarce hold until morning : wherefore the captain cause the boat to be man with five lusty man , who can swim all well , and send they to the little hand on the right hand of the harbour , to bring aboard six of our man , who have fill our cask with fresh water : the boat the same night return aboard with our man , but all our cask ready fill they leave behind , unpossible to be have aboard without danger of cast away both man and boat : for this night prove very stormy and foul . the next morning it be agree by the captain and my self , with the master and other , to weigh anchor , and go for the place at croatoan , where our planter be : for that then the wind be good for that place , and also to leave that cask with fresh water on shore in the hand until our return . so then 418 they bring the cable to the Capston , but when the anchor be almost apecke , the cable break , by mean whereof we lose another anchor , wherewith we drive so fast into the shore , that we be force to let fall a three anchor : which come so fast home that the ship be almost aground by Kenricks mount : so that we be force to let slip the cable end for end . and if it have not chance that we have fall into a channel of deep water , close by the shore than we account of , we can never have go clear of the point that lie to the southward of Kenricks mount . be thus clear of some danger , and get into deep water , but not without some loss : for we have but one cable and anchor leave we of four , and the weather grow to be foul and foul ; our victual scarce , and our cask and fresh water lose : it be therefore determine that we shall go for saint John or some other hand to the southward for fresh water . and it be further purpose , that if we can any way supply our want of victual and other necessary , either at Hispaniola , Sant John , or Trynidad , that than we shall continue in the Indies all the winter follow , with hope to make 2. rich voyage of one , and at our return to visit our countryman at Virginia . the captain and the whole company in the admiral ( with my earnest petition ) thereunto agree , so that it rest only to know what the master of the moonlight our consort will do herein . but when we demand they leave the coast of Virpnia , they if they will accompany we in that new determination , they allege that their weak and leak ship be not able to continue it ; wherefore the same night we part , leave the moonlight to go direct for England , and the admiral set his course for Trynidad , which course we keep two day . on the 28. the wind change , and it be set on [ three . 294. ] foul weather every way : but this storm bring the wind west and northwest , and blow so forcible , that we be able to bear no sail , but our forecourse 419 half mast high , wherewith we run upon the wind perforce , the due course for England , for that we be drive to change our first determination for Trynidad , and stand for the hand of azore , where we purpose to take in fresh water , and also there hope to meet with some english man of war about those hand , at who hand we may obtain some supply of our want . and thus continue our course for the azore , sometime with calm , and sometime with very scarce wind , on the fifteen of September the wind come south southeast , and blow so exceed , that we be force to lie atry all that day . at this time by account we judge our self to be about twenty league to the west of Cuervo and Flores , but about night the storm cease , and fair weather ensue . on Thursday the seventeenth we see Cuervo and Flores , but we can not come to anchor that night , by reason the wind shift . the next morning be the eighteenth , stand in again with Cuervo , we escry a sail ahead we , to who we give chase : but when we come near he , we know he to be a Spaniard , and hope to make sure purchase of he : but we understand at our speak with he , that he be a prize , and of the Domingo fleet already take by the John our consort , in the Indies . we learn also of this prize , that our vice-admiral and pinnace have fight with the rest of the Domingo fleet , and have force they with their admiral to flee unto Jamaica under the fort for succour , and some of they run themselves aground , whereof one of they they bring away , and take out of some other so much as the time will permit . and further we understand of they , that in their return from Jamaica about the organ near cape saint Anthony , our vice-admiral meet with two ship of the main land , come from Mexico , bind for Havana , with who he fight : in which fight our viceadmirals lieutenant be slay , 420 and the captain right arm strike off , with four other of his man slay , and sixteen hurt . but in the end he enter , and take one of the spanish ship , which be so sore shoot by we under water , that before they can take out her treasure she sink ; so that we lose thirteen pipe of silver which sink with she , 13 - Pfa* °f beside much other rich merchandise . and in the stlver ’ mean time the other spanish ship be pierce with nine shot under water , get away ; who our vice-admiral intend to pursue : but some of their man in the top make certain rock , which they see above water near the shore , to be galley of Havana and Cartagena , come from Havana to rescue the two ship ; wherefore they give over their chase , and go for England . after this intelligence be give we by this our prize , he depart from we , and go for England . on Saturday the 19 of September we come to a anchor near a small village on the north side of Flores , where we find ride 5. English man of war , of who we understand that our vice-admiral and prize be go thence for England . one of these five be the moonlight our consort , who upon the first sight of our come into Flores , set sail and go for England , not take any leave of we . on Sunday the 20. the mary rose , admiral of the queen fleet , wherein be general sir John Hawkins , stand in with flores , and diverse other of the queen ship , namely the hope , the Nonpareilia , the rainbow , the swift-sure , the foresight , with many other good merchant ship of war , as the Edward Bonaventure , the merchant royal , the amity , the eagle , the dainty of sir John Hawkins , and many other good ship and pinnace , all attend to meet with the king of Spain fleet , come from terra firma of the west Indies . the 22. of September we go aboard the rainbow , and towards night we speak with the swift-sure , and give he 3. piece . the captain desire our 421 company ; wherefore we willing attend on they : who at this time with io . other ship stand for faial . but the general with the rest of the fleet be separate from we , make two fleet , for the sure meeting with the spanish fleet . on Wednesday the 23. we see gratiosa , where the admiral and the rest of the queen fleet be come together . the admiral put forth a flag of counsel , in which be determine that the whole fleet shall go for the main , and spread themselves on the coast of Spain and Portugal , so far as convenient they may , for the sure meeting of the spanish fleet in those part . the 26. we come to faial , where the admiral with some other of the fleet anchor , othersome ply up and down between that and the Pico until midnight , at which time the Antony shoot off a piece and weigh , show his light : after who the whole fleet stand to the east , the wind at Northeast by east . on Sunday the 27. towards evening we take our [ three . 295. ] leave of the admiral and the whole fleet , who stand to the east . but our ship accompany with a flyboat stand in again with saint George , where we purpose to take in more fresh water , and some other fresh victual . on Wednesday the 30. of September , see the wind hang so northerly , that we can not attain the hand of S. George , we give over our purpose to water there , and the next day frame our due course for England . October . the 2. of October in the morning we see saint Michael hand on our star board quarter . the 23. at 10. of the clock afore noon , we see Ushant in Britaigne . on Saturday the 24. we come in safety , God be thank , to a anchor at Plymmouth . 