the relation of Nicholas Burgoignon , alias holy , who sir Francis Drake bring from saint Augustine also in Florida , where he have remained six year , in i and master heriot hear . his Nicholas Burgoignon say , that between saint Augustine and S. Helen there be a cacique who name be Casicola , which be lord of ten thousand Indian , and another cacique who name be Dicasca , and another call Touppekyn towards the north , and a four name Potanou towards the south , and another call Moscita towards the south likewise . beside these he acknowledge Oristou , Ahoia , ahoiaue , isamacon , allege by the Spaniard . he further affirm , that there be a city northwestward from S. helenes in the mountain , which the Spaniard call la grand Copal , and be very great and rich , and that in these mountain there be great store of crystal , gold , and ruby , and diamond : and that a Spaniard bring from thence a diamond which be worth five thousand crown , which Pedro Melendes ix i13 h the english voyage the mark nephew to old Pedro Melendes that slay Ribault , and be now governor of Florida , wear . he say also , that to make passage unto these mountains , it be needful to have store of hatchet to give unto the Indian , and store of pickax to break the mountain , which shine so bright in the day in some place , that they can behold they , and therefore they travel unto they by night . also corslet of cotton , which the Spaniard call Zecopitz , be necessary to be have against the arrow of the savage . he say far , that a tun of the sassafras of Florida be sell in Spain for sixty ducat : and that they have there great store of turquoise cock , of bean , of peason , and that there be great store of pearl . the thing , as he report , that the floridians make most account of , be red cloth , or red cotton to make baldric or girdle : copper , and hatchet to cut withal . the Spaniard have all demand leave at their own cost , to discover these mountain , which the king deny , for fear lest the english or French will enter into the same action , once know . all the Spaniard will pass up by the river of saint Helena unto the mountain of gold and crystal . the Spaniard enter 50. league up saint Helena , find Indian wear gold ring at their nostril and ear . they find also ox , but less than we . six league from saint Helena towards the north , there be a point that run far into the sea , which be the mark to the seaman to find saint Helena and Waterin . Waterin be a river forty league distant northward from saint Helena , where any fleet of great ship may ride safe . i take this river to be that which we call waren in Virginia , whither at Christmas last 1585. the Spaniard send a bark with forty man to discover where we be seat : in which bark be Nicholas Burgoignon the reporter of all these thing . 114 the Spaniard of S. Augustine have slay three hundred of the subject of Potanou . one Potassi be neighbour to Potanou . Oratina be he which the french history call Olata Outina . Calauai be another cacique which they know . sundry voyage make from Nueva Galicia , and Nueva Viscaia in new Spain , to the 15. province of new Mexico , and to Quivira and Cibola , all situate on the backside of Guastecan , Florida , and Virginia , as far as 37. degree of northerly latitude : with a description of the river , lake , city , town , nation , fertile soil , and temperate air in those part ; and most certain notice of many exceed rich silver mine , and other principali commodity . 