Laudonnieres a JY friend , you know the cause why our king send ' muthtw oul we unto country ; you know that he be our jurs ’ natural prince , who we be bind to obey accord to the commandment of God , in such sort , that we ought neither to spare our good nor life to do those thing that concern his service : you know , or at least you can be ignorant , that beside this general and natural obligation , you have this also join thereunto , that in receive of he reasonable pay and wage , you be bind to follow those who he have establish over you to be your governor , and to command you in his name , have for this purpose give he a oath of fidelity , which you can by any mean revoke for any fair appearance which you have to do the contrary : for this be reason , that see you live upon his charge on this condition , ( this be reason i say ) that you shall be faithful unto he . notwithstanding you have have more regard unto your unbridle affection then unto virtue , which invite you to the observance of your oath , in such sort that be become contemners of all honesty , you have pass your bond , and think that all thing be lawful for you . whereupon it be fall out , that while you think to escape the justice of man , you can not avoid the judgement of God , which as a thing by no mean to be avoid have lead you , and in spite of you have make you to arrive in this place , to make you confess 46 how true his judgement be , and that he never suffer so foul a fault to escape unpunished . after that i have use unto they these or the like speech , follow that which we have agree upon in council , in respect of the crime which they have commit , aswell against the king majesty as against i which be their captain , i command that they shall be hang . see therefore that there be no start hole , nor mean at all to save themselves from this arrest , they take themselves unto their prayer : yet one of the four , think to raise a mutiny among my soldier , say thus unto they : what , brethren and companion , will you suffer we to die so shameful ? And take the word out of his mouth , i say unto he , that they be not companion of author of sedition and rebel unto the king service . hereupon the soldier beseech i not to hang they , but rather let they be shoot through , and then afterward , if i think good , their body may be hang upon certain gibbet along the haven mouth : which i cause present to be put in execution . Loe here what be the end of my mutinous soldier , without which i have always live peaceable , and enjoy the good desire which i have to make a happy and quiet voyage . but because 1 have speak of nothing but their accident and adventure which happen unto they after their departure , without make any mention of our fort , i will return to the matter from which i digress , to declare that which fall out after their departure . first i begin to consider to the end i may confirm and make my self more constant in my affliction , that these murmurer can not ground their sedition upon want of victual : for from the time of our arrival , every soldier daily unto this day , and beside until the eight and twenty of February , have a loaf of bread weigh two and twenty ounce . again i recount with my self that all new conquest by sea or by land be ordinary trouble with rebellion , which be A.D. 1565. the sentence of death . execution . [ Iii . 337 - ] the continuation of the history . new conquest subject to re - . , . r „ . r , - - bellionsand easy to be raise , aswell ! in respect or the distance of mutiny . place , as in respect of the hope that the soldier have to make their profit , as we may be well inform both by ancient history and also by the trouble which late happen unto Christopher Columbus , after his first discovery , to Francis Pizarro , and Diego de Almagro in Peru , and to Fernando Cortes . a hundred thousand other thing come unto my mind , to encourage and confirm i . my lieutenant Ottigny , and my sergeant of my band come to seek i in the ship , where i be prisoner , and carry i from thence in a bark assoon Laudonniere as our rebel be depart . after i be come unto set thing the fort , i cause all my company that remain , to be ismurne^ut assemble in the midst of the place before the corpse de of prison to the guard , and declare unto they the fault which they fort . that have forsake we have commit , pray they to bear they in memory , to bear witness thereof when need shall require . forthwith i ordain new captain to command the troop ; and prescribe they a order , accord whereunto they be to govern themselves from thence forward , and to enter into their watch : for the great part of the soldier , of who i have the best opinion , be go away with they . my declaration end , they promise i all with one accord to obey i most humble , and to do whatsoever i shall command they , though it be to die at my foot for the king service ; wherein assure they never after fail : so that i dare say , after the departure of my mutinous companion i be as well obey as ever be captain in place where he command . the next day after my return unto the fort , i assemble my man together again , to declare unto they that our fort be not yet finish , and that it be needful that all of we shall put thereto our help hand , to assure our self against the Indian : wherein have willing agree unto i , they raise 0 it all with turf from the gate unto the river which be the Westside on the west side - this do , i set my carpenter on of the fort . work to make another bark of the same bigness that Fcuiddus mtadcus num Laudzonerus aide s' Florida , repnorunt conprendzc ^dmerica quar nunc ( jduid minimum cvius Francis dirt eat ydbadtumy . ' ferfida quern si non sociorum turpiter ho's'ti cedcdio prodp^ec ( cvius tamen , omnibus vltis , Flapsus maxibus ) quas , qualia . , quantapatraflem t Rene Laudonniere the other be of : i command the Sawyers that they shall prepare plank , the smith to prepare iron and nail , and certain other to make coal : so that the bark be finish in eighteen day . afterwards i make another lesser than the first , the better to discover up the river . in this mean space the Indian visit i , and bring i daily certain present , as fish , deer , turki-cock , leopard , little bear , and other thing accord to the place of their habitation . i recompense they with certain hatchet , knife , bead of glass , comb , and looking-glass . two Indian come unto i one day to salute i on the behalf of their king , who name be Marracou , kingmarra-dwelling from the place of our fort some forty league cou . towards the south , and tell i that there be one in the house of king Onathaqua which be call Barbu king onatha-or the beard man , and in the house of king 9^ Mathiaca another man who name they know not , which be not of their nation : whereupon i conceive ' that these may be some Christians . wherefore i send to all the king my neighbour to pray they , that if there be any Christian dwell in their country , they will find mean that he may be bring unto i , and that i will make they double recompense . they which love reward , take so much pain , that twa span-the two man , whereof we have speak , be bring yard bring unto the fort unto i . they be naked , their hair long unto their ham as the use to do , and be Spaniard bear , yet accustom to the fashion of the country the first sight they find our manner of strange . after that i have question of matter with they , i cause they to be apparel , and to cut their hair ; which they will not loose , but lap it up in a linen cloth , say that they will carry it into their country to be a testimony of the misery that they have endure in the Indies . in the hair of one of they be find a little gold hide , to ix 49 d unto Laudonniere by the savage . wear Savages so well that at apparel certain Calos a place upon you flat call the martyr near the cape of Florida . the king of Calos . great quantity ofgolde and silver . [ HL 338. ] plate of g > ld as broad as a savicer . the english voyage the value of five and twenty crown , which he give unto i . And examine they of the place where they have be , and how they come thither , they answer i that fifteen year past , three ship , in one of which they be , be cast away over against a place name Calos upon the flat which be call the martyr , and that the king of Calos recover the great part of the riches which be in the say ship , travel in such sort that the great part of the people be save , and many woman ; among which number there be three or four woman marry , remain there yet , and their child also , with this king of Calos . i desire to learn what this king be . they answer i , that he be the goodly and the tall Indian of the country , a mighty man , a warrior , and have many subject under his obedience . they tell i moreover , that he have great store of gold and silver , so far forth that in a certain village he have a pit full thereof , which be at the least as high as a man , and as large as a ton : all which wealth the Spaniard full persuade themselves that they can cause i to recover , if i be able to march thither with a hundred shot , beside that which i may get of the common people of the country , which have also great store thereof . they further also advertise i , that the woman go to dance , do wear about their girdle plate of gold as broad as a saucer , and in such number ; that the weight do hinder they to dance at their ease ; and that the man wear the like also . the great part of these riches be have , as they say , out of the spanish ship , which common be cast away in this straight ; and the rest by the traffic which this king of Calos have with the other king of the country : final , that he be have in great reverence of his subject ; and that he make they believe that his sorcery and charm be the cause that make the earth bring forth her fruit : and that he may the easy persuade they that it be so , he retire himself once or twice a year to a certain house , accompany with two or three of his most familiar friend , where he use certain enchantment ; and if any man intrude himself to go to see what they do in this place , the king immediate cause he to be put to death . Moreover , they tell i , that one of these every year in the time of harvest^ this savage king Spaniard sacrifice one man , which be keep express for this n^^at purpose , and take out of the number of the Spaniard qomes-which by tempest be cast away upon that coast . one of these two declare unto i , that he have serve he a long time for a messenger ; and that often time by his commandment he have visit a king name Oathcaqua , distant from Calos four or king oath-five day journey , which always remain his faithful friend : but that in the midway there be a island houat ca-situate in a great lake of fresh water , name sarrope , sampe an about five league in bigness , abound with many island . sort of fruit , special in date , which grow on the abundance of palm tree , whereof they make a wonder traffic ; date . yet not so great as of a kind of root , whereof they a root of great make a kind of meal , so good to make bread of , t0 that it be unpossible to eat better , and that for fifteen brea league about , all the country be feed therewith : which be the cause that the inhabitant of the isle gain of their neighbour great wealth and profit : for they will not depart with this root without they be well pay for it . beside that , they be take for the most warlike man of all that country , as they make good proof when the king of Calos , have make alliance with Oathcaqua , be deprive of oathcaquaes daughter , which he have promise to he in manage . he tell i the whole matter in this sort : as Oathcaqua well accompany with his people carry one of his daughter , exceed beautiful , accord to the colour of the country , unto king Calos , to give she unto he for his wife , the inhabitant of this isle advertise of the matter , lay a ambush for he in a place where he shall pass , and so behave themselves , that Oathcaqua the g-eat victory among the floridians . the situation of Calos . cannaveral in 28 degree . the floridians great traitor and dissembler . the english voyage be discomfit , the betroth young spouse take , and all the damosel that accompany she ; which they carry unto their isle ; which thing in all the Indian country they esteem to be the great victory : for afterward they marry these virgin , and love they above all measure . the Spaniard that make this relation , tell i that after this defeat he go to dwell with oathcaqua , and have be with he full eight year , even until the time that he be send unto i . the place of Calos be situate upon a river which be beyond the cape of Florida , forty or fifty league towards the southwest : and the dwell of Oathcaqua be on this side the cape towards the north , in a place which we call in the chart cannaveral , which be in 28 degree . about the five and twenty of January Paracoussy Satourioua my neighbour send i certain present by two of his subject , to persuade i to join with he , and to make war upon ouae utina which be my friend : and further beseech i to retire certain of my man which be with utina ; for who if it have not be , he have often time set upon he , and defeat he . he beseech i herein by diverse other king his ally , which for three week or a month space send messenger unto i to this end and purpose : but i will not grant unto they that they shall make war upon he ; yea rather contrariwise i endeavour to make they friend ; wherein they condescend unto i , so far forth that they be content to allow of any thing that i will set down : whereupon the two Spaniard which of long time know well the nature of the Indian , warn i that in any case i shall not trust unto they , because that when they show good countenance and the best cheer unto man , then be the time that they will surprise and betray they ; and that of their nature they be the great traitor and most deep dissembler of the world . beside i never trust they but upon good ground , as one that have discover a thousand of their craft and subtlety , aswell by experience as by read of the history of late year . Oure two bark be not so soon finish , but i send captain Vasseur to discover along the coast lie towards the north , and command he to sail unto a river , the king whereof be call Audusta , which be lord of that place , where those of the year 1562 inhabit . i send he two suit of apparel , with certain hatchet , knife , and other small trifle , the better to insinuate my [ three . 339. ] self into his friendship . and the better to win he , i send in the bark with captain Vasseur a soldier call Aimon , which be one of they which return home in the first voyage , hope that king Audusta may remember he . but before they be embark i command they to make inquiry what be become of another call Rouffi , which remain alone in those part when Nicolas Masson and those of the first voyage embark themselves to return into France . they understand at their arrival there , that a bark pass that way have carry away the same soldier : and afterward i know for a certainty that they be Spaniards which have carry he to Havana . the king Audusta send i back my bark full of mill , with a certain quantity of bean , two stag , some skin paint after their manner , and certain pearl of small value , because they be burn : and send i word that if i will dwell in his quarter , he will give i a great country : and that after he have gather his mill , he will spare i as much as i will have . in the mean while there come unto our fort a flock of stock-dove in so great number , and that for the space of seven week together , that every day we kill with harquebus shoot two hundred in the wood about our fort . after that captain Vasseur ' Nicolas Masson otherwise call Nicolas bar . king a adustas great humanity . pearl burn . Peter martyr write the cap . I. decade . 7. that the like flock of pigeon be in the isle oj be return , i cause the two bark to be furnish ikeLucayos . again with soldier and mariner , and send they to carry a present from i unto the widow of king Hiocaia , who dwelling be distant from our fort about twelve league northward . she courteous receive our man , send i back my bark full of mill and acorn with 53 the widow of king hioa-caia , or hihou-hacara . certain basket full of the leaf of Cassine , wherewith they make their drink . and the place where this widow dwell be the most plentiful of mill that be in this queen all the coast , and the most pleasant . it be think that name be Nia the queen be the most beautiful of all the Indian , and Cubacam . off they make most account : yea , and her subject honour she so much , that almost continual they bear she on their shoulder , and will not suffer she to go on foot . within a few day after the return of my bark , she send to visit i by her hiatiqui , which be as much thefift voyage to say , as her interpreter . now while i think i be up the river furnish with victual until the time that our ship of may . may come out of France ( for fear of keep my people idle ) i send my two bark to discover along the river , and up towards the head thereof , which go so far up that they be thirty league good beyond a Mathiaqua . place name Mathiaqua , and there they discover they the discovery entrance of a lake , upon the one side whereof no land can be see , accord to the report of the Indian , ride °whererf6 which have oftentimes climb on the high tree in no land can be the country to see land , and notwithstanding can not see . discern any : which be the cause that my man go no further , but return back ; and in come home the isle of go to see the island of Edelano situate in the midst Edelano . of the river , as fair a place as any that may be see through the world : for in the space of some three league , that it may contain in length and breadth , a man may see a exceed rich country , and marvellous people . at the come out of the village of Edelano to go unto the river side a man must pass through a alley about three hundred pace long and fifty pace broad : on both side whereof great tres be plant , the bough a excellent whereof be tie together like a arch , and meet together work of so artificial that a man will think it be a arbour nature . make of purpose , as fair i say , as any in all Christendom , although it be altogether natural . our man depart patica ' . from this p^ace row to eneguape , than to chily , from Coya . thence to patica , and last they come unto Coya : where leave their bark in a little creek of the river with man to guard they , they go to visit utina , which receive they very courteous : and when they depart from his house , he entreat they so earnest , that six of my man remain with he ; of which number there be one gentleman , name groutaid , which after he have abode there about two month , and take great pain to discover the country , with another which i have leave a great while there to that intent , come unto i to the fort , and tell i that he never see a fair country . among other thing , he report unto i that he have see a place name Hostaqua , and that the king thereof be so mighty , that he be able to bring three or four thousand savage to the field ; with who if i will join and enter into league , we may be able to reduce all the rest of the inhabitant unto our obedience : beside that this king know the passage unto the mountain of Apalatci , which the french man desire so great to attain unto , and where the enemy of Hostaqua make his abode ; which be easy to be subdue , if so be we will enter into league together . this king send i a plate of a minerail that come out of this mountain , out of the foot whereof there run a stream of gold or copper , as the savage think , out of which they dig up the sand with a hollow and dry cane of reed until the cane be full ; afterward they shake it , and find that there be many small grain of copper and silver among this sand : which give they to understand , that some rich i must needs be in the mountain . and because the king of Hostaqua or Oustaca able to bring three or four thousand savage to the field . the mountain of Apalatci . there be a mine of gold or rich cope in the mountain of Apalatci . the mountain be not pass five or six day journey from our fort , lie towards the northwest , i determine assoon as our supply shall come out of France , to [ three . 340. ] remove our habitation unto some river more towards the north , that i may be near thereunto . one of my soldier who name be Peter Gamby , which have Peter Gamby remain a long space before in this country to learn the language and traffic with the Indian , at the last the mlage come to the village of Edelano , where have get Edelano . gold wonderful together a certain quantity of gold and silver , and silver . purpose to return unto i , he pray the king of the village to lend he a canoa ( which be a vessel ! make of one whole piece of wood , which the Indian use to fish withal , and to row upon the river ) which this lord of Edelano grant he . 6ut be greedy of the riches which he have , he command two Indian , which he have charge to conduct he in the canoa , to murder he and bring he the merchandise and the gold which he have . which the two traitor villanous execute : for they knock he on the head with a hatchet , as he be blow of the fire in the canoa to seethe fish . utina send the Paracoussy utina send certain day afterward , to pray i to lend a dozen or fifteen of my shot , to jor be pe . jnvaje g enemy Potanou , and send i word , that this enemy once vanquish , he will make i passage , yea , and will conduct i unto the mountain in such sort , that no man shall be able to hinder i . than i assemble my man to demand their advice , as i be a good note , wont to do in all my enterprise . the great part be of opinion , that i shall do well to send succour unto this Paracoussy , because it will be hard for i to discover any further up into the country without his help : and that the Spaniard when they be employ in their conquest , do always enter into alliance with some one king to ruin another . notwithstanding , because i do always mistrust the Indian , and that the more after the last advertisement that the Spaniard have give i , i doubt lest the small number which utina demand may incur some danger ; wherefore i send he thirty shot under the charge of my lieutenant Ottigny , which stay not above two day with utina , while he prepare victual for his voyage , which ordinary and accord to the custom of the country be carry by woman and young boy , and by hermaphrodite . threehundr utina set forward with three hundred of his subject , Indian . have each of they their bow and quiver full of arrow , cause our thirty shot to be place in the foreward , and 56 1565-made they march all the day , until that the night approach , and have not go past half the way , they be enforce to lie all night in the wood , near a great lake , and there to encamp themselves : they separate themselves by six and six , make each of they a fire about the place where their king lie , for who guard they ordain a certain number of those archer , in who he put most confidence . assoon as day be come , the camp of the Indian march within three league of Potanou : there king utina request my lieutenant to grant he four or five of his man to go and discover the country ; which depart immediately , and have not go far , but they perceive upon a lake , distant about three league from the village of a lake three Potanou , three Indian which fish in a canoa . now league distant the custom be that when they fish in this lake , they / w‘ have always a company of watchman , arm with bow potanou . and arrow to guard the fisher . our man be hereof advertise by those of the company , dare not pass any further , for fear of fall into some ambush : wherefore they return towards utina , which sudden send they back with a great company to surprise the fisher , before they may retire and advertise their king Potanou of the come of his enemy . which they can not execute so politic , but that two of they escape ; the three also do the best he can to save himself by swim , in which mean while he be stay with shot of arrow , and they draw he stark dead unto the bank side , where our Indian flay off the skin of his head , cut off both his arm in the high way , reserve his hair for the triumph , which their king hope to make for the defeat of his enemy . utina fear least Potanou advertise by the fisher which be escape , shall put himself in arm to withstand he valiant , ask counsel of his Jawa , which be as to say in their language as his magician , whether it be best to go any further . than his magician . magician make certain sign , hideous and fearful to behold , and use certain word ; which be end , he say unto his king , that it be not best to pass Potanou accom - any further , and that Potanou accompany with two pany with thousand Indian at the least stay in such and such Tndians^ a p^ace or to bid he battle : and beside this , ' that all the say Indian be furnish with cord to bind the prisoner which they make full account to take . this relation cause utina to be unwilling to pass any further : whereupon my lieutenant be as angry as ever he may be , because he have take so great pain without do of any thing of account , say unto he , that he will never think well of he nor of his people , if he will not hazard himself : and that if he will not do it , at the least , that he will give he a guide to conduct he and his small company to the the prediction place where the enemy be encamp . hereupon of the ma - utina be ashamed , and see the good affection of monsieur de Ottigny determine to go forward : and ' he fail not to find his enemy in the very place [ three . 341. ] which the magician have name : where the skirmish begin , which last three long hour : wherein without doubt utina have be defeat , unless our harquebusiers have not bear the burden and brunt of all the battle , and slay a great number of the soldier of Potanou , upon which occasion they be put to flight . wherewithal ! utina be content for the present , cause his people to retire and return homeward to the great discontentment of monsieur de Ottigny , which desire utina have 18 nothing more , than to pursue his victory . after he or 20 ktngt to be come home to his house he send messenger to his vassal . eighteen or twenty village of other king his vassal , and summon they to be present at the feast and dance which he purpose to celebrate because of his victory . in the mean while monsieur de Ottigny refresh himself for two day : and then take his leave of the Paracoussi , and leave he twelve of his man to see that Potanou , bethink himself of his late loss 58 shall not come to burn the house of utina , he set forward on his way to come unto i unto our fort , where he up and tell i how every thing have pass : and withal that he have promise the twelve soldier , that he will come back again to fetch they . then the king my neighbour all enemy to utina , be advertise of the return of my lieutenant , come to visit i with present and to inquire how thing have pass , pray i all to receive they into my favour , and to become enemy to utina , which notwithstanding i will not grant they for many reason that move i . the Indian be wont to leave their house and to retire themselves into the wood the space of three month , to wit January , February , and march : during which time by no mean a man can see one Indian . for when they go on hunt , they make little cottage in the wood , whereunto they retire themselves , live upon that which they take in hunt . this be the cause that during this time , we can get no victual by their mean : and have it not be that i have make good provision thereof , while my man have store , until the end of April ( which be the time when at the uttermost , we hope to have have succour out of France ) i shall have be great amaze . this hope be the cause that the soldier take no great care to look well unto their victual , although i divide equal among they that which i can get abroad in the country , without reserve unto my self any more than the least soldier of all the company . the month of May approach and no manner of succour come out of France , we fall into extreme want of victual , constrain to eat the root of the earth and certain sorrel which we find in the field . for although the savage be return by this time unto their village , yet they succour we with nothing but certain fish , without which assure we have perish with famine . beside they have give we before the great part of their maiz and of their bean for our merchandise . this famine hold we from the beginning 59 at custom of the Indian to leave their house for 3 or 4 month and to live in the wood . they look for succour out of France by the end of April at the uttermost . extreme famine for six week space . promise break . the english voyage of May until the midst of June . during which time the poor soldier and handicrafts-man become as feeble as may be , and be not able to work do nothing but go one after another in centinel unto the clift of a hill , situate very near unto the fort , to see if they may discover any french ship . in fine be frustrate of their hope , they assemble altogether , and come to beseech i to take some order that they may return into France , consider that if we let pass the season to embark our self , we be never like to see our country , where it can not be choose but that some trouble be fall out , see they have break their promise make unto we , and that no succour be come from thence . thereupon it be consult and resolve by all the company , that the bark Breton shall be trim up , whereof captain Vasseur have charge . but because the ship be not big enough to receive we all , some think good to build the brigandine two deck high , which our mutinous soldier have bring back , and that 25 man shall hazard themselves to pass therein into France . the rest be better advise say that it shall be far better to build a fair ship upon the keel of the galiote which i have cause to be make , promise to labour courageous thereupon . than i inquire of my shipwright to know in what space they can make this ship ready . they assure the whole company that be furnish with all thing necessary , they will make it ready by the 8. of August . immediate i dispose of the time to work upon it , i give charge to monsieur de Ottigny my lieutenant to cause timber necessary for the finish of both the vessel to be bring , and to monsieur de Arlac my standart-bearer to go with a bark a league ofif from the fort to cut down tree fit to make plank , and to cause the sawier which he carry with he to saw they : and to my sergeant of the company to cause fifteen or sixteen man to labour in make coal : and to master hance keeper of the artillery , and to the gunner to gather 1565. store of rosin to bray the vessel : wherein he use such diligence , that in less than 3 week he gather 2 hog - two hogshead head of the same together . there remain now but °frosen-the principal , which be to recover victual to sustain we while our work endure : which i undertake to do with you rest of my company and the mariner of the ship . to this end i embark my self make up the thirty [ hl 34.2 . ] in my great bark , to make a voyage of forty or fifty league , have with we no provision at all of victual : whereby it may easy be gather how simple those of our fort be provide . true it be that certain soldier be better husband than the rest , and have make some provision of mast , sell a little measure thereof for fifteen and twenty sou unto their companion . during our voyage we live of nothing else but raspice , of a certain round grain little and black , and of the root of palmito which we get by the river side : wherein after we have sail a long time in vain , i be constrain to return to the fort : where the soldier beginning to be weary of work , because of the extreme famine which do consume they , assemble themselves and declare unto i , that see we can get no victual of the Indian , it be expedient for the save of their life , to seize upon the person of one of the king of the country : assure themselves that one be take , the subject will not suffer our man to want victual . i make they answer that this enterprise be not rash to be attempt : but that we ought to have good regard unto the consequence that may ensue thereof . hereupon they reply unto i , that see the time be pass of our succour from France , and that we be resolve to abandon the country , that there be no danger to constrain the savage to furnish we with victual : which for the present t will not grant unto they , but promise they assure that i will send to advertise the Indian that they shall bring i victual for exchange of merchandise and apparel : which they also do for the space of certain day , during which pinocke a certain kind of fruit as big as cherry . the english voyage they bring of their mast and of their fish : which these Indian be traitorous , and mischievous of nature , and know our exceed strange famine , sell we at so dear a price , that for less than nothing they have get from we all the rest of our merchandise which remain ; . and which be worse , fear to be force by we and see that they have get all from we , they come no near to our fort then the shot of a harquebus . thither they bring their fish in their little boat , to which our poor soldier be constrain to go , and oftentimes ( as i have see ) to give away the very shirt from their back to get one fish . if at any time they show unto the savage the excessive price which they take , these villain will answer they rough and churlish : if thou make so great account of thy merchandise , eat it , and we will eat our fish : then fall they out a laugh and mock they with open throat . whereupon our soldier utter impatient , be oftentimes ready to cut they in piece , and to make they pay the price of their foolish arrogancy . notwithstanding consider the importance hereof , i take pain to appease the impatient soldier : for i will not by any mean enter into question with the savage , and it suffice i to delay the time . wherefore i devise to send unto utina to pray he to deal so far forth with his subject , as to succour i with mast and maiz : which he do very spare , send i 12 or 15 basket of mast , and two of pinock , which be a kind of little green fruit which grow among the weed in the river , and be as big as cherry : yea , and this be not but by give of they in exchange twice as much merchandise and apparel as they be worth . for the subject of utina perceive evident the necessity wherein we be , and begin to use the like speech unto we , as the other do : as it be common see that need alter man affection . while these thing be in do , a certain breathe space present it self for utina give i to understand that there be a king his 1565. subject who name be Astina , which he determine Astina a king . to take prisoner , and to chastise he for his disobedience : that for this cause , if i will give he aid with a certain number of my soldier , he will bring they to the village of Astina , where there be mean to recover mast and maiz . in the mean season he excuse himself unto i because he have send i no more maiz , and send i word that the little store that he have leave , be scarce sufficient for his seed-corn . now be somewhat relieve , as i think , by the hope which i have of this offer , i will not fade to send he the man which he desire of i , which nevertheless be very evil entreat : for he deceive they , and in stead of lead they against Astina , he cause they to march against his other enemy . my lieutenant which have the charge of this enterprise with captain Vasseur and my sergeant be determine to be revenge of utina and to cut he in piece 8c his people : and have it not be that they fear to do any thing against my will , without all doubt they will have put their enterprise in execution . therefore they will not pass any further without advertise i thereof . wherefore be come back again unto the fort , angry 8c prick deep to the quick for be so mock , they make their complaint unto i , declare unto i that they be almost dead for hunger . they tell the whole matter to the rest of the soldier , which be very glad that they have not enter into that action , 8c resolve , assemble themselves again together , to let i understand that they do persist in their first deliberation , which be , to punish the boldness and maliciousness of the savage , which they can no long endure , 8c be determine to take one of their king prisoner : which thing i be enforce to grant unto they , to you end to avoid a great mischief , and the sedition which i foresee [ in . 343. ] will ensue , if i have make refusal thereof . for , say they , what occasion have you to deny we , consider the necessity wherein we be , and the small account that they make of we . shall it not be lawful for we to punish they for the wrong which they do unto we , beside that we know apparent how little they respect we ? be not this sufficient although there be no necessity at all , since they thus delude we , and have break promise with we ? after i have therefore resolve with they to seize on the person of utina , which beside that he have give we occasion hereof , be also most able to help we to recover victual , i depart with fifty of my best soldier all embark in two bark and we arrive in the dominion of utina , distant from our fort about 40 or 50 league : then go on shore we draw towards his village situate 6 great utina take league from the river , where we take he prisoner , prisoner in his howbeit not without great cry and alarm , and lead r^mniere away our bark , have first signify unto and 50 of he be father in law and his chief subject , that in that soldier . i have take he , it be not for any desire that i have to do he any harm , but only to relieve my necessity and want of victual which oppress i , and that in case they will help i to some , i will find mean to set he again at liberty : that in the mean space i will retire my self into my bark ( for i fear lest they will there assemble themselves together , and that some mischief may thereof ensue ) where i will stay for he two day to receive his answer : notwithstanding that my meaning be not to have any thing without exchange of merchandise . this they promise they will do . and in very deed the very same evening , his wife accompany with all the woman of the village come unto the river brink , and cry unto i to enter into the bark , to see her husband and her son , which i hold both prisoner . i discover the next five os - six day five or six hundred Indian archer , which draw hundred in - near unto the river side , and come to i to dian - signify unto i how that during the absence of their king , their enemy Potanou , be thereof advertise , 64 1565. be enter into their village , and have set all on fire . they pray i that i will succour they : never - the deep dis-thelesse in the mean while they have one part of their troop in ambush , with intent to set upon i if i ln , ans‘ have come on land , which be easy for i to discern . for see that i refuse so to do , they great doubt that they be discover , and seek by all mean to remove out of my mind that evil opinion which i have conceive of they . they bring i therefore fish in their little boat and of their meal of mast , they make also of their drink which they call cassine , which they send to utina and i . now albeit i have get this point of they that i hold their king prisoner , yet nevertheless i can not get any great quantity of victual for the present : the reason be , because they think that after i have draw victual from they , i will put their king to death . for they measure my will accord to their custom , the Indian whereby they put to death all the man prisoner that hillalltheman they take in war . and thus be out of all hope of his liberty , they assemble themselves in the great house , war . and have call all the people together they propose the election of a new king , at which time the father the election in law of utina set one of the king young son ofa king . upon the royal throne : and take such pain that every man do he homage by the major part of the voice . this election have like to have be the cause of great trouble among they . for there be a kinsman of the king near adjoin , which pretend a title to the kingdom , and in deed he have get one part of the subject : notwithstanding this enterprise can not take effect , forasmuch as by a common consent of the chief , it be consult and conclude , that the son be more meet to succeed the father then any other . now all this while i keep utina with i , to who i have give some of my apparel to clothe he , as i have likewise do unto his son . but his subject which before have a opinion that i will have kill he , ix 65 e the hatred among the savage king of Florida . note . [ HL 344 ] note . Rootes . Esquine . the english voyage be advertise of the good entertainment which i use towards he , send two man which walk along the river , and come to visit he , and bring we some victual . Theise two man at their come be receive by i with all courtesy , and entertain accord to the victual which i have . while these thing thus pass , there arrive from all quarter many savage of the country adjoin , which come to see utina , and seek by all mean to persuade i to put he to death , offer that if i will do so , they will take order that 1 shall want no victual . there be also a king my neighbour who name be Saturioua , a subtle and crafty man , and one that show by proof that he be great practise in affair . the king send ordinary messenger unto i , to pray i to deliver utina unto he : and to win i the more easy , he send twice seven or eight basket of Maiz or of mast , think by this way to allure i , and to make i come to composition with he : in the end notwithstanding when he see he lose his time , he cease to visit i with ambassage and victual : 8c in the mean while i be not able with you same store of victual which i have , so well to proportion out the travail upon the ship which we build to return into France , but that in the end we be constrain to endure extreme famine , which continue among we all the month of May : for in this latter season , neither Maiz nor bean , nor mast be to be find in the village , because they have employ all for to sow their field , insomuch that we be constrain to eat root , which the most part of our man pun in the mortar which i have bring with i to beat gunnepowder in , and the grain which come to we from other place : some take the wood of Esquine , beat it , and make meal thereof , which they boil with water , and eat it : other go with their harquebus to seek to kill some foul . yea this misery be so great , that one be find that gather up among the filth of my house , all the fish bone that he can find , which he dry and beat into powder to make bread thereof . the effect of this hideous famine appear incontinent among we , for our bone eftsoon begin to cleave so near unto the skin , that the most part of the soldier have their skin peirce through with they in many part of their body : in such sort that my great fear be , lest the Indian will rise up against we , consider that it will have be very hard for we to have defend our self in such extreme decay of all our force , beside the scarcity of all victual , which fail we all at once . for the very river have not such plenty of fish as it be wont , and it seem that the land and water do fight against we . now as we be thus upon term of despair , about the end of the month of May , and the begin of June , i be new corn by advertise by certain Indian that be my neigh - en^ °f hour , that in the high country up above the river , there be new Maiz , and that that country be most ' forward of all . This cause i to take upon i to go thither with a certain number of my man , and i go up the river to a place call Enecaque : where i meet the village of the sister of utina in a village where she make we very Enecaque . good cheer and send we fish . we find that which be tell we to be true : for the maiz be now ripe : but by this good luck one shrewd turn happen unto i . for the most part of my soldier fall sick with eat moor of it then their weaken stomach can digest . we have also be the space of four day since we depart from our fort , without eat any thing , save little pinocke , and a little fish , which we a little green get of the fisher which we meet sometime along the fruit that river . and yet this be so little that certain soldier eat privy little whelp which be new whelp , cherry the next day i purpose to go into you lie of Edelano than he of to take the king which have cause one of my man to Edelano . be slay , as i have mention before : but be advertise of my depart out of my fort , and of the way which i take up the river , he fear that i go forth two carpen-ten killedfor gather the Indian maiz . the village athore . Nia Cubacani a queen . the english voyage with a purpose to be revenge of the evil turn which he play : so that when i come thither , i find the house empty , for he be retire a little before with all his people : and i can not by any mean keep my soldier , be angry because they have lose one of their companion , from set the village on fire . at my departure from thence i pass back again by Enecaque , where i gather as much maiz as i can possible : which with great diligence i convey to our fort to succour my poor man , which i have leave in great necessity . they therefore see i a far off come , run to that side of the river where they think i will come on land : for hunger so pinch they to the heart , that they can not stay until the victual be bring they to the fort and that they well show assoon as i be come , and that i have distribute that little maiz among they , which i have give to each man , before i come out of the bark : for they eat it before they have take it out of the husk . but see my self in this extreme need , i take pain day by day to seek some village where there be some food . and as i travail this way and that way , it happen that two of my carpenter be kill by the two son of king Emola , and by one who name be Casti , as they go on walk to the village call athore . the cause of this murder be , because they can not refrain themselves as they walk through the field from gather a little maiz , which as they be do , they be take in the manner : whereof i be present advertise by a Indian which a little before have bring i a present from Nia Cubacani queen of a village , and neighbour to our fort upon receipt of this advertisement , i send my sergeant with a number of soldier which find nothing else but the 2 dead corpse , which they bury and return without do any other exploit , because the inhabitant be flee away , fear they shall be punish for such a foul fact . as these thing thus pass , and that by this time we have almost drive out the month of May , two subject of king utina come unto i with a hermaphrodite , which show i that by this time the maiz be ripe in the great part of their quarter . whereupon utina signify unto i that in case i will carry he home to his house , he will take such good order that i shall have plenty of maiz and bean : and withal , that the field which he have cause to be sow for i , shall be reserve to my use . i consult with my man concern this matter , and find by the advice of all my company , that it be best to grant he his request , say , that he have mean to succour we with food sufficient to serve our turn for [ three . 34.5 . ] our embarkement , and that therefore i may do well to carry he home . wherefore i cause the two bark forthwith to be make ready , wherein i sail to Patica , a patica a place distant from his village 8 or 9 league , where i village . find no body , for they be get into the wood , and will not show themselves , albeit utina show himself unto they , for as much as they imagine that i shall be constrain to let he go . but see no body to show themselves , i be constrain to hazard one of my man which have be acquaint with the state of the country , to who i deliver the young son of utina , and command he to go with diligence to the village of utina , unto his father in law and his wife , to advertise they that if they will have their king again , they shall bring i victual unto the side of the little river whither i be go . at my man come every one make much of the little child , neither be there a man that think not himself well appaide to touch he . his father in law and his wife hear of these news come present towards our bark , and bring bread which they give unto my soldier , they hold i there three day , and in the mean while do all that they can to take i : which present i discover , and therefore stand diligent upon my guard . wherefore perceive they can not have their purpose , and that they be already desire of revenge root in the savage . the english voyage discover , they send to advertise i that as yet they can not help i to victual , and that the corn be not yet ripe . thus i be constrain to return and to carry back utina home , where i have much ado to save he from the rage of my soldier : which perceive the maliciousness of the Indian , go about to have murder he . Moreover it seem they be content that they have get the son , and that they care not great for the father . now my hope fail i on this side , i devise to send my man to the village where i think the maiz be by this time ripe ; i go to diverse place , and continue so do 15 day after , when as utina beseech i again to send he unto his village , assure himself that his subject will not stick to give i victual : and that in case they refuse so to do , he be content that i shall do what i think good with he . i undertake this voyage the second time with the two bark furnish as before . at my come unto the little river , we find his subject there , which fail not to come thither with some quantity of bread , bean , and fish , to give my soldier . nevertheless return again to their former practice they seek all mean to entrap i , hope to cry quittance for the imprisonment of their king , if they may have get the victory of i . but after that they see the small mean , which they have to annoy i , they return to entreaty , and offer that if i will give they their king with certain of my soldier , they will conduct they unto the village , and that the subject see he , will be more willing to give we victual . which thing notwithstanding i will not grant unto they ( mistrust their subtility , which be not so covert , but that one may espy day at a little hole ) until they have first give i two man in pledge with charge that by the next day they shall bring i victual . which thing they grant , and give i two man which i put in chain for fear they shall escape away , as i know well they be instruct to do . four day be spend in these conference , at the end whereof they declare unto i , that they can not full and whole perform their promise : and that the uttermost that they can do for the present , be to cause each subject to bring his burden of mill . to conclude , they be content to do so on condition that i will send they their two pledge within ten day . as my lieutenant be ready to depart , i warn he above all a necessary thing to take heed he fall not into the Indian hand : admonition . because i know they to be very subtle and crafty to enterprise and execute any thing to our disadvantage . he depart therefore with his troop , and come to the small river whereinto we be accustom to enter to approach as near as we can unto the village of utina , be six french league distant from thence . there he go on shore , put his man in good array , and draw straight towards the great house that be the king , where the chief man of the country be assemble , which cause very great store of victual to be bring now one and then another , in do whereof they spend notwithstanding three or four day : in which mean while they gather man together , to set upon we in our retreat . they use therefore many mean to hold the we still in breath . for one while they demand their floridians pledge , another while ( see my lieutenant will not stt ill yield to they , until such time as they have bring the victual unto the boat ; accord to the agreement pass between we ) they signify unto he that the woman and young child be afiraide out of all measure to see fire in their match so near their harquebus : and that therefore they most earnest beseech they to put they out , that they may more easy get people enough to carry the victual , and that they for their part will leave their bow and arrow , and will be content that their servant shall carry they . this second request be as flat deny they as the former : for it be a easy matter to smell out their intention . but while these thing be thus in handle , utina by no mean be to be [ three . 346. ] 71 see , but hide and keep himself secret in a little house apart , where certain choose man of i go to see he show themselves aggrieve with he for the long delay of his subject : whereunto he answer , that his subject be so much incense against we , that by no mean possible he be able to keep they in such obedience as he willing will have do , and that he can not hold they from wage of war against monsieur de Ottigny . that he also call to mind , that even while he be prisoner , at what time our man lead he into his country to obtain some victual , he see along the high way arrow stick up , at the end whereof long hair be fasten , which be a certain sign of open war proclaim , which arrow the captain also carry with he to the fort . he say further that in respect of the good will he bear to the captain , he forewarn his lieutenant that his subject be determine to cut down the tree , and cause they to fall a thwart the little river where the boat be , to keep they from depart thence , that they may fight with they at their ease , and that if it thus fall out , he assure he for his part he will not be there to meddle in the matter . and that which much moor augment the suspicion of war be , that as my messenger depart from utina , they hear the voice of one of my man , which during the voyage have always be among the Indian , and who as yet they will never render , until they have get their pledge home . this poor fellow cry out a main because two Indian will have carry he into the wood to have cut his throat : whereupon he be succour and deliver . Theise admonition be well understood , after ripe deliberation thereof Monsieur de Ottigny resolve to retire himself the seven and twenty of July . wherefore he set his soldier in order , and deliver to each of they a sack full of mill : and afterward he march towards his bark , think to prevent the enterprise of the savage . there be at the a alley of 3 or 4 hundred pace long . come forth of the village a great alley about three or four hundred pace long , which be cover on both side with great tree . my lieutenant dispose his man in this alley and set they in such order as they desire to march : for he be well assure that if there be any ambush , it will be at the come out of the tree . therefore he cause Monsieur de Arlac my ensign to march somewhat before with 8 harquebusier to discover whether there be any danger : beside he command one of my sergeant and corporal to march on the out side of the alley with four harquebusier while he himself conduct the rest of his company through it . now as he suspect , so it fall out : for monsieur de Arlac meet with two or three hundred Indian at the end of the alley , which salute he with a infinite number of their arrow , and with such fury that it be easy to see with what desire they seek to charge we . howbeit they be so well sustain in the first assault which my ensign give they , that they which fall down dead , do somewhat abate the choler of those which remain alive . this do my lieutenant haste to gain ground in such sort as i have already say . after he have march about four hundred pace , he be charge afresh with a new troop of savage which be in number about 300 , which assail he before , while the rest of the former set upon he behind . this second assault be so valiant sustain , that i may just say that monsieur de Ottigny so well discharge his duty , as be possible for a good captain to do . and so it stand they upon : for he have to deal with such kind of man , as know well how to fight and to obey their head which conduct they , and which know so well to behave themselves in this conflict , as if Ottigny have not prevent their practice , he have be in danger to have be defeat . their manner in this fight be , that when two hundred have shoot , they retire themselves and give place to the rest that be behind , and all a skirmish between the savage and the french . a second fresh charge of savage . theflorldians manner of fight . the while have their eye and foot so quick and ready , that assoon as ever they see the harquebus lay to the cheek , so soon be they on the ground , and eftsoon up to answer with their bow and to fly their way , if by chance they perceive we go about thefloridians to take they : for there be nothing that they fear so mefe fear . much , because of our sword and dagger . this conflict continue and last from nine of the clock in the morning , until the night depart they . and if Ottigny have not bethink himself to cause his man to break the arrow which they find in the way , and so to deprive the savage of the mean to begin again , without all doubt he shall have have very much to do : for by this mean they lack arrow , and so be constrain to retire themselves . during the time of the conflict they cry and make sign that they be the captain and lieutenant friend : and that they fight for none other cause but to be revenge on the soldier , which be their mortali enemy . my lieutenant be come unto his boat take a re-two slalne . view of his company , and find two man want which be kill , of who the one be call James sale , and the other name be Mesureur . he find two and twen - moreover 22 of they wound , which with much ado ty wound . causecj to be bring unto the boat . all the mill that he find among his company come but to two man burden , which he divide equal among they . for [ three . 34-7 - ] assoon as the conflict begin , every man be constrain to leave his sack to put his hand to his weapon . in this mean while i remain at the fort , and cause every man diligent to travel , hope that my lieutenant will bring we victual . but see the time consume away , i begin to suspect the truth of that which fall out , whereof i be assure immediate after at their return . see therefore my hope frustrate of|it on at side , i make my prayer unto God , and thank God for their he of his grace which he have show unto my poor deliverance , soldier which be escape : afterwards i think upon new mean to obtain victual , aswell for our return into France , as to drive out the time until our embark . i be advertise by certain of our company , which usual go on hunt into the wood and through the village , that in the village Sarauahi situate on the other side of the river , and two league distant from the fort , and in the village emoloa there be field wherein the mill be very forward , and that there be thereof in those part in great abundance . wherefore i cause my boat to be make ready , and send my sergeant thither with certain soldier , which use such diligence , that we have good store of mill . i send also to the river which the savage call Iracana , name by captain Ribault the river of Somme , where captain Vasseur and my sergeant arrive with two boat and their ordinary furniture , and find there a great assembly of the lord of the country , among who be athore the son of Satourioua , Apalou , and Tacadocorou , which be there assemble to make merry : because that in this place be the fair maid and woman of all the country . captain Vasseur in my name give certain small trifle to all the lord , to the queen , to the maid and woman of the village . whereupon the boat be forthwith lade with mill , after they have make our man as good cheer as they can devise . the queen send i two small mat so artificial wrought as it be unpossible to make better . now find our self by this mean sufficient furnish with victual , we begin each of we in his place , to travail and use such diligence , as the desire to see our native country may move we . but because two of our carpenter be slay by the Indian ( as heretofore i mention ) John de Hais , master Carpenter , a man very worthy of his vocation , repair unto i , and tell i that by reason of want of man he be not able to make i up the ship against the time that he have promise i : which speech cause such a mutiny among the soldier that very hardly he escape kill : howbeit i appease they aswell as i 75 the village Sarauahi . the village Emoloa . the river of Iracana call by Ribault the river of Somme . courtesy and liberality the best mean to deal with the savage . Most artificiali mat . the beat down of the house without the fort , y the palisade . the cause why the french lose Florida . eight king laudonniers friend and ally . the principali scope of planter in strange country . Florida a rich country . the english voyage can , and determine to work no more from thenceforth upon the ship , but to content our self to repair the brigandine which i have . so we begin to beat down all the house that be without the fort , and cause coal to be make of the timber thereof : likewise the soldier beat down the palisade which be towards the water side , neither be i ever able to keep they from do it . i have also determine to beat down the fort before my departure and to set it on fire , for fear lest some newcome guest shall have enjoy and possess it . in the mean while there be none of we to who it be not a extreme grief to leave a country , wherein we have endure so great travail and necessity , to discover that which we must forsake through our own countrymen default . for if we have be succour in time and place , and accord to the promise that be make unto we , the war which be between we and utina , have not fall out , neither shall we have have occasion to offend the Indian , which with all pain in the world i entertain in good amity , aswell with merchandise and apparel , as with promise of great matter , and with who i so behave myself , that although sometime i be constrain to take victual in some few village , yet i lose not the alliance of eight king and lord my neighbour , which continual succour and aid i with whatsoever they be able to afford . yea this be the principali scope of all my purpose , to win and entertain they , know how great their amity may advance our enterprise , and principal while i discover the commodity of the country , and seek to strengthen my self therein . i leave it to your cogitation to think how near it go to our heart , to leave a place abound in riches ( as we be thorough inform thereof ) in come whereunto , and do service unto our prince , we leave our own country , wife , child , parent , and friend , and pass the peril of the sea , and be therein arrive , as in a plentiful treasure of all our heart desire . as each of we be much torment in mind with these or such like cogitation , the three of August dig . 1565. i descry four sail in the sea , as i walk upon a little hill , whereof i be exceed well pay : i send immediate one of they which be with i to advertise those of the fort thereof , which be so glad of those news , that one will have think they to be out of their wit to see they laugh and leap for joy . after these ship have cast anchor , we descry that they send one of their ship boat to land : whereupon i cause one of i to be arm with diligence to send to meet they , and to know who they be . in the mean while , fear lest they be Spaniards , i set my soldier in order and in readiness , attend the return of captain Vasseur and my lieutenant , which where go to meet they , which bring i word that they be Englishman : and in [ three . 348 - ] truth they have in their company one who name be Martine Atinas of diepe , which at that time be in their service , which on the behalf of master John Hawkins their general come to request i that i Hawkins you will suffer they to take fresh water , whereof they Qgnerau . stand in great need , signify unto i that they have be above fifteen day on the coast to get some . he bring unto i from the general two flagon of wine , and bread make of wheat : which great refresh i , forasmuch as for seven month space i never taste a drop of wine : nevertheless it be all divide among the great part of my soldier . This Martine Atinas have guide the Englishman unto our coast , wherewith he be acquaint : for in the year 1562 he come thither with i , and therefore the general scent he to i . therefore after i have grant his request , he signify the same unto the general , which the next day follow cause one of his small ship to enter into the river , and come to see i in a great shipboate , accompany with gentle - man honourable apparel , yet unarm . he send for great store of bread and wine , to distribute thereof to every one : on my part i make he the best cheer sheep and i can possible , and cause certain sheep and poultry ^int^flofida^ to be kill , which until this present i have careful ' preserve hope to store the country withal . for notwithstanding all the necessity and sickness that happen unto i , i will not suffer so much as one chicken to be kill : by which mean in a short time i have gather together above a hundred pullet . now three day pass , while the english general remain with i , during which time the Indian come in from all part to see he , and ask i whether he a advantage be my brother : i tell they he be so , and signify wise take . unto that he be come to see i and aid i with so great store of victual , that from thence forward i shall have no need to take any thing of they . the bruit hereof incontinent be spread over all the country , in such sort as ambassador come unto i from all part , which on the behalf of the king their master desire to make alliance with i : and even they , which before seek to make war against i , come to offer their friendship and service unto i : whereupon i receive they and gratify they with certain present . the general immediate understand the desire and urgent occasion which i have to return into France : whereupon he offer to transport i and all my company home : whereunto notwithstanding i will not agree , be in doubt upon what occasion he make so large a offer . for i know not how the case stand between the french and the english : and although he promise i on his faith to put i on the trench land in France , before he will touch in England , yet mistrust that j stand jn doubt lest he will attempt somewhat in { man will ' Fkrida in the name of his mistress . wherefore i flat plant in refuse his offer : whereupon there arise a great mutiny Florida . among my soldier , which say that i seek to destroy they all , and that the brigandine , whereof i speak before , 78 be not sufficient to transport they , consider the season of the year wherein we be . the bruit and mutiny increase more and more : for after that the general be return to his ship , he tell certain gentleman and soldier which go to see he , partly to make good cheer with he , he declare , i say unto they , that he great doubt that hardly we shall be able to pass safe in those vessel which we have : and that in case we shall enterprise the same , we shall no doubt be in great jeopardy : notwithstanding , if i be so content , he will transport part of my man in his ship , and that he will leave i a small ship to transport the rest . the soldier be no soon come home , but they signify the offer unto their companion , which incontinent consent together that in case i will not accept the same , they will embark themselves with he and forsake i , so that he will receive they accord to his promise . they therefore assemble themselves all together and come to seek i in my chamber , and signify unto i their intention , whereunto i promise to answer within one hour after . in which mean space i gather together the principali member of my company , which after i have break the matter with they , answer i all with one voice , that i ought not to refuse this offer , nor contemn the occasion which present it self , and that they can not think evil of it in France , if be forsake , as we be , we aid our self with such mean as God have send we . after sundry debating of this matter , in conclusion i give my advice , that we ought to deliver he the price of the ship which he be to leave we , and that for my part i be content to give he the best of my stuff , and the silver which i have gather silver find in the country . whereupon notwithstanding it be ™ determine that i shall keep the silver , for fear lest the queen of England see the same , shall the rather note . be encourage to set foot there , as before she have desire : that it be far better to carry it into France the great importance of this enterprise . [ HL 349 - ] the great humanity and bounty of master John Hawkins to the french . the english voyage to give encouragement unto our prince not to leave off a enterprise of so great importance for our commonwealth , and that see we be resolve to depart , it be far better to give he our artillery , which otherwise we shall be constrain to leave behind we , or to hide it in the ground by reason of the weakness of our man , be not able to embark the same . this point be thus conclude and resolve on , i go my self unto the english general , accompany with my lieutenant , and captain Vasseur , captain Verdier , and trenchant the pilot , and my sergeant , all man of experience in such affair and know sufficient how to drive such a bargain . we therefore take a view of the ship which the general will sell , who we draw to such reason , that he be content to stand to my own man judgement , who esteem it to be worth seven hundred crown , whereof we agree very friendly . wherefore i deliver he in earnest of the sum , two bastard , two minion , one thousand of iron , and one thousand of powder . this bargain thus make , he consider the necessity wherein we be , have for all our sustenance but mill and water : whereupon be move with pity , he offer to relieve i with 20 barrel of meal , six pipe of bean , one hogshead of salt , and a hundred of wax to make candle . Moreover forasmuch as he see my soldier go barefoot , he offer i beside fifty pair of shoe , which i accept and agree of a price with he , and give he a bill of my hand for the same , for which until this present i be indebt to he . he do more than this : for particular he bestow upon my self a great jar of oil , a jar of vinegar , a barrel of olive , and a great quantity of rice , and a barrel of white biscuit . beside he give diverse present to the principali officer of my company accord to their quality : so that i may say that we receive as many courtesy of the general , as it be possible to receive of any man live . wherein doubtless he have win the reputation of a good and charitable man , deserve to be esteem asmuch of we all as if he have save all our life . incontinent after his departure i spare the departure no pain to hasten my man to make biscuit of the meal which he have leave i , and to hoop my cask ‘ to take in water needful for the voyage . a man may well think what diligence we use , in respect of the great desire we have to depart , wherein we continue so well , that the fifteen day of August the biscuit , the August it , . great part of our water , and all the soldier stuff be bring aboard : so that from that day forward we do nothing but stay for good wind to drive we into France : which have free we from a infinite number of mischief which afterward we suffer , if they have come as we desire : but it be not God good pleasure , as shall appear hereafter . be thus in a readiness to set sail , we bethink our self that it will do well to bring certain man and woman of the country into France , to the end that if this voyage shall be take in hand again they may declare unto their king the greatness of our king , the excellency of our prince , the goodness of our country , and the manner of live of the Frenchman : and that they may also learn our language , to serve our turn thereby in time to come . wherein i take so good order , that i find mean to bring away with i the goodly person of all the country , if our intention have succeed as i hope they will have do . in the mean season the king my neighbour come often to see and visit i : which , after that they understand that i will return into France , demand of i whether i mean to return again or no , and whether it shall be in short time . i signify unto they that within ten moon ( so they thefloridians call their month ) i will visit they again with measure their such force , that i will be able to make they conquerors over all their enemy . they pray i that the moon . i will leave they my house , that i will forbid my soldier to beat down the fort and their lodge - ix 81 f ing , and that i will leave they a boat to aid they withal in their war against their enemy . which i make as though i will grant unto they , to the end i may always remain their friend until my last departure . 