a notable discourse of m. John Chilton , touch the people , manner , mine , city , riches , force , and other memorable thing of new Spain , and other province in the west Indies , see and note by himself in the time of his travel , continue in those part , the space of seventeen or eighteen year . n the year of our lord 1561 , in the month of July , i John Chilton go out of this city of London into Spain , where i remain for the space of seven year , and from thence i sail into Nova Hispania , and so travel there , and by the south sea , unto Peru , the space of seventeen or eighteen year : and after that time expire , i return into Spain , and so in the year 1586 in the month of July , i arrive at the fbresayd city of London : where peruse the note which i have 360 1568. take in the time of my travel in those year , i have set down as follow . in the year 1568 , in the month of march , be 1568. desirous to see the world , i embark my self in the bay of Cadiz in Andaluzia , in a ship bind for the Cadiz .. isle of the canary , where she take in her lade , and set forth from thence for the voyage , in the month of June , the same year . within a month after , we fall with the isle of S. Domingo , and from thence direct to Nova Hispania , and come into the port of saint John San Juan de de ullua , which be a little island stand in the sea , ua-about two mile from the land , where the king maintaineth about 50 soldier , and captain , that keep the fort , and about 150 negro , who all the year long be occupy in carry of stone for building , and other use , and to help to make fast the ship that come in there , with their cable . there be build two bulwark at each end of a wall , that stand likewise in the say island , where the ship use to ride , make fast to the say wall with their cable , so near , that a man may leap ashore . from this port i journey by land to a town call Vera Cruz , stand by a river side , VeraCruz . where all the factor of the spanish merchant dwell , t111 - 4$6d which receive the good of such ship as come thither , and also lade the same with such treasure and merchandise as they return back into Spain . they be in number about four hundred , who only remain there , during the time that the spanish fleet discharge , and be load again , which be from the end of August to the begin of April follow . and then for the unwholesomeness of the place they depart thence sixteen league further up within the country , to a town call Xalapa , a very Jalapa six-healthfull soil . there be never any woman deliver ten lea&ues-of child in this port of Vera Cruz : for so soon as they perceive themselves conceive with child , they get they into the country , to avoid the peril of the infect air , although they use every morning to drive through the town above two thousand head of cattle , to take away 361 Pueblo de los angel eight league . the english voyage the ill vapour of the earth . from Xalapa seven league i come to another place , name Perota , wherein be certain house build of straw , call by the name of ventas , the inhabitant whereof be Spaniard , who accustom to harbour such traveller as be occasion to journey that way up into the land . it stand in a great wood of pine and cedar tree , the soil be very cold , by reason of store of snow which lie on the mountain there all the year long . there be in that place a infinite number of dear , of bigness like unto great mule , have also home of great length . from Perota nine league , i come to the Fuentes of Ozumba , which fuente be spring of water issue out of certain rock into the midst of the high way , where likewise be certain range , and house , for the use before mention . eight league ofif from this place i come to the city of the angel , so call by that name of the Spaniard , which inhabit there to the number of a thousand , beside a great number of Indian . this city stand in very plain field , have near adjoin to it many sumptuous city , as namely the city of Tlaxcalla , a city of two hundred thousand Indian , tributary to the king , although he exact no other tribute of they then a handful of wheat a piece , which amount to thirteen thousand hannege yearly , as have appear by the king book of account . and the reason why he content himself with this tribute , only for they , be , because they be the occasion that he take the city of Mexico , with who the tlaxcallians have war at the same time when the Spaniard come into the country . the governor of this city be a Spaniard , call among they the Alcalde maydr , who administer chief cause of justice both unto the Christians and Indian , refer small and light vice , as drunkenness and such like , to the judgement and discretion of such of the Indian as be choose every year to rule among they , call by the name of alcalde . Theise Indian from fourteen year old 362 upward , pay unto the king for their yearly tribute one ounce of silver , and a hannege of maiz , which be value among they common at twelve real of plate . the widow among they pay half of this . the Indian both of this city , and of the rest , lie about Mexico , go clothe with mantle of linen cloth make of cotton wool , paint throughout with work of diverse and fine colour . it be distant from the city of the angel four Tlaxcalla league to the northward , and fourteen from Mexico . league there be another city a league from it , call Chetula , consist of more than sixty thousand Indian , tributary , angel . and there dwell not above twelve Spaniard there . from it , about two league , there be another , call Acassingo , of above fifty thousand Indian , and about eight or twelve Spaniard , which stand at the foot of the Vulcan of Mexico , on the east side . there be vukan be a beside these , three other great city , the one name ml that c < > n-tepiaca , a very famous city , Waxazingo , and tichama-chalcho : all these in time past belong to the kingdom ' of Tlaxcalla : and from these city they bring most of their Cochinilia into Spain . the distance from the Cochinilia . city of the angel , to the city of Mexico be twenty Pueblo de los league . this city of Mexico be the city of great angeles20 fame in all the Indies , have goodly and costly house in it , build all of lime and stone , and seven street ’ in length , and seven in breadth , with river run through every second street , by which they bring their provision in canoas . it be situate at the foot of certain hill , which contain in compass by estimation above twenty league , compass the say city on the one side , and a lake which be fourteen league about on the other side . upon which lake there be build many notable and sumptuous city , as the city of Tescuco , where the Spaniard build six frigate , at that time when they conquer Mexico , and where also Fernando Cortes make his abode five or six month in cure of the sickness of his people , which they have take at their come into the country . there dwell 363 his voyage from Mexico to Nueva Biscaia . [ Iii . 457. ] new Biscay . the silver mine of tamascaltepec . the valley of saint barthoh-mew . the haven where you ship of China in thephiuppinas arrive . Guaxaca . the english voyage in this city about sixty thousand Indian , which pay tribute to the king . in this city the say Fernando build the fine church that ever be build in the Indies , the name whereof be saint Peter . after i have continue two year in this city , be desirous to see further the country , i employ that which i have , and take my voyage towards the province of California , in the which be discover a certain country , by a Biscaine , who name be Diego the guiara , and call it after the name of his country , new Biscay , where i sell my merchandise for exchange of silver , for there be there certain rich mine discover by the aforesaid biskaine . go from Mexico i direct my voyage somewhat towards the southwest , to certain mine , call Tamascaltepec , and so travel forward the space of twenty day through desert place unhabit , till i come to the valley of saint Bartholomew , which join to the province of new Biscay . in all these place the Indian for the most part go naked , and be wild people . their common armour be bow and arrow : they use to eat up such Christians as they come by . from hence depart , i come to another province name Xalisco , and from thence to the port of Navidad , which be 120 league from Mexico , in which port arrive always in the month of April , all the ship that come out of the south sea from China , and then philippinas , and there they lie their merchandise ashore . the most part whereof be mantle mad of cotton wool , wax , and fine platter gild , make of earth , and much gold . the next summer follow , be in the year 1570 ( which be the first year that the pope Buis be bring into the Indies ) i undertake another voyage towards the province of sonsonate , which be in the kingdom of Guatimala , whither i carry diverse merchandise of Spain , all by land on mule back . the way thitherward from Mexico be to the city of the angel , and from thence to another city of Christians 80 league off , call Guaxaca , in which there dwell about counterfeit 3^4 Spaniard , and many Indian . all the Indian of this province pay their tribute in mantle of cotton wool , and Cochinilia , whereof there grow abundance throughout this country . near to this place there lie a port in the south sea , call Aguatulco , in the which there agwtuko . dwell not above three or four Spaniard , with certain negro , which the king maintain there : in which place sir Francis Drake arrive in the year 1579 , in the month of April , where i lose with his be there above a thousand ducat , which he take away , with much other good of other merchant of Mexico from one Francisco Gomes Rangifa , factor there for all the spanish merchant that then trade in the south sea : for from this port they use to embark all their good that go for Peru , and to the kingdom of Honduras . from Guaxaca i come to a town name Nixapa , which stand Nixapa . upon certain very high hill in the province of sapot - Sapotecas . ecas , wherein inhabit about the number of twenty Spaniard , by the king of Spain commandment , to keep that country in peace : for the Indian be very rebellious : and for this purpose he bestow on they the town and city that be within that province . from hence i go to a city call Tecoantepec , which be the far Tecoantepec . town to the eastward in all nova Hispania , which some time do belong to the mark de Valle , and because it be a very fit port , stand in the south sea , the king of Spain , upon a rebellion make by the say mark against he , take it from he , and do now possess it as his own . here in the year 1572 i see a piece of ordinance of brass , call a demy culverin , which come out of a ship call the Jesus of Lubec , which captain Hawkins leave in saint John de ullua , be in fight with the Spaniard in the year 1568 ; which piece they afterward carry 100 league by land over mighty mountain to the say city , to be embark there for the philippinas . leave Tecoantepec , i go still along by the south sea about 150 league in the desolate province of Soconusco , Soconusco . in which province there grow cacao , which the chris-365 1570. tian carry from thence into Nova Hispania , for that it will not grow in any cold country . the Indian of this country pay the king their tribute in cacao , give he four hundred cargas , and every carga be 24000 almond , which carga be worth in Mexico thirty piece of real of plate . they be man of great riches , and withal very proud : and in all this province throughout , there dwell not twenty Christians . i travel through Suchetepec . Guasacapan . another province call Suchetepec ; and thence to the province of Guasacapan : in both which province be very few people , the big town therein have not above two hundred Indian . the chief merchandise Guatimala . there , be cacao . hence i go to the city of Guatimala , which be the chief city of all this kingdom : in this city do inhabit about 80 Spaniard : and here the king have his governor , and council , to who all the people of the kingdom repair for justice . this city stand from the coast of the south sea 14 league within the land , and be very rich , by reason of the gold that they fetch out of the coast of Veragua . from this city to the eastward 60 sonsonate . league lie the province sonsonate , where i sell the merchandise i carry out of Nova Hispania . the chief san Salvador . city of this province be call saint Salvador , which lie 7 league from the coast of the south sea , and have a port Acaxutla . lie by the sea coast , call Acaxutla , where the ship arrive with the merchandise they bring from Nova Hispania ; and from thence lade back again the cacao : there dwell here to the number of threescore Spaniard . Nicoia a port where you ship which go to thephilippinas be build . [ Iii . 458. ] from sonsonate i travel to Nicoia , which be in the kingdom of Nicaragua , in which port the king build all the ship that travel out of the Indies to the Malucos . i go forward from thence to Costa rica , where the Indian both man and woman go all naked , and the land lie between Panama , and the kingdom of Guatimala : and for that the Indian there live as warrior , i dare not pass by land , so that here in a town call S. Salvador i bestow that which i carry in annile ( which be a kind of thing to die blow withal ) which i carry with i to the port of Cavallos , lie in Puerto the ca-the kingdom of Honduras , which port be a mighty huge a ruh gulf , and at the come in on the one side of it there * a : e it lie a town of little force without ordinance or any other strength , have in it house of straw : at which town the Spaniard use yearly in the month of August to unlade four ship which come out of Spain lade with rich merchandise , and receive in here again their lade of a kind of merchandise call annile and Cochinilia ( although it be not of such value as that of Nova Hispania ) and silver of the mine of Tomaangua , and gold of Nicaragua , and hide , and Salsa perilla , the best in all the Indies : all which merchandise they return , and depart from thence always in the month of April follow , take their course by the island of Jamaica , in which island there dwell on the west side of it certain Spaniard of no great number . from this place they go to the cape of saint Anthony , which be the uttermost part of the westward of the island of Cuba , and from thence to Havana lie hard by , which be descrip-the chief port that the king of Spain have in all the country of the Indies , and of great importance : for all the ship , both from Peru , Hunduras , porto rico , s. Domingo , Jamaica , and all other place in his Indies , arrive there in their return to Spain , for that in this port they take in victual and water , and the most part of their lade : here they meet from all the foresay place always in the begin of may by the king commandment : at the entrance of this port it be so narrow , that there can scarce come in two ship together , although it be above six fathom deep in the narrow place of it . in the north side of the come in there stand a tower , in which there watch every day a man to descry the sail of ship which he can see on the sea ; and as many as he discover , so many banner he set upon the tower , that the people of the town ( which stand within the port about a mile from the tower ) may understand thereof . under this tower there 367 lie a sandy shore , where man may easy go aland ; and by the tower there run a hill along by the water side , which easy with small store of ordinance subdu the town and port . the port within be so large that there may easy ride a thousand sail of ship without anchor or cable , for no wind be able to hurt they . there the smalforce inhabit within the town of Havana about three hundred of Havana . Spaniard , and about threescore soldier , which the king maintain there for the keep of a certain castle which he have of late erect , which have plant in it about twelve piece of small ordinance , and be compass round with a small ditch , wherethorow at their pleasure they may let in the sea . about two league from Havana there lie another town call Wanabacoa , in which there be dwell about a hundred Indian , and from this place 60 league there lie another town name Bahama , situate on the north side of the island . the chief city of this island of Cuba ( which be above 200 league in length ) be also call Sant Iago de Cuba , where dwell a bishop and about two hundred Spaniard ; which town stand on the south side of the island the commodi - about loo league from Havana . all the trade of this tie of Cuba . isiand js cattle , which they kill only for the hide that be bring thence into Spain : for which end the Spaniard maintain there many negro to kill their cattle , and foster a great number of hog , which be kill , and cut into small piece , they dry in the sun , and so make it provision for the ship which come for Spain . Having remain in this island two month , i take hombre de ship in a frigate , and go over to number de dios , dw ’ and from thence by land to Panama , which stand upon Panama . the south sea . from number de dios to Panama be 17 league distance : from which town there run a river which be call the river of Chagre , which run within 5 league of Panama , to a place call cruze , through which river they carry their good , and disembark they at the say cruze , and from thence they be convey on mule back to Panama by land ; where they again 368 embark they in certain small ship in the south sea for all the coast of Peru. in one of these ship i go to Potossi , and from thence by land to Cusco , and from Potosi . thence to Paita . here i remain the space of seven month , and then return into the kingdom of Guatimala , and arrive in the province of Nicoia , and Nicaragua . from Nicaragua i travel by land to a province call Nicamula ( which lie towards the north sea in certain high mountain ) for that i can not pass through the kingdom of Guatimala at that time for water , wherewith all the low country of the province of Soconusco , lie by the south sea , be drown with the rain that fall above in the mountain , endure always from April to September : which season for that cause they call their winter . from this province i come into another call de Vera Paz , in which the chief city be also Vera Paz. call after that name , where there dwell a bishop [ three . 459. ] and about forty Spaniard . among the mountain of this country towards the north sea , there be a province call la Candona , where be Indian man of war which the king can not subdue , for that they have town and fort in a great lake of water above in the say mountain : the most part of they go naked , and some wear mantle of cotton wool . distant from this about 80 league , i come into another province call the province of Chiapa , wherein the chief city be call Sacatlan , chiapa 300 where there dwell a bishop and about a hundred a£ue^fr < he Spaniard . in this country there be great store of ‘ Cotten wool , whereof the Indian make fine linen cloth , which the Christians buy and carry into Nova Hispania . the people of this province pay their tribute to the king all in cotton wool and feather . fourteen league from this city there be another call Chiapa , where be the fine gennet in all the Indies , which be carry hence to Mexico , 300 league from it . from this city i travel still through hill and mountain , till i come to the end of this province , to ix 369 2 A Ecatepec an a hill call Ecatepec , which in English signify the ^ka he h w*nde : f°r they say , it be the high hill ‘ that ever be discover : for from the top of it may be discover both the north and the south sea ; and it be in height suppose to be nine league . they which travel over it , lie always at the foot of it over night , and begin their journey about midnight , to travel to the top of it before the sun rise the next day , because the wind blow with such force afterward , that it be impossible for any man to go up : from the foot of this Tecoantepec . hill to Tecoantepec , the first town of Nova Hispania , be about fifteen league . and so from hence i journey to Mexico . his journey to by and by after i come to Mexico ( which be in the panuco . year 1572 ) in the company of another Spaniard , which be my companion in this journey , we go together towards the province of Panuco , which lie upon the coast of the north sea , and within three day journey Mestitlan . we enter a city call Mestitlan , where there dwell twelve Spaniard : the Indian inhabitant there be about thirty thousand . this city stand upon certain high mountain , which be very thick plant with town very wholesome and fruitful , have plentiful fountain of water run through they . the high way of these hill be all set with fruit , and tree of diverse kind , and most pleasant . in every town as we pass through , the Indian present we with victual . within twenty Clanchinolte - league of this place there be another city call clanchi-fec - noltepec , belong to a gentleman , where there inhabit about forty thousand Indian ; and there be among they eight or nine friar of the order of saint Augustine , who have there a monastery . within three day after we de-guaxutla . part from this place , and come to a city call Guaxutla , where there be another monastery of friar of the same order : there dwell in this town about twelve Spaniard . from this place forward begin a province call Guastecan . Guastecan , which be all plain ground without any Tancuylabo . hill . the first town we come unto be call tan-370 cuylabo , in which there dwell many Indian , high of stature , have all their body paint with blue , and wear their hair long down to their knee , tie as woman use to do with their hair-lace . when they go out of their door , they carry with they their bow and arrow , be very great archer , go for the most part naked . in those country they take neither gold nor silver for exchange of any thing , but only salt , which they great esteem , and use it for a saltaprind-principall medicine for certain worm which breed in 7 their lip and in their gum . after nine day travel c n 1 e ' from this place , we come to a town call tampice , tampice a which be a port town upon the sea , wherein there port tmne-dwell , i think , forty Christians , of which number while we abide there , the Indian kill fourteen , as they be gather of salt , which be all the trade that they have in this place : it stand upon the entry of the river of Panuco , which be a mighty great river ; and Panuco . be it not for a sand that lie at the mouth of it , ship of five hundred ton may go up into it above three score league . from hence we go to Panuco , fourteen league from tampice , which in time pass have be a goodly city , where the king of Spain have his governor : but by reason that the Indian there destroy the christian , it lie in a manner waste , containing in it not above ten Christians with a priest . in this town i fall sick , where i lie one and forty day , have no other sustenance than fruit and water , which water i send for above six league off within the country . here i remain till my companion come to i , which have depart from i another way , retain in my company only a slave , which i bring with i from Mexico . and the last day in easter week my companion come to i , find i in a very weak state , by reason of the unholesomenesse of the place . notwithstanding my weakness , i be set on a horse , and a Indian behind i to hold i , we go forward on our voyage all that day till night . the 371 next day in the morning we pass over the river in a canoa ; and be on the other side , i go my self before alone : and by reason there meet many way trale by the wild beast , i lose my way , and so travel through a great wood about two league : and at length [ three . 460. ] fall into the hand of certain wild Indian , which be there in certain cottage make of straw ; who see i , come out to the number of twenty of they , with their bow and arrow , and speak unto i in their language , which i understand not : and so i make sign unto they to help i from my horse ; which they do by commandment of their lord , which be there with they ; and light down . they carry i under one of their cottage , and lay i upon a mat on the ground : and perceive that i can not understand they , they bring unto i a little Indian wench of Mexico , of fifteen or sixteen year of age , who they command to ask i in her language from whence i come , and for what intent i be come among they : for ( say she ) do thou not know Christian , how that these people will kill and eat thou ? to who i answer , let they do with i what they will ; here now i be . Shee reply , say , thou may thank God thou be lean ; for they fear thou have the pock : otherwise they will eat thou . so i present to the king a little wine which i have with i in a bottle ; which he esteem above any treasure : for for wine they will sell their wife and child . afterwards the wench ask i what i will have , and whether i will eat any thing . i answer that i desire a little water to drink , for that the country be very hot : and she bring i a great Venice glass , gild , full of water . And marvel at the glass , i demand how they come by it . she tell Shallapa . i that the cacique bring it from Shallapa , a great town distant 30 league from this place on the hill , whereas dwell certain Christians , and certain friar of the order of saint Augustine , which this cacique with his people on a night slay ; and burn the friar monastery , 372 among other thing reserve this glass : and from thence also bring i . have now be conversant with they about three or four hour , they bid she ask i if i will go my way . i answer she , that i desire nothing else . So the cacique cause two of his Indian to lead i forward in my way ; go before i with their bow and arrow , naked , the space of three league , till they bring i into a high way : and then make a sign unto i , they signify that in short time i shall come to a town where Christians inhabit , which be call S. Iago de los valle , stand in plain field , wall about with a mud wall : the number of the Christians that dwell therein , be not above four or five and twenty , unto which the king of Spain give Indian and town , to keep the country subject unto he . here the Christians have their mighty mule , which they carry for all the part of the Indies , and into Peru , for that all their merchandise be carry by this mean by land . in this town aforesaid , i find my company , which i have lose before , who make no other account of i but that i have be slay : and the Christians there likewise marvel to hear that i come from those kind of Indian alive , which be a thing never see nor hear of before : for they take a great pride in kill a christian , and to wear any part of he where he have any hair grow , hang it about their neck , and so be account for valiant man . in this town i remain eighteen day , till i recover my health , and in the mean space there come one don Francisco de Pago , who the viceroy don Henrico Manriques have send for captain general , to open and discover a certain way from the sea side to the mine of Sacatecas , which be from this place 160 league , for to transport their merchandise by that way , leave the way by Mexico , which be seven or eight week travel . so this captain take i and my company , with the rest of his soldier , to the number of forty , which he have bring with he , and five hundred 373 Sant Iago de los valle . mighty mule . don Henrico Manriques viceroy of Mexico . the mine of Sacatecas . the valley of saint Michael . Pueblo nuevo . mechuacan . copper mine . Campeche . [ Iii . 461. ] Merida . Rio de Tabasco . Indian , which we take out of two town in this province call Tanchipa , and Tamaclipa , all good archer , and naked man , and go thence to the river de las Palmas , which be of great bigness , part the kingdom of Nova Hispania and Florida : and go still along by this river the space of three day , seek passage to pass over ; and find none , we be at length enforce to cut timber to make a balsam or raft , which when we have make , we sit on it , the Indian swim in the water , and thrust it before they to the other side . within thirty day after , travel through wood , hill , and mountain , we come to the mine of Sacatecas , which be the rich mine in all the Indies , and from thence they fetch most silver : at which mine there dwell above three hundred Christians : and there our captain give we leave to depart . so we come to the valley of saint Michael towards Mexico ; and from thence to Pueblo novo ; and from that place to the province of mechuacan , after which name the chief city of that place be call : where there dwell a bishop , and above a hundred Spaniard in it : it abound with all kind of spanish fruit , and have wood full of nut tree , and wild vine . here be many mine of copper , and great store of cattle . it lie 60. league from Mexico , whither we come within four day after . the Indian of this country be very mighty and big man . afterwards i return another way to the province of sonsonate by Vera cruz , and so to Rio Alvarado , and from thence to the province of campeche , which lie on the south side of the bay of Mexico : the chief town of this province be call Merida , in which be a bishop and almost 100 Spaniard . the Indian of this province pay all their tribute in mantle of cotton wool and cacao . there be no port in all this province for a ship of 100 tun to ride in , but only in the river of Tabasco , by which river this city of Merida stand . the chief merchandise which they lade there in small frigate , be a certain 374 wood call campeche , ( wherewith they use to die ) as also hide and annile . by this there lie the province of lucatan , near the Honduras by the north sea coast , where there be also another bishop , and a town likewise name lucatan , where there dwell a few Spaniard . they have no force at all in all this coast to defend themselves withal , save only that the land be low , and there be no port to receive any ship , unless they be frigate , which carry from thence to the port of saint John de ullua , wax , cacao , honey , and also mantle of cotton wool , whereof they make there great store , and of which kind of merchandise there be great trade thence to Mexico : of the same also they pay their tribute to the king . the king have tribute bring he yearly out of the Indies into Spain between nine and ten million of gold and silver : for he receive of every Indian which be subject unto he ( except those which do belong to the Incommenderos , which be the child of those Spaniard , who first conquer the land , to who the king give and grant the government of the city and town subdue for three life ) twelve real of plate , and a hannege of maiz , which be a wheat of the country , ( five of they make a quarter of english measure ) and of every widow woman he have six real , and half a hannege lucatan . the greatness of the king of Spain tribute out of the west Indies . of maiz . and so if any Indian have twenty child in his house , he pay for every one of they , be above fifteen year old , after that rate . this wheat be due bring to the governor of every province and city , be sell in Mexico by the king governor there every year ; so that the money receive for it , be put into the king treasury there , and so be yearly carry from thence into Spain . of the Spaniard which be owner of the mine of gold and silver , he receive the five part of it , which he call his quinta , which be take out the quinto . of the heap , there be his arm set on it ; for otherwise it may not be ' bring out of the land into Spain , under pain of death . the mark of silver , which be eight ounce , when it come out of the mine , not have 375 the mark of the king seal upon it , be worth three and forty real of silver be 64 plate , and so it be current : and when they will bring it for real of plate . Spain , they carry it to the king treasure house , where his seal be set upon it ; and so it be raise in value thereby to threescore and four real of plate : and so the king have for his custom of every mark of plate one and twenty real . from the year of 1570 , which be the year that the pope bull come into the Indies , as be afore mention , he have receive both of the Indian which be tributary unto he , and also of all other belong to the incommenderos , of every one be above twelve year of age , four real of every bull . also they carry other pardon with they into the Indies , for such as be dead , although a hundred year before the Spaniard come into the country : which pardon the friar in their preach persuade the poor Indian to take , tell they that with give four real of plate for a mass , they will deliver their soul out of purgatory . of the Christians likewise dwell there he have fourteen real for every bull : and there be certain bull bring thither for the christian beside the former , which serve for pardon all such fault wherein they have trespass either against the king , by keep back his custom , or one against another by any other injury ; for every hundred crown whereof a man conscience do accuse he that he have deceive the king or any other , he must give ten for a bull , and so after that rate for every hundred which he have any the revenue way steal , and so be pardon the fault . the revenue bukandpar - ul after manner yield unto his treasury don come yearly above three million of gold , as i have be yearly to three credible inform , although of late both the Spaniard million . and Indian do refuse to take the bull ; for that they perceive he do make a yearly custom of it : only each Indian take one pardon for all his household , ( whereas in former time every Indian use to take one for every person in his house ) and tear the same 376 into small piece , and give to every one of his household a little piece , say thus , they need now no more , see in that which they buy the year before they have above ten thousand year pardon . Theise piece they stick up in the wall of the house where they lie . both the Christians and Indian be weary with these infinite tax and custom , which of late he have impose upon they , more than in the year before : so as the people of both sort do rebel rebellion « twice in the time that i be among they , and will have set up another king of themselves ; for which exac-cause the king have command upon pain of death , that tion . they shall not plant either wine or oil there , but shall always stand in need of they to be bring out of Spain , although there will more grow there in four year , then there grow in Spain in twenty , it be so fertile a country . and the king to keep the country always in sub - [ he . 462. ] iection , and to his own use , have straight provide by reason law , upon pain or death , and loss or good , that none the of these country shall traffic with any other nation , tyainetofirbid although the people themselves do much now desire to firren traffic trade with any other then with they , and will undoubted do , if they fear not the peril ensue it thereupon . about Mexico , and other place in Nova Hispania , there grow a certain plant call maguei , which maguei . yield wine , vinegar , honey , and black sugar , and of the leaf of it dry they make hemp , rope , shoe which they use , and tile for their house : and at the end of every leaf there grow a sharp point like a awl , wherewith they use to bore or pierce through any thing . thus to make a end , i have here set down the sum of all the chief thing that i have observe and note in my seventeen year travel in those part . 