the three troublesome voyage make with the Jesus of Lubeck , the minion , and four other ship , to the part of Guinea , and the west Indies , in the year 1567 and 1568 by m. John Hawkins . a storm . the fleet be he ship depart from Plymouth , the second day of October , anno 1567 and have reasonable weather until the seven day , at which time forty league north from cape Finister , there arise a extreme storm , which continue four day , in such sort , that disperse , and all our great boat lose , Gomera . envenom arrow . and the Jesus our chief ship , in such case , as not think able to serve the voyage : whereupon in the same storm we set our course homeward , determine to give over the voyage : but the eleven day of the same month , the wind change with fair weather , whereby we be animate to foil owe our enterprise , and so do , direct our course with the hand of the canary , where accord to a order before prescribe , all our ship before disperse , meet at one of those hand , call Gomera , where we take water , and depart from thence the four day of November , towards the coast of Guinea , and arrive at cape Verde , the eighteenth of November : where we land 150 man , hope to obtain some negro , where we get but few , and those with great hurt and damage to our man , which chief proceed of their envenom arrow : and although in the beginning they seem to be but small hurt , yet there hardly escape any that have blood draw of they , but die in strange sort , with their mouth shut some ten day before they die , and after their wound be whole ; where i my self have one of the great 64 1567. wound , yet thanks be to God , escape . from thence we pass the time upon the coast of Guinea , search with all diligence the river from Rio Grande , unto Sierra Leona , till the twelve of Januarie , in which time we have not get together a hundred and fifty negro : yet notwithstanding the sickness of our man , and the late time of the year come - [ three . 522. ] mand we away : and thus have nothing wherewith to seek the coast of the west India , i be with the rest of our company in consultation to go to the coast of the mine , hope there to have obtain some gold for our ware , and thereby to have defray our charge . but even in that present instant , there come to we a negro , send from a king , oppress by other king his neighbour , desire our aid , with promise that as many negro as by these war may be obtain , aswell of his part as of we , shall be at our pleasure : whereupon we conclude to give aid , and send 120 of our man , which the 15 of Januarie , assault a town of the negro of our town of ally adversary , which have in it 8000 inhabitant , 8°°° ” * 8 ™ be very strong impale and fence after their ' manner , but it be so well defend , that our man prevail not , but lose six man and forty hurt : so that our man send forthwith to i for more help : whereupon consider that the good success of this enterprise may high further the commodity of our voyage , i go my self , and with the help of the king of our side , assault the town , both by land and sea , and very hardly with fire ( their house be cover with dry palm leave ) obtain the town , put the inhabitant to flight , where we take 250 person , man , woman , and child , and by our friend the king of our side , there be take 600 prisoner , whereof we hope to have have our choice : but the negro ( in which nation be seidome or never find 5 in truth ) mean nothing less : for that night he re - negro . move his camp and prisoner , so that we be ten 65 e the english voyage fain to content we with those few which we have get our self . now have we obtain between four and five hundred negro , wherewith we think it somewhat reasonable to seek the coast of the west Indies , and there , for our negro , and other our merchandise , we hope to obtain , whereof to countervail our charge with some gain , whereunto we proceed with all diligence , furnish our water , take fuel , and depart the coast of Guinea the three of February , continue at the sea with a passage more hard , then before have be accustom till the 27 day of march , which day we have sight of a hand , call Dominica , upon the coast of the west Indies , in fourteen degree : from thence we coast from place to place , make our traifike with the Spaniards as we may , somewhat hardly , because the king have straight command all his governor in those part , by no mean to suffer any trade to be make with we : notwithstanding we have reasonable trade , and courteous entertainment , from the he of Margarita unto Cartagena , without any thing great worth the note , save at Capo de la Vela , in a town call Rio de la Hacha ( from whence come all the pearl ) the treasurer who have the charge there , will by no mean agree to any trade , or suffer we to take water , he have fortify his town with diverse bulwark in all place where it may be enter , and furnish himself with a hundred harquebusier , so that he think by famine to have enforce we to have put a land our negro : of which purpose he have not great fail , unless we have by force enter the town : which ( after we can by no mean obtain his favour ) we be enforce to do , and so with two hundred man break in upon their bulwark , and enter the town with the loss only of two man of our part , and no hurt do to the Spaniard because after their volley of shot discharge , they all flee . thus have the town with some circumstance , as 66 partly by the Spaniard desire of negro , and partly by friendship of the treasurer , we obtain a secret trade : whereupon the Spaniard resort to we by night , and buy of we to the number of 200 negro : in all other place where we trade the Spaniard inhabitant be glad of we and trade willing . at Cartagena the last town we think to have Cartagena . see on the coast , we can by no mean obtain to deal with any Spaniard , the governor be so straight , and because our trade be so near finish we think not good either to adventure any land , or to detract further time , but in peace depart from thence the 24 of July , hope to have escape the time of their storm which then soon after begin to reign , the which they call Furicanos , but pass by the west Furicanos . end of Cuba , towards the coast of Florida there happen to we the 12 day of August a extreme storm which continue by the space of four day , which so beat the Jesus , that we cut down all her high building , her rudder also be sore shake , and withal be in so extreme a leak that we be rather upon the point to leave she then to keep she any long , yet hope to bring all to good pass , we seek the coast of Florida , where we find no place nor haven for our ship , because of the shalownesse of the coast : thus be in great despair , and take with a new storm storm . which continue other 3 day , we be enforce to take for our succour the port which serve the city of Mexico call saint John de ullua , which stand in 19 degree : in seek of which port we take in our way 3 ship which carry passenger to the number of a hundred , which passenger we hope shall be a mean to we the better to obtain victual for our money , Sc a quiet place for the repair of our fleet . Shortly after this the 16 of September we enter the [ i3j - 523d port of saint John de ullua and in our entry the °a Spaniard think we to be the fleet of Spain , the chief officer of the country come aboard we , which the Spaniard be deceive of their expectation be great disdeceived . may : but immediate when they see our demand be nothing but victual , be recomfort . i find also in the same port twelve ship which have in they by report two hundred thousand pound in gold and silver , all which ( be in my possession , with the king hand as also the passenger before in my way thitherward stay ) i set at liberty , without the take from they the weight of a groat : only because i will not be delay of my dispatch , i stay two man of estimation and send post immediate to Mexico , which be two hundred mile from we , to the president and Councell there , show they of our arrival there by the force of weather , and the necessity of the repair of our Oure request , ship and victual , which want we require as friend to king Philip to be furnish of for our money : and that the president and Councell there shall with all convenient speed take order , that at the arrival of the spanish fleet , which be daily look for , there may not cause of quarrel rise between we and they , but for the better maintenance of amity , their commandment might be have in that behalf . this message be send away the sixteenth day of September at night , be the very day of our arrival , in the next morning which be the seventeenth day of the same month , we see open of the haven thirteen great ship , the fleet of and understand they to be the fleet of Spain , i Spain . send immediate to advertise the general of the fleet of my be there , do he to understand , that before i will suffer they to enter the port , there shall some order of condition pass between we for our safe be there , and maintenance of peace . now it be to the manner be understand that this port be make by a little hand stone not three foot above the water in the high one ua . piace , a ( j but a bow-shoot of length any way , this hand stand from the main land two bow shoot or more , also it be to be understand that there be not in all this coast any other place for ship to arrive in safety , 68 because the north wind have there such violence , that unless the ship be very safe more with their anchor fasten upon this hand , there be no remedy for these north wind but death : also the place of north wind the haven be so little , that of necessity the ship must ride one aboard the other , so that we can not give place to they , nor they to we : and here i begin to bewail that which after follow , for now , say i , i be in two danger , and force to receive the one of they . that be , either i must have keep out the fleet from enter the port , the which with god help i be very well able to do , or else suffer they to enter in with their accustom treason , which they never fade to execute , where they may have opportunity , to compass it by any mean : if i have keep they out , then have there be present shipwreck of all the fleet which amount in value to six million , which be in value of our money 1800000. livre . which i consider i8ooz&w*w i be not able to answer , fear the queen majesty poundindignation in so weighty a matter . thus with my self revolve the doubt , i think rather better to abide the jutt of the uncertainty , than the certain tie . the uncertain doubt i account be their treason which by good policy i hope may be prevent , and therefore as choose the least mischief i proceed to condition . now be our first messenger come and return from the fleet with report of the arrival of a viceroy , so that he have authority , both in all this a viceroy . province of Mexico ( otherwise call Nueva Espanna ) and in the sea , who send we word that we shall send our condition , which of his part shall ( for the better maintenance of amity between the prince ) be both fare word favourable grant , and faithful perform , with many fair word how pass the coast of the Indies he have understand of our honest behaviour towards the inhabitant where we have to do , aswell elsewhere as in the same port , the which i let pass : thus follow our demand , we require victual for our money , and our request . the english voyage licence to sell as much ware as may furnish our want , and that there may be of either part twelve gentleman as hostage for the maintenance of peace : and that the hand for our better safety may be in our own possession , during our abode there , and such ordinance as be plant in the same hand which be eleven piece of brass : and that no Spaniard may land in the hand with any kind of weapon : these condition at the first he somewhat mislike , chief the guard of the hand to be in our own keep , which if they have have , we have soon know our fare : for with the first north wind they have cut our cable and our ship have go ashore : but in the end he conclude to our request , bring the twelve hostage to ten , which with all speed of either part be receive , with a write from the viceroy sign with his hand and seal with his seal of all the condition conclude , and forthwith a trumpet blow with commandment that none of either part shall be mean to violate the peace upon pain of death : and further it be conclude that the two general of the fleet shall meet , and give faith each to other for the performance of the premise which be so do . thus at the end of 3 day all be conclude and the fleet enter the port , salute one another as the manner of the sea do require . thus as i say before , Thursday we enter the port , Friday we see the fleet , and on Monday at night they enter the port : than we labour 2. day place the english ship by themselves and the spanish ship by themselves , the captain of each part and inferior man of their part promise great amity of all side : which even as with all fidelity it be mean on our part , so the Spaniard mean nothing less on their part , but from the main land have furnish themselves with a supply of man to the number of 1000 , and mean the next Thursday be the 23 of September at dinner time to set upon we on all side . the same Thursday in the morning the treason be at hand , some appearance show , as shift of weapon from ship to ship , plant and bend of ordinance from the ship to the hand where our man ward , pass too and fro of company of man more than require for their necessary business , and many other ill likelihood , which cause we to have a vehement suspicion , and therewithal ! send to the viceroy to inquire viceroy what be mean by it , which send immediate straight commandment to plant all thing suspicious , and also ■ they ' send word that he in the faith of a viceroy will be our defence from all villainy . yet we be not satisfy with this answer , because we suspect a great number of man to be hide in a great ship of 900 ton , which be more next unto the minion , send again to the viceroy the master of the Jesus which have the spanish tongue , and require to be satisfy if any such thing be or not . the viceroy now see that the treason must the treason be discover , forthwith stay our master , blow the brake four . trumpet , and of all side set upon we : our man which ward a shore be strike with sudden fear , give place , flee , and seek to recover succour of the ship ; the Spaniard be before provide for the purpose land in all place in multitude from their ship which they may easy do without boat , and slay all our man a shore without mercy , a few of they escape aboard the Jesus . the great ship which have by the estimation three hundred man place in she secret , immediate fall aboard the minion , but by god the minion appointment , in the time of the suspicion we have , which es / a be only one half hour , the minion be make ready you to avoid , and so lose her hedfast , and hail away by the sternefaste she be get out : thus with god help she defend the violence of the first brunt of these three hundred man . the minion be pass out , they come aboard the Jesus , which also with very much a doe and the loss of many of our man be defend and keep out . than there be also two other ship that assault the Jesus the Jesus at the same instant , so that she have hard get loose , but yet with some time we have cut our head-fast and get out by the stern-fast . now when the Jesus and the minion be get about two ship sharp war , length from the spanish fleet , the fight begin so hot on all side that within one hour the admiral of the Spaniard be suppose to be sink , their vice-admiral 3. ship of the burn and one other of their principali ship suppose to consume sun^e > so that the ship be little able to annoy we . sum ’ then it be to be understand , that all the ordinance upon the island be in the Spaniard hand , which do we so great annoyance , that it cut all the mast and yard of the Jesus , in such sort that there be no hope a hard case , to carry she away : also it sink our small ship , whereupon we determine to place the Jesus on that side of the minion , that she may abide all the battery from the land , and so be a defence for the minion till night , and then to take such relief of victuali and other necessary from the Jesus , as the time will suffer we , and to leave she . as we be thus determine , and have place the minion from the shot of the land , sudden the Spaniard have fire two great ship which be come direct with we , and have no mean to avoid the fire , it breed among our man a marvellous fear , so that some say , let we depart with the minion , other say , let we see whither the wind will carry the fire from we . but to be short , the minion man which have always their sail in a readiness , think to make sure work , and so without either consent of the captain or master cut their sail , so that very hardly i be receive into the minion . the most part of the man that be leave alive in the Jesus , make shift and follow the minion in a small boat , the rest which the little boat be not able to receive , be enforce to abide the mercy of the Spaniard t0 ( which i doubt be very little ) so with the minion tyrants^ on^ and Ju ( iith ( a small bark of 50 ton ) we at storm , escape , which bark the same night forsake we in our great misery : we be now remove with the minion from the spanish ship two bowshootes , and there ride all that night : the next morning we recover a hand a mile from the Spaniard , where there take we a north 1568. wind , and be leave only with two anchor and two cable ( for in this conflict we lose three cable and two anchor ) we think always upon death which ever be present , but God preserve we to a long time . the weather wax reasonable , and the Saturday we set sail , and have a great number of man and little [ hl 525. ] victual our hope of life wax less and less : some ^es desire to yield to the Spaniard , some rather desire to obtain a place where they may give themselves to the infidel , and some have rather abide with a little pittance hard choice . the mercy of God at sea : so thus with many sorrowful heart we wander in a unknown sea by the space of 14 day , till hunger enforce we to seek the land , for hide be think very good meat , rat , cat , mouse and misery . dog , none escape that may be get , parrot and monkey that be have in great price , be think there very profitable if they serve the turn one dinner : thus in the end the 8 day of October we come to the land in the bottom of the same bay of Mexico in 23 degree and a half , where we hope to have find inhabitant of the Spaniard , relief of victual , and place for the repair of our ship , which be so sore beat with shot from our enemy and bruise with shoot off our own ordinance , that our weary and weak arm be scarce able to defend and keep out water . but all thing happen to the contrary , for we find neither people , victuali , nor haven of relief , but a place where have fair weather with some peril we may land a boat : our people be force with hunger desire to be set on land , whereunto i consent . and such as be willing to land i put they apart , and such as be desirous to go homewards , i put apart , so that they be indifferent part a hundred of one side hundred and a hundred of the other side : these hundred man we set a land with all diligence in this little place beforesaid , an^a which be land , we determine there to take in fresh half . water , and so with our little remain of victual to take the sea . the next day have a land with i fifty of our 73 the english Voyages hundred man that remain for the speedy prepare of our water aboard , there arise a extreme storm , so that in three day we can by no mean repair aboard our ship : the ship also be in such peril that every hour we look for shipwreck . but yet God again have mercy on we , and send fair weather , we have aboard our water , and depart the sixteenth day of October , after which day we have fair and prosperous weather till the sixteenth day of November , which day God be praise we be clear from the coast of the Indies , and out of the channel and gulf of Bahama , which be between the cape of Florida , and the island of Lucayo . after this grow near to the cold country , our man be oppress with famine , die continual , and they that be leave , grow into such weakness that we be scant able to manage our ship , and the wind be always ill for we to recover England , we determine to go with Galicia in Spain , with intent there to relieve our company and other extreme want . And be arrive the last day of December in a place near unto Vigo call Ponte Vedra , our man with excess of fresh meat grow into miserable disease , and die a great part of they . this matter be bear out as long as it may be , but in the end although there be none of our man suffer to go a land , yet by access of the Spaniard , our feebleness be know to they . whereupon they cease not to seek by all mean to betray we , but with all speed possible we depart to Vigo , where we have some help of certain english ship and twelve fresh man , wherewith we repair our want as we may , and depart the 20 day of January 1568 arrive in mount bay in Cornwall the 25 of the same month , praise be God therefore . if all the misery and troublesome affair of this sorrowful voyage shall be perfect and thorough write , there shall need a painful man with his pen , and as great a time as he have that write the life and death of the martyr . John Hawkins . 