the voyage make to the bay of Mexico by m. William king captain , m. Moore , m. how , and m. Boreman owner , with the Salomon of 200 ton , and the jane Bonaventure of 40 ton of sir Henry palmer , from Ratcliff the 26 of January 1592. he Salomon be man with a hundred man , all mariner , and the jane with six and twenty , all like wise mariner . we come first to the down in Kent , and never strike sail in pass thence , until we come to cape S. Vincent on the coast of Portugal . from thence we shape our course to Lancerota one of the canary island , where we land threescore man , and fetch a caravel out of a harbour on the south side , and from a small island we take a demy-canon of brass in despite of the inhabitant , which play upon we with their small shot at our first land : of who we slay three ; and give they the repulse . Thence we go to the grand 190 Canaria , where we board a bark lie at anchor : out of which we be drive by great store of shot from the island . from thence we direct our course for the west Indies , and fall with the isle of Dominica about the ten of April . there at a water place we take a ship of a hundred ton come from guiny , lade with two hundred and seventy negro , which we carry with we to saint Juan de Puerto Rico , and there come through el passaje , we give chase to a frigate which go in to saint Juan de Puerto Rico , and in the night we send in our shallope with fourteen man . and out of the harbour we take away a english ship of seventy ton , lade with threescore ton of canary-wine , in despite of the castle and two new bulwark , be within caliver shoot . Theise two prize we carry away to the westermost part of the island , and put the negro , except fifteen , all on land in a spanish caravel which the jane Bonaventure take : and we carry away one of the former prize , and set fire on the other . we pass thence by the isle of Mona , where we water , and refresh our self with potatos and plantans , and so come to the isle of Saona : and from thence arrive at the mouth of the river of Santo Domingo . and as we sail to cape Tiburon , three league to the westward of Santo Domingo we take a boat of fifteen ton , which have certain jar of maloss or unrefined sugar , with three man ; which man with their boat we carry with we to cape Tiburon , which , in respect of service do unto we in furnish we with fresh water , we dismiss . thus contrary to other Englishman course we shape we to the southward of Jamaica , and our shallop with Jamaica . 12 man range the coast but find nothing . Thence we range the three island of the caimanes , and land at grand Caiman , be the westermost , where we find no people , but a good river of fresh water ; and there we mw turn up threescore great tortoise ; and of they we take our choice , to wit , fifteen of the female , which caima „ t be the best and full of egg , whereof two serve a 191 the english voyage hundred man a day . and there with stone we may kill turtle dove , wild goose , and other good fowl at our pleasure . Thence we come to cape de Corrientes on Cuba to water , and from thence to cape S. Antonio , and so go over for the Tortugas , without take of any new prize : and thence cut over to Rio de puercos on the coast of Cuba . there we take a small bark of twenty ton , with four man and forty live hog , with certain dry pork cut like leather jerkin along , and dry hog tongue and neat tongue , and 20 ox hide . then pass thence , within four day we take a ship of 80 ton lade with hide , indico , and salsa perilla , north of a headland call corugna : thence the current set we to the east to the old chanel . there we take a frigate of 20 ton , have certain piece of spanish broad cloth and other small pillage : there continue off the matan$as 12 day , with the wind so westerly that we can hardly recover Havana in the month of May . here we take two boat lade with tortoise , which we sink , save some of the tortoise , and set the man on shore . then at length we recover up to Havana , where we come so near to the fort , that for one hour fight they overreach we with their long ordinance . then come out the two galley , have 27 bank on a side , and fight with we another hour ; which for that time leave we by reason of the increase of the wind . then pass alongst nine league to the westward we find out a excellent harbour , have three fathom water at the flood , able within to receive a thousand sail , where we find hog-house , which they term coralle , and take away certain hog and pig . as we come out of this harbour , the weather be calm , we be encounter by the galley , which have follow we , and fight with they three hour , oftentimes within caliver shoot : but we make such spoil of their man and oar , that they begin to be weary , and give we over , with their great loss . here within four day after , as we lay to the northward six league off this harbour of Cavannas , we meet with 192 I592 > master captain lane , general of master wat his fleet , and captain Roberts , in the exchange , a ship of Bristol , [ he . 571. ] of a hundred and forty ton , and master Benjamin wood with his four ship which be set out by my lord Thomas Howard with captain Kenel of Limehouse captain of the Cantar of Weymouth . all we be here together espy a ship of some 50 ton , which we chase with their boat ; but my shallope first board she , and take she : which have in her sack , canary-wine , muscadel , tent in jar , and good store of oil in jar . the ship we unlade and burn : the man run on shore . hence we come all together , be about 13 sail , before Havana ; but pass by we give chase to a ship of 60 tun , which enter into a harbour a league to the northwest of Havana , which with boat be board , and find to be of Puerto de Cavallos in the bay of Honduras , lade with tan hide , salsa perilla , indigo , raw hide , and good store of balsamum : and she have four chest of gold , which they get on land before we can come to they . we bring this ship into England . thus spend a sevennight in lie off and on for purchase , and find nothing come , i set sail for England , and arrive at Dover about the ten of November 1592. ten 