a letter of m. Thomas candish to the right honourable the lord Hunsdon , lord chamberlain , one of her majesty most honourable privy council , touch the success of his voyage about the world . Right honourable , as your favour heretofore have be most great extend towards i , so i humble desire a continuance thereof : and though there be no mean in i to deserve the same , yet the uttermost of my service shall not be want , whensoever it shall please your honour to dispose thereof . i be humble to desire your honour to make know unto her majesty the desire i have have to do her majesty service in the performance of this voyage . and as it have please God to give she the victory over part of her enemy , so i trust year long to see she overthrow they all . for the place of their wealth , whereby they have maintain and make their war , be now perfect discover : and if it please her majesty , with a very small power she may take the spoil of they all . it have please the almighty 376 to suffer i to circompasse the whole globe of the world , enter in at the strait of Magellan , and return by the cape de buena esperanza . in which voyage i have either discover or bring certain intelligence of all the rich place of the world that ever be know or discover by any christian . i navigate alongst the coast of Chili , Peru , and Nueva Espanna , where i make great spoil : i burn and sink 19 sail of ship small and great . all the village and town that ever i land at , i burn and spoil : and have i not be discover upon the coast , i have take great quantity of treasure . the matter of most profit unto i be a great ship of the king which i take at California , which ship come from the philippinas , be one of the rich of merchandise that ever pass those sea , as the king register and merchant account do show : for it do amount in value to * in Mexico to be sell . which good ( for that my ship be not able to contain the least part of they ) i be enforce to set on fire . from the cape of California , be the uttermost part of all Nueva Espanna , i navigate to the island of the philippinas hard upon the coast of China ; of which country i have bring such intelligence as have not be hear of in these part . the stateliness and riches of which country i fear to make report of , lest i shall not be credit : for if i have not know sufficient the incomparable wealth of that country , i shall have be as incredulous thereof , as other will be that have not have the like experience . i sail along the hand of the Malucos , where among some of the heathen people i be well entreat , where our country man may have trade as free as the Portugal , if they will themselves . from thence i pass by the cape of buena esperanza , and find out by the way homeward the island of saint Helena , where the Portugal use to relieve themselves : and from that island God have suffer i to return into 377 England . all which service with my self i humble prostrate at her majesty foot , desire the almighty long to continue her reign among we : for at this day she be the most famous and victorious prince that live in the world . thus humble desire pardon of your honour for my tediousness , i leave your lordship to the tuition of the almighty . Plymouth this nine of September 1588. your honour most humble to command , Thomas candish . 