a brief relation of a voyage of the delight a ship of Bristol one of the consort of m. John Chidley esquire and m. Paul wheel , make unto the strait of Magellan : with diverse accident that happen unto the company , during their 6. week abide there : begin in the year 1589. write by W. magoth . he five of August 1589. the worshipful m. John Chidley of Chidley in the county of Devon esquire , with m. Paul wheel and captain Andrew mericke set forth from Plymouth with three tall ship , the one call the wild man of three hundred ton , wherein go for general the aforesaid m. John Chidley and Benjamin wood as master , the other call the white lion , whereof m. Paul wheel be captain and John Ellis master , of the burden of 340. ton : the three the delight of Bristol , wherein go m. Andrew Merick as captain , and Robert Burnet master , with two pinnace of 14. or 15. ton a piece . the general in his ship have 180. person : m. Paul wheel have 140 , in our own ship we be 91. man and boy . our voyage be intend by the strait of Magellan for 381 m. Chidleys voyage intend partly for Arauco in Chili . Cabo Blanco . the delight lose the company of the rest of the fleet. port desire . two spring of fresh watet find at port desire . they enter into the strait of . Magelan . the english voyage the south sea , and chief for the famous province of Arauco on the coast of Chili . we keep company together to the isle of the canary and so forward to cape Blanco stand near the northerly latitude of 20. degree on the coast of Barbary , where some of our people go on shore find nothing to their content . within 12. day after our departure from this place the delight , wherein i William Magoths be , lose the company of the other two great ship , and the two small pinnace . howbeit we constant keep our course accord to our direction along the coast of Brasil , and by the river of plate , without touch any where on land until we come to port desire in the latitude of 48 degree to the southward of the equinoctial . before we arrive at this place there die of our company by God visitation of sundry disease 16. person . we stay in this harbour 17. day to grave our ship and refresh our weary people , hope here to have meet with our consort : which fall out contrary to our expectation . during our abode in this place we find two little spring of fresh water , which be upon the northwesterly part of the land , and light upon good store of seal both old and young . from hence we sail towards the strait of Magelan , and enter the same about the first of January . And come to Penguin island within the straight we take and salt certain hogshead of penguin , which must be eat with speed : for we find they to be of no long continuance ; we also furnish our self with fresh water . and here at the last send off - our boat to the island for the rest they loose 15. of our provision , we lose she and 15. man in hereby of their man force of foul weather ; but what become of they we by tempest . can not tell . here also in this storm we lose two anchor . from hence we pass far into the strait , a Spaniard and by port famine we speak with a Spaniard , who tell take at port - they that he have live in those part 6. year , and that he famtne . be one of the 4oo . man that be send king of Spain in the year 1582. to fortify and inhabit 382 there , to hinder the passage of all stranger that way into the south sea . but that and the other spanish colony be both destroy by famine , he say he have live in a house by himself a long time , and relieve himself with his caliver until our come thither . here we make a boat of the board of our chest ; which be finish we send 7. arm man in the same on land on the north shore , be waft on land by the savage with certain white skin ; who as soon as they come on shore be present kill by a 100 of the wild people in the sight of 2. of our man , which row they on shore , which two only escape back again to we with the boat . after this traitorous slaughter of our man , we fall back again with our ship to the northeastward of port famine to a certain road , where we refresh our self with muscle , and take in water and wood . at this time we take in the Spaniard aforesaid , and so sail forward again into the strait . we pass 7. or 8. time 10. league westward beyond cape froward , be still encounter with mighty northwest wind . Theise wind and the current be so vehement against we , that they force we back as in two hour , as we be get up in 8. hour . thus after we have spend 6. week in the straight strive against the fury of the element , and have at sundry time partly by casualty , and partly by sickness lose 38. of our best man , and 3. anchor , and now have but one anchor leave we , and small store of victual , and , which be not the least mischief , diverse of our company raise dangerous mutiny : we consult , though somewhat with the late , for the safeguard of our life to return while there be some small hope remain : and so set sail out of the strait homeward about the 14. of February 1590. we return back again by the river of plate ; and sail near the cost of Brasill we meet with a Portugal ship of 80. ton , which ride at a anchor upon the coast , who as soon as she descry we to chase she , incontinent weigh , and run her self on ground between 383 A.D. 1590. seven of our man kill by the treason of the savage on the north shore . they pass 7. or 8. time ten league westward of cape froward . [ Iii . 840. ] they return homeward . the isle of . Sebastian in 24. degr . of southerly latitude on the coast of Branl . they land at Manville de Hage 8. mile west of Cherbourg . the english voyage the island of saint Sebastian and the main land . but we for want of a good boat , and by reason of the foul weather , be neither able to board she , nor to go on shore . Thence in extreme misery we shape our course for the isle of cape Verde , and so pass to the isle of the azore , the canary be something out of our course ; the first land that we meet withal in our narrow sea be the isle of Alderney . and have now but six man of all our company leave alive , the master and his two mate and chief mariner be dead , we run in with Monville de Hage eight mile to the west of Cherbourg in . Normandy . where the next day after our come to a anchor , have but one in all leave , be the last of August 1590. by the foul weather that rise the anchor come home , and our ship drive on the rock : and the norman which be command by the governor of Cherbourg ( who come down to we that night ) to have lay out another anchor for she , neglect-the wrack of ing his commandment , suffer she miserable to be the ship by the split , with desire to enrich themselves by her wrack . malice of they within few dave after this last mischance fnnre nf n within few day after this last mischance four of we norman . they arrive in England . be Englishman depart from Cherbourgh , and pass home for England in a bark of Weymouth , leave the two stranger there behind we . the name of we six that return of all our company be these . f 1 William magoth of Bristol . i 2 Richard Bush. a 3 John Reade . ^4 Richard Hodgkins of Westburie near Bristol . the two stranger . i 5 Gabriel Valerosa a Portugal . i 6 Peter , a briton . 