a extract take out of the map of Sebastian Cabot , cut by clement Adam , concern his discovery of the west Indies , which be to be see in her majesty privy gallery at Westminster , and in many other ancient merchant house . Nno domini 1497 Joannes Cabotus Venetus , and Sebastianus illius filius eam terram fecerunt perviam , quam nullus prius adire ausus fuit , die 24 Junii , circiter horam quintam bene mane . hanc autem appellavit terram primum visam , credo quod ex mari in eam partem primum oculos injecerat . nam quae ex adverso sita est insula , eam appellavit insulam divi Joannis , hac opinor ratione , qudd aperta fuit eo die qui est sacer divo Joanni Baptistae : huius incolae pelles animalium , exuviasque ferarum pro indumentis habent , easque tanti faciunt , vn 145 king quanti nos vestes preciosissimas . cum bellum gerunt , utuntur arcu , sagittis , hasti , spiculis , clavis ligneis and fundis . Tellus sterilis est , neque ullos fructus aflert , ex quo fit , ut ursis albo colore , and cervis inusitatae apud nos magnitudinis referta sit : piscibus abundat , iisque sane magnis , quales sunt lupi marini , and quos salmon vulgus appellat ; soleae autem reperiuntur tam longae , ut ulnae mensuram excedant . imprimis autem magna est copia eorum piscium , quos vulgari sermon vocant bacallaos . gignuntur in ea insula accipitres ita nigri , ut corvorum similitudinem mirum in modum exprimant , perdices autem and aquilae sunt nigri coloris . the same in english . in the year of our lord 1497 John Cabot a venetian , and his son Sebastian ( with a english fleet set out from Bristol ) discover that land which no man before that time have attempt , on the 24 of June , about five of the clock early in the morning . this land he call prima vista , that be to say , first see , because as i suppose it be that part whereof they have the first sight from sea . that island which lie out before the land , he call the island of S. John upon this occasion , as i think , because it be discover upon the day of John the baptist . the inhabitant of this island use to wear beast skin , and have they in as great estimation as we have our fine garment . in their war they use bow , arrow , pike , dart , wooden club , and sling . the soil be barren in some place , and yield little fruit , but it be full of white bear ; and stag far great than we . it yield plenty of fish , and those very great , as seal , and those which common we call salmon : there be sole also above a yard in length : but especial there be great abundance of that kind of fish which the savage call baccalaos . in the same island also there breed hauk , but they be so black that they be very like to raven , as also their partridge , and eagle , which be in like sort black . 146 a discourse of Sebastian Cabot touch his discovery of part of the west India out of England in the time of king Henry the seven , use to Galeacius Butrigarius the pope legate in Spain , and report by the say legate in this sort . ) e you not understand say he ( speak to certain gentleman of Venice ) how to pass to India towards the northwest , as do of late a citizen of Venice , so valiant a man , and so well practise in all thing pertain to navigation , and the science of cosmography , that at this present he have not his like in Spain , insomuch that for his virtue he be prefer above all other pilot that sail to the west Indies , who may not pass thither without his licence , and be therefore call piloto mayor , that be , the grand pilot and when we say that we know he not , he proceed , say , that be certain year in the city of Sivil , and desirous to have some knowledge of the navigation of the Spaniard , it be tell he that there be in the city a valiant man , a venetian bear name Sebastian Cabot , who have the charge of those thing , be a expert man in that science , and one that can make card for the sea with his own hand , and that by this report , seek his acquaintance , he find he a very gentle person , who entertain he friendly , and show he many thing , and among other a large map of the world , with certain particular navigation , as well of the Portugal , as of the Spaniard , and that he speak further unto he to this effect . this discourse be take out of the second volume of the voyage of Baptista Ramusius . Sebastian Cabota Pilot mayor of Spain . [ Iii . 7. ] when my father depart from Venice many year since to dwell in England , to follow the trade of merchandises , he take i with he to the city of London , while i be very young , yet have nevertheless some knowledge of letter of humanity , and of the sphere . 147 the second voyage of Cabot to the land of Brasil , and Rio the plat a. the english voyage and when my father die in that time when news be bring that don Christopher Colonus Genuese have discover the coast of India , whereof be great talk in all the court of king Henry the 7. who then reign , insomuch that all man with great admiration affirm it to be a thing more divine then humane , to sail by the west into the east where spice grow , by a way that be never know before , by this fame and report there increase in my heart a great flame of desire to attempt some notable thing . And understand by reason of the sphere , that if i shall sail by way of they northwest , i shall by a short tract come into India , i thereupon cause the king to be advertise of my devise , who immediate command two caravel to be furnish with all thing appertain to the voyage , which be as far as 1 remember in the year 1496. in the begin of summer . i begin therefore to sail towards the northwest , not think to find any other land then that of Cathay , and from thence to turn towards India , but after certain day i find that the land run towards the north , which be to i a great displeasure . nevertheless , sail along by the coast to see if i can find any gulf that turn , i find the land still continent to the 56. degree under our pole . And see that there the coast turn towards the east , despair to find the passage , i turn back again , and sail down by the coast of that land towards the equinoctial ( ever with intent to find the say passage to India ) and come to that part of this firm land which be now call Florida , where my victual fail , i depart from thence and return into England , where i find great tumult among the people , and preparation for war in Scotland : by reason whereof there be no more consideration have to this voyage . whereupon i go into Spain to the catholique king , and queen Elizabeth , which be advertise what i have do , entertain i , and at their charge furnish certain ship , wherewith they cause i to sail to dis-148 cover the coast of Brasile , where i find a exceed great and large river name at this present Rio de la plata , that be , the river of silver , into the which i sail and follow it into the firm land , more than six score league , find it every where very fair , and inhabit with infinite people , which with admiration come run daily to our ship . into this river run so many other river , that it be in manner incredible . after this i make many other voyage , which i now pretermit , and wax old , i give my self to rest from such travel , because there be now many young and lusty pilot and mariner of good experience , by who for - office of wardnesse i do rejoice in the fruit of my labour , and ’ " ‘ mere with the charge of this office , as you see . another testimony of the voyage of Sebastian Cabot to the west and northwest , take out of the sixth chapter of the three decade of Peter martyr of Angleria . Crutatus est oras glaciales Sebastianus quidam Cabotus genere Venetus , say a parentibus in . britanniam insulam tendentibus ( uti moris est venetorum , qui commercii causa terrarum omnium sunt hospite ) transportatus pene infans . duo be sibi navigia , propria pecunia in Brit - annia ipsa instruxit , and prim tendens cum hominibus tercentum ad septentrionem donec etiam julio mense vastas repererit glaciales mole pelago natantes , and lucem fere perpetuam , tellure tamen libera , gelu liquefacto : quare coactus fuit , uti ait , vela vertere and occidentem sequi : tetenditque tantum ad meridiem littore seize in - * 5° curvante , ut herculei freti latitudinis fere gradus aequarit : ad occidentemque profectus tantum est ut cubam insulam a laeva , longitudine graduum pene parem , habuerit . be ea littora percurren , quae baccalaos appelavit , eosdem se reperisse aquarum , sed lenes delapsus ad occidentem ait , quos Castellani , meridionales suas regiones adnavigantes , inveniunt . ergo non modd verisimilius , sed necessario concludendum est , vastos inter utramque ignotam hactenus tellurem jacere hiatus , qui viam praebeant aquis ab orient cadentibus in occidentem . quas arbitror impulsu coelorum circulariter agi in gyrum circa terrae globum , non autem demogorgo anhelante vomi , absorberique ut nonnulli senserunt , quod influxu , and refluxu forsan assentire daretur . baccalaos , Cabotus ipse terras illa appellavit , eo quod in earum pelago tantam reperierit magnorum quorundam piscium , tynnos aemulantium , sic vocatorum ab indigenis , multitudinem , ut etiam illi interdum navigia detardarent . earum regionum homines pellibus tantum coopertos reperiebat , rationis haudquaquam expertes . Ursorum inesse regionibus copiam ingentem refert , qui and ipsi piscibus vescantur . inter densa namque piscium illorum agmina seize immergunt ursi , and singulos singuli complexos , unguibusque inter squamma immissis in terram raptant and comedunt . propterea minime noxios hominibus visos esse ait . Orichalcum in plerisque locis se vidisse apud incolas praedicat . Familiarem habeo domi cobotum ipsum , and contubernalem intejdum . vocatus namque ex britannia a rege nostro catholico , post henrici majoris britanniae regis mortem , concurialis noster est , expectatque indies , ut navigia sibi parentur , quibus arcanum hoc naturae laten jam tandem detegatur . the same in english . these north sea have be search by one Sebastian Cabot , a venetian bear , who be yet but in manner a infant , his parent carry with they into England , have occasion to resort thither for trade of mar - the people of island say the sea and ice set also west . Jonas arngrimus . the english voyage chandise , as be the manner of the venetian to leave no part of the world unsearched to obtain riches . he therefore furnish two ship in England at his own charge , and first with 300 man direct his course so far towards the north pole , that even in the month of July he find monstrous heap of ice swim on the sea , and in manner continual day light , yet see he the land in that tract free from ice , which have be melt by the heat of the sun . thus see such heap of ice before he , he be enforce to turn his sail and follow the west , so coast still by the shore , that he be thereby bring so far into the south , by reason of the land bend so much southwards , that it be there almost equal in latitude , with the sea Fretum Herculeum , have the northpole elevate in manner in the same degree . he sail likewise in this tract so far towards the west , that he have the island of Cuba on his left hand , in manner in the same degree of longitude . as he travel by the coast of this great land , ( which he name baccalaos ) he say that he find the like course of the water towards the west , but the same to run more soft and gentle then the swift water which the Spaniard find in their navigation southward . wherefore it be not only more like to be true , but aught also of necessity to be conclude that between both the land hitherto unknown , there shall be certain great open place whereby the water shall thus continual pass from the east unto the west : which water i suppose to be drive about the globe of the earth by the un-cessant move and impulsion of the heaven , and not to be swallow up and cast up again by the breathe of Daemogorgon , as some have imagine , because they see the sea by increase and decrease to ebb and flow . Sebastian Cabot himself name those land baccalaos , because that in the sea thereabouts he find so great multitude of certain big fish much like unto Tunies , ( which the inhabitant call baccalaos ) that they sometime stay his ship . he find also the people of those * 5* region cover with beast skin , yet not without the use of reason . he also say there be great plenty of bear in those region which use to eat fish : for ing themselves into you water , where they perceive a multitude of these fish to lie , they fasten their claw in their scale , and so draw they to land and eat they , so ( as he say ) the bear be thus satisfy with fish , be not noisome to man . he declare further , that in many place of these region he see great plenty of copper among the inhabitant . Cabot be my very friend , who i use familiar , and delight to have he sometime keep i company in my own house . for be call out of England by the commandment of the catholique king of Castille , after the death of king Henry the seven of that name king of England , he be make one of our council and assistant , as touch the affair of the new Indies , look for ship daily to be furnish for he to discover this hide secret of nature . of three savage which Cabot bring home and present unto the king in the fourteenth year of his reign , mention by the foresay Robert Fabian . his year also be bring unto the king three man take in the newfound island that before i speak of , in William Purchas time be mayor : these be clothe in beast skin , and do eat raw flesh , and speak such speech that no man can understand they , and in their demeanour like to bruit beast , who the king keep a time after . of the which upon two year after , i see two apparel after the manner of Englishman in Westminster palace , which that time i can not discern from Englishman , till i be learned what they be , but as for speech , i hear none of they utter one word . a discourse write by sir Humphrey Gilbert knight , to prove a passage by the northwest to Cathaia , and the east Indies . the table of the matter in every chapter of this discourse . Capitulo 1. o prove by authority a passage to be on the north side of America , to go to Cataia , China , and to the east India . Capitulo 2. to prove by reason a passage to be on the north side of America , to go to Cataia , Moluccas , etc Capitulo 3. to prove by experience of sundry man travail the open of this northwest passage , whereby good hope remain of the rest . 158 to prove by circumstance , that the northwest passage have be sail throughout . Capitulo 5. to prove that such Indians as have be drive upon the coast of Germany come not thither by the southeast , and Southwest , nor from any part of Africa or America . Capitulo 6. to prove that the indian aforenamed come not by the north-east , and that there be no thorough passage navigable that way . Capitulo 7. to prove that these Indians come by the northwest , which induce a certainty of this passage by experience . Capitulo 8. what several reason be allege before the queen majesty , and certain lord of her highness privy council , by m. Anth. Jenkinson a gentleman of great travail and experience , to prove this passage by the north-east , with my several answer then allege to the same . Capitulo 9 how that this passage by the northwest be more commodious for our traffic , than the other by the north-east , if there be any such . Capitulo 10. what commodity will ensue , this passage be once discover . [ to prove 159 to prove by authority a passage to be on the northside of America , to go to Cathaia , and the east India . chapter 1. when i give my self to the study of Geographic , after i have peruse and diligent scan the description of Europe , Asia and Africa , and confer they with the map and globe both antique and modern : i come in fine to the four part of the world , common call America , which by all description i find to be a hand environ round about with sea , have on the southside of it the frete or straight of Magellan , on the west side mar deal Sur , which sea run towards the north , separate it from the east part of Asia , where the dominion of the cathaians be : on the east part our west ocean , and on the north side the sea that sever it from Groneland , through which northern sea the passage lie , which i take now in hand to discover . Plato in Timaeo , and in the dialogue call Critias , discourse of a incomparable great hand then call Atlantis , be great than all Africa and Asia , which lie westward from the strait of Gibraltar , navigable round about : affirm also that the prince of Atlantis do aswell enjoy the governance of all Africa , and the most part of Europe , as of Atlantis it self . also to prove Plato opinion of this hand , and the inhabit of it in ancient time by they of Europe , to be of the more credit ; Marinseus Siculus in his chronicle of Spain , report that there have be find by the Spaniard in the gold mine of America , certain piece of money engrave with the image of Augustus Caesar : which piece be send to the pope for a testimony of the matter , by John Rufus archbishop of Consentinum . Moreover , this be not only think of Plato , but by Marsilius Ficinus , and excellent florentine philosopher , 160 Crantor the grecian , and Proclus , and Philo the famous pnclut page . Jew ( as appear in his book de mundo , and in the 24-commentary upon Plato ) to be overflow and swallow up with water , by reason of a mighty earthquake , and stream down of the heavenly fludgate . the like whereof happen unto some part of Italy , when by the forciblenes of the sea , call Superum , it cut off Sicilia from the continent of Calabria , as appear in Justine , in the begin of his four book . also Justine Lib. there chance the like in Zetland a part of Flanders . and also the city of Pyrrha and Antissa , about Pliny . Meotis palus : and also the city Burys , in the corynthian bosom , common call Sinus Corinthiacus , have be swallow up with the sea , and be not at this day to be discern : by which accident America grow to be unknown of long time , unto we of the late age , and be late discover again , by Americus Vespucius , in the year of our lord 1497. which some say to have be first discover by Christophorus Columbus a genuois , anno 1492. the same calamity happen unto this isle of Atlantis 600. and odd year before Plato his time , which some of the people of the southeast part of the world accounted as 9000. year : for the manner then be to reckon the moon her period of the zodiak for a year , which be our usual month , depend a Luminari minori . so that in these our day there can no other main or island be find or judge to be parcel of this Atlantis , than those western island , which bear now the name of America : countervail thereby the name of Atlantis , in the knowledge of our age . then , if when no part of the say Atlantis be oppress by water , and earthquake , the coast round about the same be navigable : a far great hope now remain of the same by the northwest , see the most part of it be ( since that time ) swallow up with a minore ad water , which can not utter take away the old deep mai^-and channel , but rather , be a occasion of the enlarge Vii 161 l of the old , and also a enforce of a great many new : why then shall we now doubt of our northwest passage and navigation from England to India ? etc see that Atlantis now call America , be ever know to be a island , and in those day navigable round about , which by access of more water can not be diminish . also Aristotle in his book de mundo , and the learned germane Simon Gryneus in his annotation upon the same , say that the whole earth ( mean thereby , as manifest do appear , Asia , Africa , and Europe , be all the country then know ) be but one island , compass about with the reach of the sea Atlantine : which likewise prove America to be a island , and in no part adjoin to Asia , or the rest . Strabo lib . 15. also many ancient writer , as Strabo and other , call both the ocean sea , ( which lie east of India ) Atlanticum pelagus , and that sea also on the west coast of Spain and Africa , mare Atlanticum : the distance between the two coast be almost half the compass of the earth . so that it be incredible , as by Plato appear manifest , that the east indian sea have the name Atlanticum pelagus of the mountain Atlas in Africa , or yet the sea adjoin to Africa , have the name Oceanus Atlanticus Valerius of the same mountain : but that those sea and the anselmus in mountain Atlas be so call of this great island rum Orin Atlantis , and that the one and the other have their name dpium . folio 6. for a memorial of the mighty prince Atlas , sometime king Gen. 9 10. thereof , who be Japhet young son to Noah , in who time the whole earth be divide between the three brethren , Sem , cam , and Japhet . wherefore i be of opinion that America by the northwest will be find favourable to this our enterprise , and be the rather embolden to believe the same , for that i find it not only confirm by Plato , Aristotle , and other ancient philosopher : but also by all the best [ two modern geographer , as gemma Frisius , Munsterus , Appianus , Hunterus , Gastaldus , Guyccardinus , Michael 162 Tramasinus , Franciscus Demongenitus , Bernardus Puteanus , Andreas Vavasor , Tramontanus , Petrus martyr , and also Ortelius , who do coast out in his generali map set out anno 1569 , all the country and cape , on the northwest side of America , from Hochelaga to cape de Paramantia : describe likewise the sea coast of Cataia and Gronland , towards any part of America , make both Gronland and America , island disjoin by a great sea , from any part of Asia . all which learned man and painful traveller have affirm with one consent and voice , that America be a island : and that there lie a great sea between it , Cataia , and Grondland , by the which any man of our country , that will give the attempt , may with small danger pass to Cataia , the Moluccas , India , and all other place in the east , in much short time , then either the Spaniard , or Portugal do , or may do , from the near part of any of their country within Europe . what move these learned man to affirm thus much , wh i know not , or to what end so many and sundry traveller of both age have allow the same : but i reverent conjecture that they will never have so constant opinion of affirm , or notify their opinion therein to the world , worthy man . if they have not have great good cause , and many probable reason , to have lead they thereunto . now lest you shall make small account of ancient writer or of their experience which travel long before our time , reckon their authority among fable of no importance : i have for the better assurance of those proof , set down some part of a discourse , write in the saxon tongue , and translate into english by m. Nowell servant to sir William Cecil , lord Burleigh , and lord high treasurer of England , wherein there be describe a navigation , which one ochther make , in the time of a navigation king Alfred , king of westsaxe anno 871. the word of ofoneqchther which discourse be these : he sail right north , have always the desert land on the starborde , and on the larboard the main sea , continue his course , until 163 a perfect description ofour Moscovia voyage - by sir Hugh Willouglibie knight , chancellor and borough . the english voyage he perceive that the coast bow direct towards the east , or else the sea open into the land he can not tell how far , where he be compel to stay until he have a western wind , or somewhat upon the north , and sail thence direct east alongst the coast , so far as he be able in four day , where he be again enforce to tarry until he have a north wind , because the coast there bow direct towards the south , or at least open he know not how far into the land , so that he sail thence along the coast continual full south , so far as he can travel in the space of five day , where he discover a mighty river , which open far into the land , and in the entry of this river he turn back again . whereby it appear that he go the very same way , that we now do yearly trade by saint Nicholas into mos-covia , which way no man in our age know for certainty to be by sea , until it be since discover by our english man , in the time of king Edward the sixth ; but think before that time that Groneland have join to Normoria , Byarmia , etc and therefore be account a new discovery , be nothing so indeed , as by this discourse of ochther it appear . nevertheless if any man shall have take this voyage in hand by the encouragement of this only author , he shall have be think but simple : consider that this navigation be write so many year past , in so barbarous a tongue by one only obscure author , and yet we in these our day find by our own experience his former report to be true . how much more than ought we to believe this passage to Cataia to be , be verify by the opinion of all the best , both antique , and modern geographer , and plain set out in the best and most allow map , Charts , globe , cosmographical table and discourse of this our age , and by the rest not deny , but left as a matter doubtful . 164 to prove by reason , a passage to be on the northside of America , to go to Cataia , etc Chap. 3. first , all sea be maintain by the abundance of experiment water , so that the near the end any river , bay or haven be , the shallower it wax , ( although by some er ' accidentali bar , it be sometime find otherwise ) but the far you sail west from island towards the place , where this fret be think to be , the more deep be the sea : which give we good hope of continuance of the same sea with mar deal Sur , by some fret that lie between America , Groneland and Cataia . 2 also if that America be not a island , but a part of you continent adjoin to Asia , either the people [ three . 14. ] which inhabit Mangia , Anian , and quinzay , etc be borderer upon it , will before this time have make some road into it , hope to have find some like commodity to their own . 3 or else the scythian and tartarian ( which often time heretofore have seek far and near for new seat , drive thereunto through the necessity of their need make cold and miserable country ) will in all this time have the old we t0 find the way to America , and enter the same , have the ’ passage be never so strait or difficult ; the country be so temperate , pleasant and fruitful , in comparison of their own . but there be never any such people find there by any of the Spaniard , Portugal , or Frenchmen , who first discover the inland of that country : which Spaniards , or Frenchmen must then of necessity have see some one civil man in America , consider how full of civil people Asia be : but they never see so much as one token or sign , that ever any man of the know part of the world have be there . 4 furthermore it be to be think , that if by reason of mountain , or other craggy place , the people neither 165 motum fluxus y refluxus . 3 motum circularem . ad coeli motum elementa omnia ( excepta terra ) moventur . the english voyage of Cataia or Tartary can enter the country of America , or they of America have enter Asia if it be so join : yet some one savage or wander beast will in so many year have pass into it : but there have not any time be find any of the beast proper to Cataia , or Tartary etc in America : nor of those proper to America , in Tartary , Cataia , etc or any part of Asia . which thing prove America , not only to be one island , and in no part adjoin to Asia : but also that the people of those country , have not have any traffic with each other . 5 moreover at the least some one of those painful traveller , which of purpose have pass the confine of both country , with intent only to discover , will as it be most likely have go from the one to the other : if there have be any piece of land , or Isthmos , to have join they together , or else have declare some cause to the contrary . 6 but neither Paulus Venetus , who live and dwell a long time in Cataia , ever come into America , and yet be at the sea coast of Mangia , over against it where he be embark , and perform a great navigation along those sea : neither yet Verarzanus , or Franci scus Vasques de Coronado , who travel the north part of America by land , ever find entry from thence by land to Cataia , or any part of Asia . 7 also it appear to be a island , insomuch as the sea run by nature circular from the east to the west , follow the diurnal motion of primum Mobile , which carry with it all inferior body movable , aswell celestial as elemental : which motion of the water be most evident see in the sea , which lie on the southside of Africa , where the current that run from the east to the west be so strong ( by reason of such motion ) that the Portugal in their voyage eastward to Calicut , in pass by Cap. de buona speranda be enforce to make diverse course , the current there be so swift as it strike from thence all along westward 166 1576. upon the fret of Magellan , be distant from thence , near the four part of the longitude of the earth : and not have free passage and entrance through the fret towards the west , by reason of the narrowness of the say strait of Magellan , it run to salve this wrong ( nature not yield to accidentali restraint ) all along the eastern coast of America , northwards so far as cape Fredo , be the far know place of the same continent towards the north : which be about 4800 league , reckon therewithal ! the trending of the land . 8 so that this current be continual maintain with such force , as Jaques Cartier affirm it to be , who meet with the same be at baccalaos , as he sail along the coast of America , then either it must of necessity have way to pass from cape Fredo , through this fret , westward towards Cataia , be know to come so far , only to salve his former wrong , by the authority before name : or else it must needs strike over , upon the coast of island , Norway , Finmarke , and Lappia , ( which be east from the say place about 360 league ) with great force than it do from cape de Posita causa , buona speranda , upon the fret of Magellan , or from effec-the fret of Magellan to cape Fredo , upon which coast ' Jaques Cartier meet with the same , consider the shortness of the cut from the say cape Fredo , to island , Lappia , etc and so the cause efficient remain , it will have continual follow along our coast , through the narrow sea , which it do not , but be digested about the north of Labrador , by some through passage there through this fret . the like course of the water in some respect happen in the mediterrane sea ( as affirm Conterenus ) whereas Conterenus . the current which come from Tanais , and Pontus Euxinus , run along all the coast of Greece , Italy , France , and Spain , and not find sufficient way out through Gibraltar , by mean of the straitness of the fret it run back again along the coast of Barbary , by Alexandria , Anatolia , etc 167 a objection answer . the sea do evermore per-fbrme this circular motion , either in Suprema , or concava superficie aqua . the ice set westward every year from island . Auth. Jona arngrimo . the english voyage it may ( peradventure ) be think that this course of the sea do sometime surcease , and thereby impugn this principle , because it be not discern all along the coast of America , in such sort as Jaques Cartier find it : whereunto i answer this : that albeit , in every part of the coast of America , or elsewhere this current be not sensible perceive , yet it have evermore such like motion , either in the uppermost or nethermost part of the sea : as it may be prove true , if you sink a sail by a couple of rope , near the ground , fasten to the nethermost corner two gun chamber or other weight : by the drive whereof you shall plain perceive , the course of the water , and current , run with such course in the bottom . by the like experiment , you may find the ordinary motion of the sea , in the ocean : how far soever you be off the land . 9 also there come another current from out the north-east from the scythian sea ( as m. Jenkinson a man of rare virtue , great travail and experience , tell i ) which run westward towards Labrador , as the other do , which come from the south : so that both these current , must have way through this our fret , or else encounter together and run contrary course , in one line , but no such conflict of stream , or contrary course be find about any part of Labrodor , or terra nova , as witness our yearly fisher , and other sailor that way , but be there digest , as aforesaid , and find by experience of Barnard de la Torre , to fall into mar deal Sur. 10 furthermore , the current in the great ocean , can not have be maintain to run continual one way , from the begin of the world unto this day , have there not be some thorough passage by the fret aforesaid , and so by circular motion be bring again to maintain it self : for the tide and course of the sea be maintained by their interchangeable motion : as fresh river be by spring , by ebb and flow , by rarefaction and condensation . 168 so that it rest not possible ( so far as my simple reason can comprehend ) that this perpetuali current can by any mean be maintain , but only by continual reaccess of the same water , which pass through the fret , and be bring about thither again , by such circular motion as aforesaid . and the certain fall thereof by this fret into mar deal Sur be prove by the testimony and experience , of Bernard de la Torre , who be send from P. de la Natividad to the Moluccae , anno domini 1542. by commandment of Anthony Mendoza , than viceroy of Nova Hispania , which Bernard sail 750. league , on the northside of the aequator , and there meet with a current , which come from the north-east the which drive he back again to Tidore . wherefore , this current be prove to come from C. de buona speranda to the fret of Magellan , and want sufficient entrance there , by narrowness of the strait , be by the necessity of nature force , bring to terra de Labrador , where Jaques Cartier meet the same , and thence certain know , not to strike over upon island , Lappia , etc and find by Bernard de la Torre in Mar del Sur , on the backside of America : therefore this current ( have none other passage ) must of necessity , fall out through this our fret into mar deal Sur , and so trending by the Moluccae , China , and C. de buona speranda , maintain it self by circular motion , which be all one in nature , with motus ab orient in occidentem . A.D. 1576. the flow m occasion by reason that the heat of the moon boil , and make the water thin by way of rarefaction . a experience to prove the fall of this current into mar deal Sur. so that it seem , we have now more occasion to doubt of our return , than whether there be a passage that way , yea or no : which doubt , hereafter shall be sufficient remove . wherefore , in my opinion , reason it self , ground upon experience , assure we of this passage , if there be nothing else to put we in hope thereof . but least these may not suffice , i have add in this chapter follow , some further proof hereof , by the experience of such as have pass some part of this discovery : and in the next adjoin to that the authority 169 of those , which have sail whole , through every part thereof . to prove by experience of sundry man travel , the open of some part of this northwest passage : whereby good hope remain of the rest . [ Iii . 16. ] Alcatrani be pelican . Baros lib . 9 of his first decas cap . 1. Chap. 3. PAulus Venetus , who dwell many year in Cataia , affirm that he sail 1500 mile upon the coast of Mangia , and Anian , towards the north-east : always find the sea open before he , not only as far as he go , but also as far as he can discern . 2 also Franciscus Vasques de Coronado pass from Mexico by Cevola , through the country of Quivira , to Siera Nevada , find there a great sea , where be certain ship lade with merchandise , carry on their prowess the picture of certain bird call Alcatrarzi , part whereof be make of gold , and part of silver , who signify by sign , that they be thirty day come thither : which likewise prove America by experience to be disjoined from Cataia , on that part by a great sea , because they can not come from any part of America , as native thereof : for that , so far as be discover , there have not be find there any one ship of that country . 3 in like manner , John Baros testify that the cosmographers of china ( where he himself have be ) affirm that the sea coast trend from thence Northeast , to 50 degree of septentrional latitude , be the further part that way which the Portugal have then knowledge of : and that the say cosmographer know no cause to the contrary , but that it may continue further . by who experience America be prove to be separate from those part of Asia , direct against the same . and not content with the judgement of these learned man only , i have search what may be further say for the confirmation hereof . 170 4 and i find that Franciscus Lopez de Gomara affirm America to be a island , and likewise Gronland : and that Gronland be distant from Lappia 40 league , and from terra de Labrador , 50. 5 Moreover , Alvarus Nunnius a Spaniard , and learned cosmographer , and Jacobus Cartier , who make two voyage into those part , and sail 900 mile upon the north-east coast of America do in part confirm the same . 6 likewise Hieronymus Fracastorius , a learned italian , and traveler in the north part of the same land . 7 also Jaques Cartier have do the like , hear say at Hochelaga in Nova Francia , how that there be a great sea at Saguinay , whereof the end be not know : which they presuppose to be the passage to Cataia . Furthermore , Sebastian Cabota by his personal ex - write in the perience and travel have set forth , and describe this discourse of passage in his Charts , which be yet to be see in the 1 avl^a wn ' queen majesty privy gallery at Whitehall , who be send to make this discovery by king Henry the seven , and enter the same fret : affirm that he sail very far westward , with a quarter of the north , on the northside of Terra de Labrador the eleven of June , until he come to the septentrionali latitude of 67 degree and a half , and find the sea still open , say , that he may , and will have go to Cataia , if the mutiny of the master and mariner have not be . now as these man experience have prove some part of this passage : so the chapter follow shall put you in full assurance of the rest , by their experience which have pass through every part thereof . [ to prove 171 2 auditus . 3 Olfactus . 4 Gustus . 5 Tactus . Singularia sensu , universalia vero mente percipiuntur . Lib. i.cap . ss . [ Iii . 17. i page - s^o . the english voyage to prove by circumstance that then northwest passage have be sail throughout . Chap. 4. the diversity between bruit beast and man , or between the wise and the simple be , that the one judge by sense only , and gather no surety of any thing that he have not see , feel , hear , taste , or smell : and the other not so only , but also find the certainty of thing by reason , before they happen to be try . wherefore i have add proof of both sort , that the one and the other may thereby be satisfy . 1 first , as gemma Frisius recite , there go from Europe three brethren through this passage : whereof it take the name of Fretum trium fratrum . 2 also Pliny affirm out of Cornelius Nepos , ( who write 57 year before Christ ) that there be certain Indians drive by tempest , upon the coast of Germany which be present by the king of sum evia , unto quintus Metellus Celer , the proconsuli of France . 3 and Pliny upon the same say , that it be no marvel though there be sea by the north , where there be such abundance of moisture : which argue that he doubt not of a navigable passage that way , through which those Indians come . 4 and for the better proof that the same authority of Cornelius Nepos be not by i wrest , to prove my opinion of they northwest passage : you shall find the same affirm more plain in that behalf , by the excellent geographer Dominicus Marius Niger , who show how many way the indian sea stretch it self , make in that place recital of certain Indians , that be likewise drive through the north sea from India , upon the coast of Germany , by great tempest , as they be sail in trade of merchandise . 172 5 also while Frederic Barbarossa reign emperor , avouch by anno do. 1160. there come certain other Indians upon franciscuslo-the coast of Germany . pesdeGomara r t , • i . r 0 tn his histone oh . likewise otnon in the stone of the Goth affirm , of India , lib . that in the time of the germane emperor , there be i . cap . io . also certain Indians cast by force of weather , upon the coast of the say country , which foresay Indians can not possible have come by the southeast , Southwest , nor from any part of Africa or America , nor yet by the north-east : therefore they come of necessity by this our northwest passage . to prove that these Indians aforenamed come not by the southeast , Southwest , nor from any other part of Africa , or America . Cap. 5. first , they can not come from the southeast by the cape de bona speranda , because the roughness of the sea there be such ( occasion by the current and great wind in that part ) that the great armada the king of Portugal have , can without great difficulty pass that way , much less than a Canoa of India can live in those outrageous sea without shipwreck ( be a vessel of very small burden ) and have conduct themselves to the place aforesaid , be man unexpert in the art of navigation . 2 also , it appear plain that they be not able to come from alongst the coast of Africa aforesaid , to those part of Europe , because the wind do ( for the most part ) blow there easterly off from the shore , and the current run that way in like sort , shall have drive they westward upon some part of America : for such wind and tide can never have lead they from thence to the say place where they be find , nor yet can they have come from any of the country aforesaid , keep the sea always , without skilful mariner 173 this five reason by late experience be prove utter untrue . that the Indians can not be native either of Africa , or of America . the english voyage to have conduct they such like course as be necessary to perform such a voyage . 3 presuppose also , if they have be drive to the west ( as they must have be , come that way ) than they shall have perish , want supply of victual , not have any place ( once leave the coast of Africa ) until they come to America , nor from America until they arrive upon some part of Europe , or the island adjoin to it , to have refresh themselves . 4 also , if ( notwithstanding such impossibility ) they may have recover Germany by come from India by the southeast , yet must they without all doubt have strike upon some other part of Europe before their arrival there , as the isle of the azore , Portugal , Spain , France , England , Ireland , etc which if they have do , it be not credible that they shall or will have depart undiscovered of the inhabitant : but there be never find in those day any such ship or man but only upon the coast of Germany , where they have be sundry time and in sundry age cast aland : neither be it like that they will have commit themselves again to sea , if they have so arrive , not know where they be , nor whither to have go . 5 and by the southwest it be unpossible , because the current aforesaid which come from the east , strike with such force upon the fret of Magellan , and fall with such swiftness and fury into mar deal Zur , that hardly any ship ( but not possible a Canoa , with such unskilful mariner ) can come into our western ocean through that fret , from the west sea of America , as magellans experience have partly teach we . 6 and further , to prove that these people so arrive upon the coast of Germany , be Indians , and not in-habiters of any part either of Africa or America , it be manifest , because the native both of Africa and America neither have , or have at this day ( as be report ) other kind of boat then such as do bear neither mast nor sail , ( except only upon the coast of Barbary and the 174 Turk ship ) but do carry themselves from place to place near the shore by the ore only . to prove that those Indians come not by the north-east , and that there be no thorough navigable passage that way . Cap. 6. it be likely that there shall be no thorough passage by the north-east , whereby to go round about the world , because all sea ( as aforesaid ) be maintain by the abundance of water , wax moor shallow and shelffie towards the end , as we find it do by experience in mare glaciali , towards the east , which breed small hope of any great continuance of that sea , to be navigable towards the east , sufficient to sail thereby round about the world . 2 also , it stand scarce with reason , that the Indians dwell under torrida zona , can endure the injury of the cold air , about the septentrional latitude of 80. degree , under which elevation the passage by the north-east can be ( as the often experience have of all the south part of it show ) see that some of the inhabitant of this cold climate ( who summer be to they a extreme winter ) have be strike to death with the cold damp of the air about 72 degree , by a accidental mishap , and yet the air in such like elevation be always cold , and too cold for such as the Indians be . 3 furthermore , the pierce cold of the gross thick air so near the pole will so stiffen and fur the sail and ship tackle , that no mariner can either hoist or strike they ( as our experience far near the south , than this passage be presuppose to be , have teach we ) without the use whereof no voyage can be perform . 4 also , the air be so darken with continual ! mist and fog so near the pole , that no man can well see , either to guide his ship , or direct his course . 5 also the compass at such elevation do very 175 [ three . 18. ] quicquid ■ naturali loco privatur , quam citissime corrumpitur . Qualls causa talis effectus . quicquid corrumpitur a contrario corrumpitur . omne simile gignit svi simile . the english voyage sudden vary , which thing must of force have be their destruction , although they have be man of much more skill than the Indians be . 6 moreover , all bay , gulf , and river do receive their increase upon the flood , sensible to be discern on the one side of the shore or the other , as many way as they be open to any main sea , as mare mediterraneum , mare rubrum , Sinus Persicus , Sinus Bodicus , Thamesis , and all other know haven or river in any part of the world , and each of they open but on one part to the main sea , do likewise receive their increase upon the flood the same way , and none other , which mare Glaciale do , only by the west ; as m. Jenkinson affirm unto i : and therefore it follow that this Northeast sea , receive increase but only from the west , can possible open to the main ocean by the east . 7 moreover , the far you pass into any sea towards the end of it , on that part which be shut up from the main sea ( as in all those above mention ) the less and less the tide rise and fall . the like whereof also happen in mare Glaciale , which prove but small continuance of that sea towards the east . 8 also , the further you go towards the east in mare Glaciale , the less salt the water be : which can not happen , if it be open to the salt sea towards the east , as it be to the west only , see every thing natural engender his like : and then must it be like salt throughout , as all the sea be , in such like climate and elevation . and therefore it seem that this Northeast sea be maintain by the river ob , and such like freshet , as mare Goticum , and mare mediterraneum , in the uppermost part thereof by the river Nilus , Danubius , neper , Tanais , etc 9 furthermore , if there be any such sea at that elevation , of like it shall be always freeze throughout ( there be no tide to hinder it ) because the extreme coldness of the air be in the uppermost part , and the extreme coldness of the earth in the bottom , the sea 176 sir Humphrey GILBERT’S map of the world , a.d. 1576 the material original position here be too large for reproduction in this reissue . a pdf can be download from the web address give on page iv downlo^dedfomthttpsv / www . cambridge.org / core^u^ library , on 30 Aug 2021 at 14 : 06 : 09 , subject to there be but of small depth , whereby the one accidentali coldness do meet with the other , and the sun not have his reflection so near the pole , but at very blunt angel , it can never be dissolve after it be freeze , notwithstanding the great length of their day : for that the sun have no heat at all in his light or beam , but proceed only by a accidentali reflection , which there want in effect . io and yet if the sun be of sufficient force in that elevation , to prevail against this ice , yet must it be break before it can be dissolve , which can be but through the long continuance of the sun above their horizon , and by that time the summer will be so far spend , and so great darkness and cold ensue , that no man can be able to endure so cold , dark , and discomfortable a navigation , if it be possible for he then , and there to live . both further , the ice be once break , it must of force so drive with the wind and tide , that no ship can sail in those sea , see our fisher of island , and the new find land , be subject to danger through the great island of ice which fleet in the sea ( to the sailor great danger ) far to the south of that presuppose passage . 12 and it can be that this Northeast passage shall be any near than south , then before recite , for than it shall cut off Ciremissi , and Turbi Tartari , with Uzesucani , Chisani , and other from the continent of Asia , which be know to be adjoin to Scythia , Tartary , etc with the other part of the same continent . and if there be any thorough passage by the north-east , yet be it to small end and purpose for our traffic , because no ship of great burden can navigate in so shallow a sea : and ship of small burden [ three . 19 i be very unfit 8c unprofitable , especial towards the bluster north , to perform such a voyage . [ to prove seven 177 m to prove that the indian aforenamed , come only by the northwest , which induce a certainty of our passage by experience . Cap. 7. it be as likely that they come by the northwest , as it be unlikely that they shall come either by the southeast , Southwest , Northeast , or from any other part of Africa or America , and therefore this northwest passage have be already so many way prove , by disprove of the other , etc i shall the less need in this place , to use many word otherwise then to conclude in this sort , that they come only by the northwest from England , have these many reason to lead i thereunto . 1 first , the one half of the wind of the compass may bring they by the northwest , bear always between two sheat , with which kind of sail the indian be only acquaint , not have any use of a bow line , or quarter wind , without the which no ship can possible come either by the southeast , Southwest or Northeast , have so many sundry cape to double , whereunto be require such change and shift of wind . true , both in 2 and it seem likely that they shall come by oblique northwest , because the coast whereon they be oho indentis drive , lay east from this our passage , and all wind ex diametro doe natural drive a ship to a opposite point from spirantibus , whence it blow , not be otherwise guide by art , which the Indians do utter want , and therefore it seem that they come direct through this our fret , which they may do with one wind . 3 for if they have come by the cape de buona speranda , then must they ( as aforesaid ) have fall upon the south part of America . 4 and if by the fret of Magellan , then upon the coast of Africa , Spain , Portugal , France , Ireland or England . 178 5 and if by the north-east , then upon the coast of Ceremissi , Tartarii , Lappia , island , terra de Labrador , etc and upon these coast ( as aforesaid ) they have never be find . so that by all likelihood they can never have come without shipwreck upon the coast of Germany , if they have first strike upon the coast of so many country , want both art and ship to make orderly discovery , and altogether ignorant both in the art of navigation , and also of the rock , flat , sand or haven of those part of the world , which in most of these place be plentiful ! . 6 and further it seem very likely , that the inhabitant of the most part of those country , by which they must have come any other way beside by the northwest , be for the most part anthropophagi , or man eater , will have devour they , slay they , or ( at the least wise ) keep they as wonder for the gaze . so that it plain appear that those Indians ( which as you have hear in sundry age be drive by tempest upon the shore of Germany ) come only through our northwest passage . 7 moreover , the passage be certain prove by a navigation that a Portugal make , who pass through this fret , give name to a promontory far within the same , call it after his own name , Promontorium Corterialis , near adjoin unto Polisacus fluvius . 8 also one Scolmus a Dane enter and pass a great part thereof . 9 also there be one Salvaterra , a gentleman of Victoria in Spain , that come by chance out of the west India into Ireland , anno 1568. who affirm they northwest passage from we to Cataia , constant to be believe in America navigable . and further say in the presence of sir Henry Sidney ( than lord Deputie of Ireland ) in my hear , that a friar of Mexico , call Andrew Urdaneta , more than eight year before 179 his then come into Ireland , tell he there , that he come from mar deal Sur into Germany through this northwest passage , and show Salvaterra ( at that time be then with he in Mexico ) a sea card make by his own experience and travel in that voyage , wherein be plain set down and describe this northwest passage , agree in all point with Ortelius map . and further , this friar tell the king of Portugal ( as he return by that country homeward ) that there be ( of certainty ) such a passage northwest from England , and that he mean to publish the same : which do , the king most earnest desire he not in any wise to disclose or make the passage know to any [ three . 20. ] nation : for that ( say the king ) if England have know-^the kin^of kdge and experience thereof , it will great hinder Portugal , to both the king of Spain and i . this friar ( as Sal-Andro Urda - vaterra report ) be the great discoverer by sea , neta a friar , that have be in our age . also Salvaterra be touch then nerswade of this passage by the friar Urdaneta , and this northwest then common opinion of the Spaniard inhabit passage from America , offer most willing to accompany i in England to this discovery , which of like he will not have do Cataia . if he stand in doubt thereof . and now as these modern experience can be impugn , so , lest it may be object that these thing ( gather out of ancient writer , which write so many year past ) may serve little to prove this a objection , passage by the north of America , because both America and India be to they then utter unknown : to Aristotle lib . remove this doubt , let this suffice : that Aristotle ( who be 300. year before Christ ) name mare indi-5 cum . also Berosus ( who live 330 year before Christ ) have these word , Ganges in India . also in the first chapter of Hester be these word , in the day of Assuerus which rule from India to Aethiopia , which Assuerus live 580 year before Christ . also Quintus Curtius ( where he speak of the conquest of Alexander ) mention India . also , Arianus , Philostratus , 180 and Sidrach in his discourse of the war of the king of Bactria , and of Garaab , who have the most part of India under his government . all which assure we , that both India and Indians be know in those day . Theise thing consider , we may ( in my opinion ) not only assure our self of this passage by the northwest , but also that it be navigable both to come and go , as have be prove in part and in all , by the experience of diverse , as Sebastian Cabota , Corterialis , the three brethren above name , the Indians , and Urdaneta the friar of Mexico , etc and yet notwithstanding all this , there be some that have a better hope of this passage to Cataia by the north-east then by the west , who reason with my several answer ensue in the chapter follow . certain reason allege for the prove of a passage by the north-east , before the queen majesty , and certain lord of the counsel , by master Anthony Jenkinson , with my several answer then use to the same . Cap. 8. because you may understand as well those thing allege against i , as what do serve for my purpose , i have here add the reason of master Anthony Jenkinson a worthy gentleman , and a great traveller , who conceive a better hope of the passage to Cataia from we , to be by the north-east , then by the northwest . he first say that he think not to the contrary , the north-but that there be a passage by the northwest , accord - west passage ing to my opinion : but assure he be , that there assent unt0 ' may be find a navigable passage by the north-east from England , to go to all the east part of the world , which he endeavour to prove three way . the first be that he hear a fisherman of Tartary the first say in hunt the morce , that he sail very far reas°n . 181 visus nonnun-quam fallitur in suo objecto . the second reason or allegation . the answer or resolution . [ Iii . 21. ] towards the southeast , find no end of the sea : whereby he hope a thorough passage to be that way . whereunto i answer , that the tartarian be a barbarous people , and utter ignorant in the art of navigation , not know the use of the sea card , compass or star , which he confess to be true : and therefore they can not ( say i ) certain know the southeast from the north-east , in a wide sea , and a place unknown from the sight of the land . or if he sail any thing near the shore , yet he ( be ignorant ) may be deceive by the double of many point and cape , and by the trending of the land , albeit he keep continual alongst the shore . and further , it may be that the poor fisherman through simplicity think that there be nothing that way but sea , because he see no land : which proof ( under correction ) give small assurance of a navigable sea by the north-east , to go round about the world . for that he judge by the eye only , see we in this our clear air do account twenty mile a ken at sea his second reason be , that there be a unicorn horn find upon the coast of Tartary , which can not come ( say he ) thither " by any other mean then with the tide , through some fret in the north-east of mare Glaciale , there be no unicorn in any part of Asia , save in India and Cataia : which reason ( in my simple judgement ) force as little . first , it be doubtful whether those barbarous tartarian do know a unicorn horn , yea , or no : and if it be one , yet it be not credible that the sea can have drive it so far , be of such nature that it will not swim . also the tide run too and fro , will have drive it as far back with the ebb , as it bring it forward with the flood . there be also a beast call asinus Indicus ( who horn most like it be ) which have but one horn like a unicorn in his forehead , whereof there be great 182 ... isib ' plenty in all the north part thereunto adjoin , as in Lappia , noruegia , Finmarke , etc as Jacobus Zieglerus write in his history of Scondia . and as Albertus say , there be a fish which have but one horn in his forehead like to a unicorn , and therefore it seem very doubtful both from whence it come , and whether it be a unicorn horn , yea , or no . his three and last reason be , that there come a con - than three and tinuall stream or current through mare Glaciale , of such swiftness ( as a colmax tell he ) that if you cast any ’ thing therein , it will present be carry out of sight towards the west . whereunto i answer , that there do the like from the answer or Maeotis Palus , by Pontus Euxinus , Sinus Bosphorus , resolution-and along the coast of Graecia , etc as it be affirm by Contarenus , and diverse other that have have experience of the same : and yet that sea lie not open to any main sea that way , but be maintain by freshet as by Tanais , Danubius , etc in like manner be this current in mare Glaciale increase and maintain by the Dwina , the river ob , etc now as i have here brief recite the reason allege , to prove a passage to Cataia by the north-east , with my several answer thereunto : so will i leave it to your judgement , to hope or despair of either at your pleasure . how that the passage by the northwest be more commodious for our traffic , than the other by the east , if there be any such . Cap. 9 first , by the north-east ( if your wind do not give you a marvelous speedy and lucky passage ) you be in danger ( be so near the pole ) to be benight almost the one half of the year , and what danger that be , to live so long comfortless , void of light , ( if the 183 cold kill you not ) each man of reason or understanding may judge . some doubt of 2 also Mangia , Quinzai , and the Moluccae be near unto we by the northwest , then by the north-east , more than two five part , which be almost by the half . 3 also we may have by the west a yearly return , it be at all time navigable , whereas you have but 4. month in the whole year to go by the north-east : the passage be at such elevation as it be former express , for it can be any near than south . 4 furthermore , it can be finish without diverse wintring by the way , have no haven in any temperate climate to harbour in there : for it be as much as we can well sail from hence to saint Nicholas , in the trade of Moscovia , and return in the navigable season of the year , and from saint Nicholas to Cerimissi Tartari , which stand at 80 degree of the septentrionali latitude , it be at the least 400 league , which amount scarce to the three part of the way , to the end of your voyage by the north-east . 5 and yet after you have double this cape , if then there may be find a navigable sea to carry you southeast accord to your desire , yet can you not winter convenient , until you come to 60 degree , and to take up one degree run southeast , you must sail 24 league and three four part , which amount to 495 league . 6 furthermore , you may by the northwest sail thither with all easterly wind , and return with any westerly wind , whereas you must have by the north-east sundry wind , and those proper , accord to the lie of the coast and cape , you shall|be enforce to double , which wind be not always to be have , when they be look for : whereby your journey shall be great prolong , and hardly endure so near the pole . as we be teach by sir Hugh Willoughbie , who be freeze to death far near the south . 7 moreover , it be very doubtful , whether we shall 184 long enjoy that trade by the north-east , if there be any such passage that way , the commodity thereof once know to the Moscovite , what privilege soever he have grant , see policy with the mass of excessive gain , to the enrich ( so great ) of himself and all his dominion will persuade Kim to presume the same , have so great opportunity to utter the commodity of those country by the narve . but by the northwest , we may safe trade without danger or annoyance of any prince live , Christian or heathen , it be out of all their trade . 8 also the queen majesty dominion be near [ three . 22. ] the northwest passage than any other great prince that may pass that way , and both in their go and return , they must of necessity succour themselves and their ship upon some part of the same , if any tempestuous weather shall happen . further , no prince navy of the world be able to encounter the queen majesty navy , as it be at this present : and yet it shall be great increase by the traffic ensue upon this discovery , for it be the long voyage that increase and maintain great ship . now it seem necessary to declare what commodity will grow thereby , if all these thing be , as we have heretofore presuppose , and think they to be : which next adjoin be brief declare . what commodity will ensue , this passage once discover . Cap. 10. first , it be the only way for our prince , to possess the wealth of all the east part ( as they term they ) of the world , which be infinite : as appear by the experience of Alexander the great , in the time of his conquest of India , and other the east part of the world , allege by Quintus Curtius , which will be a great advancement to our country , a wonderful enrich to 185 our prince , and a unspeakable commodity to all the inhabitant of Europe . 2 for through the shortness of the voyage , we shall be able to sell all manner of merchandise , bring from thence , far better cheap than either the Portugal or Spaniard do or may do . and further , we shall share with the Portugal in the east , and the Spaniard in the west , by trade to any part of America , through mar deal Sur , where they can no manner of way offend we . 3 also we may sail to diverse very rich country , both civil and other , out of both their jurisdiction , trade and traffic , where there be to be find great abundance of gold , silver , precious stone , cloth of gold , silk , all manner of spice , grocery ware , and other kind of merchandise of a inestimable price , which both the Spaniard and Portugal , through the length of their journey , can well attain unto . 4 also we may inhabit some part of those country , and settle there such needy people of our country , which now trouble the common wealth , and through want here at home be enforce to commit outrageous offence , whereby they be daily consume with the gallows . 3 moreover , we may from all the aforesaid place have a yearly return , inhabit for our staple some convenient place of America , about Sierra Nevada , or some other part , whereas it shall seem best for the shorten of the voyage . 6 beside utter of our country commodity , which the Indians , etc much esteem : as appear in Hester , where the pomp be express of the great king of India , Assuerus , who match the colour clothes , wherewith his house and tent be apparel , with gold and silver , as part of his great treasure : not mention either velvet , silk , cloth of gold , cloth of silver , or such like , be in those country most plentiful : whereby it plain appear in what great estimation they will have the clothes of this our country , so 186 1576. that there will be find a far better vent for they by this mean , then yet this realm ever have : and that without depend either upon France , Spain , Flanders , Portugal , Hamborow , Emden , or any other part of Europe . 7 also , here we shall increase both our ship and mariner , without burden of the state . 8 and also have occasion to set poor man child to learn handy craft , and thereby to make trifle and such like , which the Indians and those people do much esteem : by reason whereof , there shall be none occasion to have our country cumber with loiterer , vagabond , and such like idle person . all these commodity will grow by follow this our discovery , without injury do to any christian prince , by cross they in any of their use trade , whereby they may take any just occasion of offence . thus have i brief show you some part of the ground of my opinion , trust that you will no long judge i fantastic in this matter : see i have conceive no vain hope of this voyage , but be persuaded thereunto by the best cosmographer of our age , the same be confirm both by reason and certain experience . also this discovery have be diverse time heretofore by other both offer , attempt , and perform . it have be offer by Stephan Gomes unto Carolus the five emperor , in the year of our lord God 1527 , [ three . 23. ] as Alphonso Ullva testify in the story of Carolus life : who will have set he forth in it ( as the story men-tioneth ) if the great want of money , by reason of his long war have not cause he to surcease the same . and the king of Portugal fear least the emperor will have persevere in this his enterprise , give he to this discovery leave the matter unattempted , the sum of 350000 crown : and it be to be think that the king of Portugal will not have give to the emperor such sum of money for egg in moonshine . 187 the labour of this discovery shorten by other man travel . why you king of Spain and Portugal will not persevere in this discovery . the english voyage it have be attempt by Sebastian Cabota in the time of king Henry the seven , by Corterialis the Portugal , and Scolmus the Dane . and it have be perform by three brethren , the indian aforesaid , and by Urdaneta the friar of Mexico . also diverse have offer the like unto the french king , who have send two or three time to have discover the same : the discoverer spend and consume their victual in search the gulf and bay between Florida and terra de Labrador , whereby the ice be break to the after comer . so that the right way may now easy be find out in short time : and that with little jeoperdie and less expense . for America be discover so far towards the north as cape Frio , which be at 62 degree , and that part of Grondland next adjoin be know to stand but at 72 degree . so that we have but 10 degree to sail north and south , to put the world out of doubt hereof : and it be likely that the king of Spain , and the king of Portugal will not have fit out all this while , but that they be sure to possess to themselves all that trade they now use , and fear to deal in this discovery , lest the queen majesty have so good opportunity , and find the commodity which thereby may ensue to the common wealth , will cut they off , and enjoy the whole traffic to her self , and thereby the Spaniard and Portugal , with their great charge , shall beat the bush , and other man catch the bird : which thing they foresee , have command that no pilot of they upon pain of death , shall seek to discover to the northwest , or plat out in any sea card any thorough passage that way by the northwest . now , and if you will indifferent compare the hope that remain , to animate i to this enterprise , with those likelihood which Columbus allege before Ferdinando the king of Castilia , to prove that there be such island in the west ocean , as be after by he 188 and other discover to the great commodity of Spain and all the world : you will think then this northwest passage to be most worthy travel therein . for Columbus have none of the west Islands set forth unto he , either in globe or card , neither yet once mention of any writer ( Plato except , and the commentary upon the same ) from 942 year before Christ , until that day . Moreover , Columbus himself have neither see America nor any other of the island about it , neither , understand he of they by the report of any other that have see they , but only comfort himself with this hope , that the land have a beginning where the sea have a end : for as touch that which the Spaniard do write of a Biscaine , which shall have teach he the way thither , it be think to be imagine of they , to deprive Columbus of his honour , be none of their country man , but a stranger bear . and if it be true of the Biscaine , yet do he but rove at the matter , or ( at the least ) gather the knowledge of it , by conjecture only . and albeit my self have not see this passage or any part thereof , but be ignorant of it as touch experience ( as Columbus be before his attempt make ) yet have i both the report , relation , and authority of diverse most credible man , which have both see and pass through some and every part of this discovery , beside sundry reason for my assurance thereof : all which Columbus want . Theise thing consider , and indifferent weigh togeth , with the wonderful commodity which this discovery may bring , especial to this realm of England : i must needs conclude with learned Baptista Ramusius , and diverse other learned man , who say , that this discovery have be reserve for some noble prince or worthy man , thereby to make himself rich , and the world happy : desire you to accept in good part this brief and simple discourse , write in haste , which if 189 the english voyage i may perceive that it shall not sufficient satisfy you in this behalf , i will then impart unto you a large discourse , which i have write only of this discovery . and further , because it suffice not only to know that such a thing there be , without ability to perform the same , i will at leisure make you partaker of another simple discourse of navigation , wherein i have not a little travel , to make my self as sufficient to bring these thing to effect , as i have be ready to offer my self therein . and therein i have devise to amend the error of usual sea card , who common fault be , to make the degree of longitude in every latitude of one like bigness . and have also devise therein a spherical instrument , with a compass of variation for the perfect know of the longitude . and a precise order to prick the sea card , together with certain infallible rule for the shorten of any discovery , to know at the first enter of any fret , whether it lie open to the ocean more way than one , how far soever the sea stretch it self into the land . desire you hereafter never to mislike with i , for the take in hand of any laudable and honest enterprise : for if through pleasure or idleness we purchase shame , the pleasure vanish , but the shame remain for ever . and therefore to give i leave without offence , always to live and die in this mind , that he be not worthy to live at all , that for fear , or danger of death , shun his country service , and his own honour : see death be inevitable , and the fame of virtue immortali . wherefore in this behalf , mutare vel timere sperno . 190 certain other reason , or argument to prove a passage by the northwest , learned write by m. Richard Willes gentleman . four famous way there be speak of to those fruitful and wealthy island , which we do usual call Moluccaes , continual haunt for gain , and daily travel for riches therein grow . Theise Islands , although they stand east from the meridian , distant almost half the length of the world , in extreme heat , under the equinoctial line , possess of infidel and barbarian : yet by our neighbour great abundance of wealth there be painful seek in respect of the voyage . dear buy , and from thence dangerous bring home unto we . our neighbour i call the Portugal in comparison of the molucchians for nearness unto we , for like situation westward as we have , for their usual trade with we , for that the far southeasterling do know this part of Europe by no other name then Portugal , not great acquaint as yet with the other nation thereof . their voyage be very well understand of all man , and the southeasterne way round about 1 by the Africa by the cape of good hope more speak of , better o^ttst . know and travel , then that it may seem needful to discourse thereof any further . the second way lie southwest , between the west 2 A ? tJie India or south America , and the south continent , through authwest-that narrow strait where Magellan first of all man that ever we do read of , pass these latter year , leave thereunto therefore his name . the way no doubt the Spaniard will commodious take , for that it lie near unto their dominion there , can the eastern current and levant wind as easy suffer they to return , be a er ' as speedy therewith they may be carry thither : for it the which difficulty , or rather impossibility of strive against the force both of wind and stream , this passage be little or nothing use , although it be very well know . 191 3 by the the three way by the north-east , beyond all Europe Northeast . anj Asia , that worthy and renown knight sir Hugh Willoughbie seek to his peril , enforce there to end his life for cold , congeal and freeze to death . and true this way consist rather in the imagination of geographer , then allowable either in reason , or approve by experience , as well it may appear by the dangerous Ortel . tab . trending of the scythish cape set by Ortelius under •A ™ * the 80 degree north , by the unlikely sail in that northern sea always clad with ice and snow , or at the least continual pester therewith , if happy it be at any time dissolve : beside bay and shelf , the water wax moor shallow towards the east , that we say nothing of the foul mist and dark fog in the cold clime , of the little power of the sun to clear the air , of the uncomfortable night , so near the pole , five month long . 4 by the a four way to go unto these aforesaid happy island Northeast . moluccas sir Humphrey Gilbert a learned and valiant knight discourse of at large in his new passage to Cathayo . the enterprise of it self be virtuous , the fact must doubtless deserve high praise , and whensoever it shall be finish , the fruit thereof can be small : where virtue be guide , there be fame a follower , and fortune a companion . but the way be dangerous , the passage doubtful , the voyage not thorough know , and therefore gainsay by many , after this manner . Ob. 1. first , who can assure we of any passage rather by the [ three . 25. ] northwest , then by the north-east ? do not both way lie in equal distance from the north pole ? stand not the north cape of either continent under like elevation ? be not the ocean sea beyond America far distant from our meridian by 30. or 40. degree west , than the extreme point of Cathayo eastward , if Ortelius InTheatro . general ! card of the world be true ? in the north-east that noble knight sir Hugh Willoughbie perish for cold : and can you then promise a passenger any better hap by the northwest ? who have go for trial sake at any time this way out of Europe to Cathayo ? 192 if you seek the advice herein of such as make profession in cosmography , Ptolome the father of Geographic , and his elder child , will answer by their map with a negative , conclude most of the sea within the land , and make a end of the world northward , near the 63. degree . the same opinion , when learn chief flourish , be receive in the roman time , as by their poet write it may appear : tibi serviat ultima Thyle , say Virgil , be of opinion , that island be the extreme part of the world habitable towards the north . Joseph Moletius a italian , and Mercator a germane , for knowledge man able to be compare with the best geographer of our time , the one in his half sphere of the whole world , the other in some of his great globe , have continue the west Indies land , even to the north pole , and consequent , cut off all passage by sea that way . the same doctor , Mercator in other of his globe and map , Moletius in his sea card , nevertheless doubt of so great continuance of the former continent , have open a gulf betwixt the west Indies and the extreme northern land : but such a one , that either be not to be travel for the cause in the first objection allege , or clean shut up from we in Europe by Greenland : the south end whereof Moletius make firm land with America , the north part continent with Lappeland and Norway . third , the great favourer of this voyage can not deny , but that if any such passage be , it lie subject unto ice and snow for the most part of the year , whereas it stand in the edge of the frosty zone . before the sun have warm the air , and dissolve the ice , each one well know that there can be no sail : the ice once break through the continual abode the sun make a certain season in those part , how shall it be possible for so weak a vessel as a ship be , to hold out amid whole island , as it be of ice continual beat on each side , and at the mouth of seven 193 n A.D. £576 . Ob. 2. Ob. 3. that gulf , issue down furious from the north , and safe to pass , when whole mountain of ice and snow shall be tumble down upon she ? Ob. 4. well , grant the west Indies not to continue continent unto the pole , grant there be a passage between these two land , let the gulf lie near we then common in card we find it set , namely , between the 61. and 64. degree north , as gemma Frisius in his map and globe imagine it , and so leave by our countryman Sebastian Cabot in his table which the earl of Bedford have at cheinies : let the way be void of all difficulty , yet do it not follow that we have free passage to Cathayo . for example sake : you may trend all Norway , Finmarke , and Lappeland , and then bow southward to saint Nicholas in Moscovia : you may likewise in the mediterranean sea fetch Constantinople , and the mouth of Tanais : yet be there no passage by sea through Moscovia into Pont euxine , now call mare Maggiore . again , in the aforesaid mediterranean sea , we sail to Alexandria in Egypt , the barbarian bring their pearl and spice from the molucca up the red sea or arabian gulf to sue , scarce three day journey from the aforesaid haven : yet have we no way by sea from Alexandria to the molucca , for that Isthmos or little straight of land between the two sea . in like manner although the northern passage be free at 61 degree of latitude , and the west ocean beyond America , usual call mar deal Zur , know to be open at 40. degree elevation from the island Japan , yea three hundred league northerly above Japan : yet may there be land to hinder the thorough passage that way by sea , as in the example aforesaid it fall out , Asia and America there be join together in one continent . ne can this opinion seem altogether frivolous unto any one that diligent peruse our cosmographer do . Josephus Moletius be of that mind , not only in his plain hemisphere of the world , but also in his sea card . the french geographer in like manner be of 194 then same opinion , as by their map cut out in form of a hart you may perceive : as though the west Indies be part of Asia . which sentence well agree with that old conclusion in the school : quicquid praeter africam and Europam est , Asia est , whatsoever land do neither appertain unto Africa nor to Europe , be part of Asia . Furthermore it be to small purpose to make so long , Ob. 5. so painful , so doubtful a voyage by such a new find way , if in Cathayo you shall neither be suffer to land for silk and silver , nor able to fetch the Molucca spice and pearl for piracy in those sea . of a law deny all alien to enter into China , and forbid all the inhabiter under a great penalty to let in any stranger into those country , shall you read in [ three . 26. ] the report of Galeotto Perera there imprison with other Portugal : as also in the japonish letter , how for that cause the worthy traveller Xavierus bargain with a barbarian merchant for a great sum of pepper to be bring into Canton , a port in China . the great and dangerous piracy use in those sea no man can be ignorant of , that list to read the japonish and East indian history . final , all this great labour will be lose , all these Ob. 6. charge spend in vain , if in the end our traveller may not be able to return again , and bring safe home into their own native country that wealth and riches , which they in foreign region with adventure of good , and danger of their life have seek for . by the north-east there be no way , the southeast passage the Portugal do hold as the lord of those sea . at you southwest magellans experience have partly teach we , and partly we be persuade by reason , how the eastern current strike so furious on that straight , and fall with such force into that narrow gulf , that hardly any ship can return that way into our west ocean out of Mar deal Zur . the which if it be true , as true it be , than we may say that the aforesaid eastern current or levant course of water continual * 95 follow after the heavenly motion , lodse not altogether his force , but be double rather by a other current from out the north-east , in the passage between America and the north land , whither it be of necessity carry : have none other way to maintain it self in circular motion , and consequent the force and fury thereof to be no less in the strait of Anian , where it strike south into mar deal Zur , beyond America ( if any such straight of sea there be ) than in Magellans fret , both straight be of like breadth : as in Belognine zalterius table of new France , and in don Diego Hermano de Toledo his card for navigation in that region we do find precise set down . nevertheless to approve that there lie a way to Cathayo at the northwest from out of Europe , we have experience , namely of three brethren that go that journey , as gemma Frisius record , and leave a name unto that strait , whereby now it be call Fretum trium fratrum . we do read again of a Portugal that pass this straight , of who master Frobisher speak , that be imprison therefore many year in Lisbon , to verify the old spanish proverb , i suffer for do well . likewise Andrew Urdaneta a friar of Mexico come out of Mar deal Zur this way into Germany : he card ( for he be a great discoverer ) make by his own experience and travel in that voyage , have be see by gentleman of good credit . Cic. 1. de now if the observation and remembrance of thing he breed experience , and of experience proceed art , ea ? ' and the certain knowledge we have in all faculty , as the best philosopher that ever be do affirm : true the voyage of these aforesaid traveller that have go out of Europe into mar deal Zur , and return thence at the northwest , do most evident conclude that way to be navigable , and that passage free . so much the Lib. i Geog. moor we be so to think , for that the first principle Cap. 2. and chief ground in all geographic , as Ptolome say , 196 be the history of travel , that be , report make by traveller skilful in geometric and astronomic , of all such thing in their journey as to Geographic do belong . it only then remain , that we now answer to those argument that seem to make against this former conclusion . the first objection be of no force , that generali table sol i . of the world set forth by Ortelius or Mercator , for it great skill not , be unskilful draw for that point : as manifest it may appear unto any one that confer the same with gemma Frisius his universali map , with his round quarter card , with his globe , with Sebastian Cabota his table , and Ortelius his generali map alone , worthy prefer in this case before all Mercator and Ortelius other do : for that Cabota be not only a skilful sea man , but a long traveller , and such a one as enter personal that straight , send by king Henry the seven to make this aforesaid discovery , as in his own discourse of navigation you may read in his card draw with his own hand , that the mouth of the north wester ne straight lie near the 318. Meridian , between 61. and 64. degree in the elevation , continue the same breed that about 10. degree west , where it open southerly moor and more , until it come under the tropic of cancer , and so run into mar deal Zur , at the least 18. degree more in breadth there , than it be where it first begin : otherwise i can as well imagine this passage to be more unlikely than the voyage to Moscovia , and more impossible than it for the far situation and continuance thereof in the frosty clime : as now i can affirm it to be very possible and most likely in comparison thereof , for that it neither coast so far north as the moscovian passage do , neither be this straight so long as that , before it bow down southerly towards the sun again . the second argument conclude nothing . Ptolome Sol. 2. know not what be above sixteen degree south 197 beyond the equinoctial line , he be ignorant of all passage northward from the elevation of 63. degree : he know no ocean sea beyond Asia , yet have the [ three . 27. ] Portugal trended the cape of good hope at the south point of Africa , and travel to Japan a island in the east ocean , between Asia and America : our merchant in the time of king Edward the sixth discover the moscovian passage far north than Thyle , and show Greenland not to be continent with Lappeland and Norway : the like our northwestern traveller have do , declare by their navigation that way , the ignorance of all cosmographer that either do join Greenland with America , or continue the west Indies with that frosty region under the north pole . as for Virgil he sing accord to the knowledge of man in his time , as a other poet do of the hot zone . Ovid . 1. Quarum quae media est , non est habitabilis aestu . etam ' imagine , as most man then do , Zonam torridam , the hot zone to be altogether dishabit for heat , though present we know many famous and worthy kingdom and city in that part of the earth , and the island of S. Thomas near ^Ethiopia , and the wealthy island for the which chief all these voyage be take in hand , to be inhabit even under the equinoctial line . So / . 3. to answer the three objection , beside Cabota and all other traveller navigation , the only credit of m. Frobisher may suffice , who late through all these island of ice , and mountain of snow , pass that way , even beyond the gulf that tumble down from the north , and in some place though he draw one inch thick ice , as he return in August do , yet come he home safe again . Sol 4. the four argument be altogether frivolous and vain , for neither be there any isthmo or strait of land between America and Asia , ne can these two land joint be one continent . the first part of my answer be manifest allow of by Homer , who that excellent 198 geographer Strabo follow , yield he in this Lib. Geog. faculty the price . the author of that book likewise irepi Kotlov to Alexander , attribute unto Aristotle , be of the same opinion that Homer and Strabo be of , in two or three place . Dionysius in oiKovnevw irepuiywi have this verse wr « ? anceavo irepiSeSpo / ae yatav airacrav . So do the ocean sea run round about the world : speak only of Europe , Africa and Asia , as than Asia be travel and know . with these doctor may note . you join Pomponius Mela. cap . 2. lib . I. Plinius lib . 2. cap . 67. and Pius 2. cap . 2. in his description of Asia . all the which writer do no less confirm the whole eastern side of Asia to be compass about with the sea , than Plato do affirm in Timaeo , under the name Atlantis , the west Indies to be a island , as in a special discourse thereof R. Eden write , agreeable Richard Eden . unto the sentence of Proclus , Marsilius Ficinus , and other . out of Plato it be gather that America be a island . Homer , Strabo , Aristotle , Dionysius , Mela , Pliny , pius 2. affirm the continent of Asia , Africa , and Europe , to be environ with the ocean . i may therefore bold say ( though late intelligence thereof have we none at all ) that Asia and the west Indies be not tie together by any Isthmos or straight of land , contrary to the opinion of some new cosmographer , by who doubtful this matter have be bring in controversy . and thus much for the first part of my answer unto the four objection . the second part , namely that America and Asia can be one continent , may thus be prove , koto Lib. 2. me-trjv r^s be koikorrjta pei km twv troTa / Mov to trX^Ooi . the ttor‘ ca ? ' 1 • most river take down that way their course , where the earth be most hollow and deep , write Aristotle : and the sea ( say he in the same place ) as it go further , so be it find deep . into what gulf do the Moscovian river Onega , Duina , ob , power out their stream northward out of Moscovia into the sea ? which way do that sea strike ? the south be main 199 the english voyage land , the eastern coast wax more and more shallow : from the north , either natural , because that part of the earth be high Aristot. 2 Met. cap . 1. or of necessity , for that the forcible influence of some northern star cause the earth there to shake off the sea , as some philosopher do think : or final for the great store of water engender in that frosty and cold climate , that the bank be not able to hold they . Alber , in 2. meteor , cap . 6. from the north , i say , continual fall down great abundance of water . so that this northeastern currant must at the length abrupt bow towards we south on the west side of Finmarke and Norway : or else strike down southwest above groan-land , or betwixt groneland and Iseland , into the northwest strait we speak of , as of congruence it do , if you mark the situation of that region , and by the report of m. Frobisher experience teach we . and m. Frobisher the further he travail in the former passage , as he tell i , the deep always he find the sea lay you now the sum hereof together . the river run where the channel be most hollow , the sea in take his course wax deep , the sea water fall continual from the north southward , the northeastern current strike down into the straight we speak of , and be there augment with whole mountain of ice and snow fall down furious out from the land under the north pole . where store of water be , there be it a thing impossible to want sea , where sea not only do not want , but wax deep , there can be discover no land . final , whence i pray you come the contrary tide , that m. Frobisher meet withal after that he have sail no small way in that passage , if there be any Isthmos or straight of land betwixt the aforesaid northwestern gulf , and mar deal Zur , to join Asia and America together ? that conclusion frequent in school quicquid praeter , etc be mean of the part of the world then know , and so be it of right to be understand . 200 the five objection require for answer wisdom and sol 5. policy in the traveler , to win the barbarian favour by some good mean : and so to arm and strengthen himself , that when he shall have the repulse in one coast , he may safe travail to a other , commodious take his convenient time , and discreet make choice of they with who he will thorough deal . to force a violent entry , will for we Englishman be very hard , consider the strength and valour of so great a nation , far distant from we , and the attempt thereof may be most perilous unto the doer , unless their part be very good . touch their law against stranger , you shall read nevertheless in the same relation of Galeotto Perera , that the cathaian king be wont to grant free access unto all foreigner that trade into his country for merchandise , and a place of liberty for they to remain in : as the moor have , until such time as they have bring the Loutea or lieutenant of that coast to be a circumcise Saracene : wherefore some of they be put to the sword , the rest be scatter abroad : at fuquien a great city in China , certain of they be yet this day to be see . as for the japans they be most desirous to be acquaint with stranger . the Portugal though they be strait handle there at the first , yet in the end they find great favour at the prince his hand , insomuch that the Loutea or precedent that misuse they be therefore put to death . the rude indian Canoa hall those sea , the Portugal , the saracenes , and moor travail continual up and down that reach from Japan to China , from China to Malacca , from Malacca to the molucca : and shall a Englishman , better appoint than any of they all ( that i say no more of our navy ) fear to sail in that ocean ? what sea at all do want piracy ? what navigation be there void of peril ? to the last argument . our traveller need not to Sol. 6. seek their return by the north-east , neither shall they be constrain , except they listen , either to attempt 201 what the eastern cut rend be . the english voyage magellan straight at the southwest , or to be in danger of the Portugal for the southeast : they may return by the northwest , that same way they do go forth , . as experience have show . the reason allege for proof of the contrary may be disprove after this manner . and first it may be call in controversy , whether any current continual be force by the motion of primum mobile , round about the world , or no ? for learned man do diverse handle that question . the naturali course of all water be downward , wherefore of congruence they fall that way where they find the earth most low and deep : in respect whereof > it be erst say , the sea do strike from the northern land southerly . violent the sea be toss and trouble diverse way with the wind , increase and diminish by the course of the moon , hoist up and down through the sundry operation of the sun and the star : final , some be of opinion , that the sea be carry in part violent about the world , after the daily motion of the high movable heaven , in like manner as the element of air and fire , with the rest of the heavenly sphere , be from the east unto the west . and this they do call their eastern current , or levant stream . some such current may not be deny to be of great force in the hot zone , for the nearness thereof unto the centre of the sun , and bluster eastern wind violent drive the sea westward : howbeit , in the temperate clime , the sun be further off , and the wind more diverse , blow as much from the north , the west and south , as from the east , this rule do not effectual withhold we from travail eastward , neither be we keep ever back by the aforesaid Levant wind and stream . but in Magellans straight we be violent drive back westward : ergo , through the northwestern straight or Anian fret shall we not be able to return eastward ? it follow not . the first , for that the northwestern straight have more sea room at the least by one hundred english miles , than 202 1576. Magellans fret have , the only want whereof cause all narrow passage general to be most violent . so will i say in the Anian gulf , if it be so narrow as don Diego and zalterius have paint it out , any return that way to be full of difficulty , in respect of such straightness thereof , not for the nearness of the sun , or eastern wind , violent force that way any levant streamer but in that place there be more sea room by many degree , if the card of Cabota , and gemma Frisius , and that which Tramezine imprint , be true . and hitherto reason see i none at all , but that i may as well give credit unto their do , as to any of the rest . it must be peregrinationis historia , that be , true report of skilful traveller , as Ptolome write , that in ca ? ' 2 ' such controversy of Geographic must put we out of doubt . Ortelius in his universali table , in his particular [ three . 29. ] map of the west Indies , of all Asia , of the northern kingdom , of the east Indies , Mercator in some of his globe , and generail map of the world , Moletius in his universali table of the globe divide , in his sea card , and particular table of the east Indies , zalterius , and don Diego , with Ferdinando berte , and other , do so much differ from gemma Frisius and Cabota , among themselves , and in diverse place from themselves , concern the diverse situation and sundry limit of America , that one may not so rash , as true surmise , these man either to be ignorant in those point touch the aforesaid region , or that the map they have give out unto the world , be collect only by they , and never of their own draw . the first voyage of m. Martine Frobisher , to the northwest , for the search of the straight or passage to China , write by Christopher hall , master in the Gabriel , and make in the year of our lord 1576. he 7. of June be Thursday , the two bark , viz. the Gabriel , and the two Michael and our pinnace set sail at Ratcliff , and bear down to Detford , and there we anchor : the cause be , that our pinnace burst her boultsprit , and foremast aboard of a ship that ride at Detford , else we mean to have pass that day by the court then at Grenewich . the 8. day be Friday , about 12 of the clock we weigh at Detford , and set sail all three of we , and bear down by the court , where we shoot off our ordinance and make the best show we can : her majesty behold the same , commend it , and bid we farewell , with shake her hand at we out of the window . afterwards she send a gentleman aboard of we , who declare that her majesty have good like of our do , and thank we for it , and also will our captain to come the next day to the court to take his leave of she . the same day towards night m. secretary Woolly come aboard of we , and declare to the company , that her majesty have appoint he to give they charge to be obedient , and diligent to their captain , and governor in all thing , and wish we happy success . the 12. day be over against Gravesend , by the castle or blockhouse , we observe the latitude , which be 51. degree 33. min. and in that place the variation of the compass be 11. degree and a half . fair island . the 24. day at 2. of the clock after noon , i have sight of fair isle , be from we 6. league north and by east , and when i bring it northwest and by north , 204 it do rise at the southermost end with a little home - mock , and swampe in the mid . the 25. day from 4. to 8. a clock in the forenoon , the wind at northwest and by north a fresh gale , i cast about to the westward , the southermost head of shot - Shotland . land call Swinborne head northnorthwest from i , and the land of fair isle , west Southwest from i . i sail direct to the north head of that say land , sound as i run in , have 60. 50. and 40. fathom , and grey red shell : and within half a mile of that island , there be 36. fathom , for i sail to that island to see whether there be any roadesteede for a northwest wind , and i find by my sound hard rock , and foul ground , and deep water , within two cable length of the shore , 28. fathom , and so do not anchor but ply to and fro with my foresail , and mizzen till it be a high water under the island . the tide set there northwest and southeast : the flood set southeast , and the ebb northwest . the 26. day have the wind at south a fair gale , sail from fair isle to Swinborne head , i do observe the latitude , the island of Fowlay be west northwest from i 6. league , and Swinborne head east southeast from i , i find my * elevation to be 37. degr . and my declination 22. degr . 46. min. so that my latitude be 59 degr . 46. min. at that present be near to Swinborne head , have a leak which do trouble we , as also to take in fresh water , i ply room with a sound , which be call saint tronions , and there do anchor in seven fathom water , and fair sand . you have come in the sound mouth in the enter 17. 15. 12. 10. 9 8. and 7. fathom , and the sound lie in north northwest , and there we ride to a west sun , and stop our leak , and have refresh our self with water , at a north northwest sun , i set sail from saint tronions the wind at south south , and turn out till we be clear of the sound , and so sail west to go clear of the island of fowlay . And run olf towards fowlay , 205 * by elevation he mean the distance of the sun from the •zenith . S. tronions . fowlaylstand . i sound , have fifty fathom , and streamy ground , and also i sound fowlay be north from i one league off that island , have fifty fathom at the south [ three . 30. ] head , and streamy ground , like break otmell , and one shell be read and white like mackerel . latitude 59 the 27. day at a south sun i do observe the erelhe^be latitude5 the island of Fowlay be from i two league to sail * east north-east : i find my self to be in latitude 59 west and by degree , 59 min. true observe , the wind at south north . Southwest : i sail west and by north . from 12. to four a clock afternoon , the wind at south , a fair gale the ship sail west and by north 6. league , and at the end of this watch , i sound have 60. fathom , with little stone and shell , the island from we 8. league east . July the first . the first of July , from 4. to 8. a clock , we sail west 4. glass 4. league , and at that present we have so much wind that we spoon afore the sea Southwest 2. league . 3 - the 3. day we find our compass to be vary one point to the westwards : this day from 4. to 8. a clock we sail west and by north 6. league . the compass from 8. to 12. a clock at noon west and by north ards^one111 ' 4 ’ league - at that present i find our compass to point . be vary ill . deg . and one 4. part to the westwards , which be one point . 11. the 11 day at a southeast sun we have sight of the ne island open janj of FriSeland bear from we west northwest 16. s a ' league , and rise like pinnacle of steeple , and all cover with snow . i find my self in 61. degr . of latitude . we sail to the shore and can find no ground at 150. fathom , we hoist out our boat , and the captain with 4. man row to the shore to get on land , but the land lie full of ice , they can not get on land , and so they come aboard again : we have much ado to get clear of the ice by reason of the fog . yet from Thursday 8. a clock in the morning to Friday at noon we sail Southwest 20. league . 206 the 18. day at a southwest sun i find the sun 18. to be elevate 33. deg . and at a southsoutheast sun 40. deg . so i observe it till i find it at the high , and then it be elevate 52. deg . i judge the variation the variation of the compass to be 2. point and a half to the t^o point and westward . , a half to the the 21. day we have sight of a great drift of ice , west . seem a firm land , and we cast westward to be a great clear of it . of ice . the 26. we have sight of a land of ice : the latitude the latitude off be 62. degree , and two minute . 62. degree z . the 28. day in the morning be very foggy : but at * the clear up of the fog , we have sight of land , sight of land which i suppose to be Labrador , with great store of t0 ice about the land : i run in towards it , and sound , i^nr . but can get no ground at 100 fathom , and the ice be so thick , i can not get to the shore , and so lie off , and come clear of the ice . upon Monday 30. we come within a mile of the shore , and seek a harborowe : all the sound be full of ice , and our boat row a shore , can get no ground at 100 fathom , within a cable length of the shore : than we sail eastnortheast along the shore , for so the land lie , and the currant be there great , set Northeast , and Southwest : and if we can have get anchor ground , we will have see with what force it have run , but i judge a ship may drive a league and a half , in one hour , with that tide . this day at 4. of the cloak in the morning , be 31. fair and clear , we have sight of a head land , as we judge , bear from we north , and by east , and we sail Northeast , and by north to that land , and when we come thither , we can not get to the land for ice : for the ice stretch along the coast , so that we can not come to the land , by five league . Wednesday the first of August it calm , and in the augiist . after noon i cause my boat to be hoist out , be king hard by a great island of ice , and i and four man row 2 ' 207 they enter the strait in the latitude of fit , . deg . ands.min . 12. ' 3 - [ he - 3i i 14. ’S - 16. the english voyage to that ice , and sound within two cable length of it , and have sixteen fathom , and little stone , and after that sound again within a minion shoot , and have ground at a hundred fathom , and fair sand : we sound the next day a quarter of a mile from it , and have sixty fathom rough ground , and at that present be aboard , that great island of ice fall one part from another , make a noise as if a great cliff have fall into the sea and at four of the clock i sound again , and have 90. fathom , and small black stone , and little white stone , like pearl . the tide here do set to the shore . the ten i take four man , and my self , and row to shore to a island one league from the main , and there the flood set southwest alongst the shore , and it flow as near as i can judge so too , i can not tarry to prove it , because the ship be a great way from i , and i fear a fog : but when i come a shore , it be a low water . i go to you top of the island , and before i come back , it be hie a foot water , and so without tarry i come aboard . the 11. we find our latitude to be 63. degr . and eight minute , and this day we enter the strait . the 12. we set sail towards a island , call the gabriels island , which be 10. league then from we . we espy a sound , and bear with it , and come to a sandy bay , where we come to a anchor , the land bear east southeast off " we , and there we ride all night in 8. fathom water . it flow there at a southeast moon . we call it prior sound , be from the gabriels island , ten league . the 14. we weigh , and run into another sound , where we anchor in 8. fathom water , fair sand , and black oaze , and there calk our ship , be weak from the wale upward , and take in fresh water . the 15. day we weigh , and sail to prior bay , be a mile from thence . the 16. day be calm , and we ride still , without ice , 208 1576-but present within two hour it be freeze round about the ship , a quarter of a inch thick , and that day very fair , and calm . the 17. day we weigh , and come to Thomas Williams 17. island . the 18. day we sail north northwest , and anchor « 8. again in 23. fathom , and tough oaze , under burcher island , which be from the former island , ten league . the 19 day in the morning , be calm , and no 19 wind , the captain and i take our boat , with eight man in she , to row we a shore , to see if there be there any people , or no , and go to the top of the island , we have sight of seven boat , which come row °ftke from the east side , towards that island : whereupon we return aboard again : at length we send our boat p with five man in she , to see whither they row , and so with a white cloth bring one of their boat with their man along the shore , row after our boat , till such time as they see our ship , and then they row a shore : then i go on shore my self , and give every of they a threadden point , and bring one of they aboard of i , where he do eat and drink , and then carry he on shore again . whereupon all the rest come aboard with their boat , be nineteen person , and they speak , but we understand they not . they ducrip-bee like to Tartar , with long black hair , broad face , °£the and flat nose , and tawny in colour , wear seal p p ’ skin , and so do the woman , not differ in the fashion , but the woman be mark in the face with blow streeke down the cheek , and round about the eye . their boat be make all of seal skin , with a keel of wood within the skin : the proportion of they be like a spanish shallop , save only they be flat in the bottom , and sharp at both end . , the twenty day we weigh , and go to the east - 20. side of this island , and i and the captain , with four man more go on shore , and there we see their house , and the people espy we , come row towards seven 209 oh our boat : whereupon we ply towards our boat : and we be in our boat and they ashore , they call to we , and we row to they , and one of their company come into our boat , and we carry he a board , and give he a bell , and a knife : so the captain and i c . of our man will five of our man to set he a shore at a rock , take by they and not among the company , which they come from , f ' but their wilfulness be such , that they will go to they , and so be take themselves , and our boat lose . 21. the next day in the morning , we stand in near the shore , and shoot off a fauconet , and sound our trumpet , but we can hear nothing of our man : this sound we call the five man sound , and ply out of it , but anchor again in thirty fathom , and oaze : and ride there all night , in the morning , the snow lie a foot thick upon our hatch . 22. the 22. day in the morning we weigh , and go again to the place where we lose our man , and our boat . we have sight of fourteen boat , and some come near to we , but we can learn nothing of our man : among the rest , we entice one boat to our ship side , with a bell , and in give he the bell , we take he , and his boat , and so keep he , and so row down to Thomas William island , and there anchor all night . they retume . the 26. day we weigh , to come homeward , and by 2 • 12. of the clock at noon , we be thwart of trumpet island . 27. the next day we come thwart of gabriels island , and at 8. of the clock at night we have the cape Labrador as we suppose west from we , ten league . 28. the 28. day we go our course southeast . 29. we sail southeast , and by east , 22. league . September . the first day of September in the morning we have king sight of the land of Friseland , be eight league from we , but we can not come near it , for the monstrous ice that lie about it . from this day , till the six of this month , we run along island , and have the south part of it at eight of the clock , east from we ten league . 210 the seven day of this month we have a very terrible 7 « storm , by force whereof , one of our man be blow into the sea out of our waste , but he catch hold of the foresail sheate , and there hold till the captain pluck he again into the ship . the 25. day of this month we have sight of the [ he . 32. ] island of Orkney , which be then east from we . the first day of October we have sight of the shield , 2% Sam and so sail about the coast , and anchor at Yarmouth , and the next day we come into Harwich . the language of the people of Meta incognita . argoteyt , a hand . Cangnawe , a nose . arere , a eye . Keiotot , a tooth . mutchatet , the head . Chewat , a ear . Comagaye , a leg . Atoniagay , a foot . Callagay , a pair of breech . ' attegay , a coat . Pollevetagay , a knife . Accaskay , a ship . coblone , a thumb . teckkere , the foremost finger . Ketteckle , the middle finger . Mekellacane , the four finger . Yacketrone , the little finger . the second voyage of master Martin Frobisher , make to the west and northwest region , in the year 1577. with a description of the country , and people : write by master dionise settle . n Whitsunday , be the six and twenty of May , in the year of our lord God 1577. captain Frobisher depart from black wall , with one of the queen majesty ship , call the aid , of nine score ton , or thereabouts : and two other little bark like wise , the one call the Gabriel , whereof master Fenton , a gentleman of my lord of warwikes , be captain : 211 theorcadians upon small occasion f . ee their home . the english voyage and the other , the Michael , whereof master York , a gentleman of my lord admiral be captain , accompany with seven score gentleman , soldier , and sailor , well furnish with victual , and other provision necessary for one half year , on this his second voyage , for the further discover of the passage to Cathay , and other country , thereunto adjacent , by west and northwest navigation : which passage or way , be suppose to be on the north and northwest part of America : and the say America to be a island environ with the sea , where through our merchant may have course and recourse with their merchandise , from these our northernmost part of Europe , to those orientali coast of Asia , in much short time , and with great benefit than any other , to their no little commodity and profit that do or shall frequent the same . Oure say captain and general of this present voyage and company have the year before , with two little pinnace , to his great danger , and no small commendation , give a worthy attempt towards the performance thereof , be also press , when occasion shall be minister ( to the benefit of his prince , and native country ) to adventure himself further therein . as for this second voyage , it seem sufficient , that he have better explore and search the commodity of those people and country , which in his first voyage the year before he have find out . upon which consideration , the day and year before express , we depart from black wall to Harwich , where make a accomplishment of thing necessary , the last of may we hoist up sail , and with a merry wind the 7. of June we arrive at the island call Orcades , or vulgar Orkney , be in number 30. subject and adjacent to Scotland , where we make provision of fresh water ; in the do whereof our generali license the gentleman and soldier for their recreation , to go on shore . at our land , the people flee from their poor cottage , with shriek and alarm , to warn their neighbour of enemy , but by gentle persuasion we reclaim 212 they to their house . it seem they be often fright with pirate , or some other enemy , that move they to such sudden fear . their house be very simple build with pibble stone , without any chimney , the fire be make in the midst thereof . the good man , wife , child , and other of their family eat and sleep on the one side of the house , and the cattle on the other , very beastly and rude , in respect of civility . they be destitute of wood , their fire be turf , and cowshard . no wood in they have corn , big , and oat , with which they pay their king rend , to the maintenance of his house . they take great quantity of fish , which they dry in the wind and sun . they dress their meat very filthy , and eat it without salt . their apparel be after the rude sort of Scotland . their money be all base . their church and religion be reform accord to the Scot . the fisher man of England can better declare the disposition fisher man oj of those people than i : wherefore i remit other their England have usage to their report , as yearly repair thither , in ta Orkney their course to and from island for fish . we depart herehence the 8. of June , and follow [ he . 33. ] our course between west and northwest , until the 4. June and of July : all which time we have no night , but that easy , thoseld^st and without any impediment we have when we be so and north-disposed , the fruition of our book , and other pleasure - west region . to pass away the time : a thing of no small moment , to such as wander in unknown sea , and long navigation , especial , when both the wind and rage surge do pass their common and wont course . this benefit endure in those part not 6. week , while the sun be near the Tropike of Cancer : but where the pole be raise to 70. or 80. degree , it continue much long . all along these sea , after we be six day sail great abun-from Orkney , we meet dote in the sea , great fir tree , dance of Fin e which as we judge , be with the fury of great flood fo^ngin root up , and so drive into the sea . island have ’ almost no other wood nor fuel , but such as they take up upon their coast . it seem , that these tree be 213 inquire drive from some part of the new find land , with the current that set from the west to the east . can ent . the we come within the make of fris - land . from this shore io . or 12. league , we meet great island of ice , of half a mile , some more , some less in compass , show above the sea , 30. or 40. fathom , and as we suppose fast on ground , where with our lead we can scarce sound the bottom for depth . here , in place of odoriferous and fragrant smell of sweet gum , and pleasant note of musical bird , which other country in more temperate zone do yield , we tee , snow , and taste the most boisterous boreal blast mix with snow hrite ui June j hail , in the month of June and July , nothing inferior to our untemperate winter : a sudden alteration , and especial in a place or parallel , where the pole be not elevate above 61. degree : at which height other country moor to the north , yea unto 70. degree , show themselves more temperate than this do . all along this coast ice lie , as a continual bulwark , and so defend the country , that those that will land there , incur great danger . Oure generali 3. day together attempt with the ship boat to have go on shore , which for that without great danger he can not accomplish , he defer it until a more convenient time . all along the coast lie very high mountain cover with snow , except in such place , where through the steepness of the mountain of force it must needs fall . four day coast along this land , we find no sign of habitation . little bird , which we judge to have lose Friseland sub - the shore , by reason of thick fog which that country ject tofigge . js much subject unto , come fly into our ship , which cause we to suppose , that the country be both more tolerable , and also habitable within , than the outward shore make show or signification . from hence we depart the eight of July : and the 16. of the same , we come with the make of land , which land our generali the year before have name the queen foreland , be a island as we judge , lie 214 near the suppose continent with America : and on the other side , opposite to the same , one other island call Halles isle , after the name of the master of the ship , near adjacent to the firm land , suppose continent with Asia . between the which two island there be a large entrance or strait , call Frobishers straight , after the name of our generali , the first finder thereof . This strni say straight be suppose to have passage into the sea of Sur , which i leave unknown as yet . it seem that either here , or not far hence , the sea shall have more large entrance , then in other part within the freeze or untemperate zone : and that some contrary tide , either from the east or west , with main force cast out that great quantity of ice , which come float from this coast , even unto Friseland , cause that country to seem more untemperate than other , much more northerly than the same . i can judge that any temperature under the pole , the time of the sun northern declination be half a year together , and one whole day , ( consider that the sun elevation surmount not 23. degree and 30. minute ) can have power to dissolve such monstrous and huge ice , comparable to great mountain , except by l^tsds of ice . some other force , as by swift current and tide , with t0 the help of the say day of half a year . mounatnes . before we come within the make of these land we taste cold storm , in so much that it seem we have change summer with winter , if the length of the day have not remove we from that opinion . at our first come , the strait seem to be shut up with a long mure of ice , which give no little cause of discomfort unto we all : but our generali , ( to who captain fn-diligence imminent danger , and difficult attempt seem ht s^e ' nothing , in respect of his willing mind , for the come - diligence fir moditie of his prince and country , ) with two little the benefit of pinnace prepare of purpose , pass twice through his prince and they to the east shore , and the island thereunto countrey-adjacent : and the ship , with the two bark lie off and 215 [ by . 34 ] the order of the people appear on shore . fierce and bold people . one take . on something further into the sea , from the danger of the ice . while he be search the country near the shore , some of the people of the country show themselves leap and dance , with strange shriek and cry , which give no little admiration to our man . Oure generali desirous to allure they unto he by fair mean , cause knife , and other thing to be proffer unto they , which they will not take at our hand : but be lay on the ground , and the party go away , they come and ' take up , leave some thing of they to countervail the same . at the length two of they leave their weapon , come down to our generali and master , who do the like to they , command the company to stay , and go unto they : who after certain dumb sign , and mute congratulation , begin to lay hand upon they , but they deliverly escape , and run to their bow and arrow , and come fierce upon they , ( not respect the rest of our company which be ready for their defence ) but with their arrow hurt diverse of they : we take the one , and the other escape . while our generali be busy in search the country , and those island adjacent on the eastshoare , the ship and bark have great care , not to put far into the sea from he , for that he have small store of victual , be force to abide in a cruel tempest , chance in the night , among and in the thick of the ice , which be so monstrous , that even the least of a thousand have be of force sufficient , to have shiver our ship and bark into small portion , if God ( who in all necessity , have care upon the infirmity of man ) have not provide for this our extremity a sufficient remedic through the light of the night , whereby we may well discern to flee from such imminent danger , which we avoid with 14. bourd in one watch the space of 4 hour . if we have not incur this danger among these monstrous island of ice , we shall have lose our 216 generali and master , and the most of our best sailor , which be on the shore destitute of victual : but by the valour of our master gunner , master Jackman , and hard Cox , Andrew Dier , the master mate , man expert both in easy gunnavigation , and other good quality , we be all content master jack-to incur the danger aforerehearse , before we will man . with our own safety , run into the sea , to the destrue - andrewdier . cion of our say generali , and his company . the day follow , be the 19 of Julie , our captain return to the ship , with report of suppose riches , which show it self in the bowel of those barren mountain , wherewith we be all satisfy . within foufe day after we have be at the entrance of the strait , then northwest and west wind disperse the ice into the sea , and make we a large entrance into the strait , so that without any impediment , on the 19 of Julie we enter they , and the 20. thereof , our generali and master with great diligence , seek out and sound the west shore , and find out a fair harbour for the ship and bark to ride in , and name it after our master mate , jackmans sound , and bring the ship , jackmans bark , and all their company to safe anchor , except one man , which die by God visitation . at our first arrival , after the ship ride at anchor , our generali , with such company as can well be spare from the ship , in march order enter the land , have speciali care by exhortation , that at our entrance thereinto , we shall all with one voice , kneel upon our knee , chief thank God for our safe arrival : second beseech he , that it will please his divine majesty , long to continue our queen , for who he , and all the rest of our company in this order take possession of the possession country : and three , that by our Christian study and taken-endevour , those barbarous people train up in paganism , and infidelity , may be reduce to the knowledge of true religion , and to the hope of salvation in Christ our redeemer . with other word very apt to signify his willing mind , and affection towards his prince and 217 country : whereby all suspicion of a undutifiill subject , may credible be judge to be utter exempt from his mind . all the rest of the gentleman and other deserve fee needful to be regard of seafaring man . [ he . 35. - ] stone glister with sparkle like gold . worthy herein , their due praise and commendation . Theise thing in this order accomplish , our generali command all the company to be obedient in thing needful for our own safeguard , to master Fenton , master York , and master beast his lieutenant , while he be occupy in other necessary affair , concern our come thither . after this order we march through the country , with ensign display , so far as be think needful , and now and then heap up stone on high mountain , and other place in token of possession , as likewise to signify unto such as hereafter may chance to arrive there , that possession be take in the behalf of some other prince , by those who first find out the country . whoso make navigation to those country , have not only extreme wind , and furious sea to encounter withal , but also many monstrous and great island of ice : a thing both rare , wonderful , and great to be regard . we be force sundry time , while the ship do ride here at anchor , to have continual watch , with boat and man ready with halser to knit fast unto such ice , as with the ebb and flood be toss to and fro in the harbour , and with force of oar to hale they away , for endanger the ship . Oure generali certain day search this suppose continent with America , and not find the commodity to answer his expectation , after he have make trial thereof he depart thence with two little bark , and man sufficient to the east shore be the suppose continent of Asia , and leave the ship with most of the gentleman , soldier , and sailor , until such time as he either think good to send or come for they . the stone of this suppose continent with America be altogether sparkle , and glister in the sun like 218 gold : so likewise do the sand in the bright water , yet they verify the old proverb : all be not gold that 4 common pro-glistereth . verb . on this west shore we find a dead fish float , which have in his nose a horn strait and torquet , of length two yard lack two inche , be break in the top , where we may perceive it hollow , into the which some of our sailor put spider they present die . i see not the trial hereof , but it be report unto i of a truth : by the virtue whereof we suppose it to be the sea unicorn . u " * - after our generali have find out good harbour for corn it the ship and bark to anchor in , and also such store of suppose gold over as he think himself satisfy withal , he return to the Michael , whereof master York aforesaid be captain , accompany with our master and his mate : who coast along the west shore not far from whence the ship ride , they perceive a fair harbour , and willing to sound the same , at the entrance thereof they espy two tent of seal skin , unto which the captain , our say master , and other company resort . at the sight of our man the people flee into the people the mountain : nevertheless they go to their tent , where leave certain trifle or we , as glass , bell , i „ 0 knife , and such like thing they depart , not take any thing of they except one dog . they do in like manner leave behind they a letter , pen , ink , and paper , whereby our man who the captain lose the year before , and in that people custody , may ( if any of they be alive ) be advertise of our presence and be there . on the same day after consultation have , all the gentleman , and other likewise that can be spare from the ship , under the conduct and lead of master master Phil-Philpot , ( unto who in our generali he absence , and his lieutenant master beast , all the rest be obedient ) go master beast . a shore , determine to see , if by fair mean we can either allure they to familiarity , or otherwise take some of 219 they , and so attain to some knowledge of those man who our generali lose the year before . at our come back again to the place where their tent be before , they have remove their tent further into the say bay or sound , where they may if they be drive from the land , flee with their boat into the sea . we part our self into two company , and compass a mountain come sudden upon they by land , who espy we , without any tarry flee to their boat , leave the most part of their oar behind they for haste , and row down the bay , where our two pinnace meet they and drive they to shore : but if they have have all their oar , so swift be they in row , it have be lose time to have chase they . when they be land they fierce assault our man with their bow and arrow , who wound three of they with our arrow : and perceive themselves thus hurt , they desperate leap off7 the rock into the sea , and drown themselves : which if they have not do , but have submit themselves , or if by any mean we can have take they alive ( be their enemy as they judge ) we will both have save they , and also have seek remedy to cure their wound receive at our hand . but they altogether void of humanity , and ignorant what mercy mean , in extremity look for no other then death : and perceive they shall fall into our hand , thus miserable by drown rather desire death then otherwise to be save by we : the rest perceive their fellow in this distress , flee into the high mountain . two woman not be so apt to escape as the man be , the one for her age , and the other be encumber with a young child , we take . the old wretch , who diverse of our sailor suppose to be either a devil , or a witch , have her buskin pluck off , to see if she be cleave footed , and for her ugly hue and deformity we let she go : the young woman and the child we bring away . we name the place where they be slay , bloody point : and the bay or harbour , York 220 sound , after the name of one of the captain of the two bark . have this knowledge both of their fierceness and fair mean cruelty , and perceive that fair mean as yet be not able to allure they to familiarity , we dispose our self , familiarity t0 contrary to our inclination , something to be cruel , return to their tent and make a spoil of the same : where we find a old shirt , a doublet , a girdle , and also shoe of our man , who we lose the year before : on nothing else unto they belong cold we set our eye . their riches be not gold , silver or precious drapery , [ he . 36. ] but their say tent and boat , make of the skin of red °f dear and seal skin : also dog like unto wolf , 5 s' but for the most part black , with other trifle , more to be wonder at for their strangeness , then for any other commodity needful for our use . thus return to our ship the 3. of August , we our departure depart from the west shore suppose firm with west America , after we have anchor there 13. day : and so ' the 4. thereof we come to our generali on the east shore , and anchor in a fair harbour name anne warwick's sound , unto which be annex a island both name after the countesseof Warwick , anne Warwick sound and isle . in this isle our generali thought good for this - voyage , to fraught both the ship and bark , with such stone or suppose gold minerali , as he judge to countervail the charge of his first , and this his second navigation to these country . in the mean time of our abode here some of they the country country people come to show themselves unto we , sundry setoe time on the main shore , near adjacent to the say unt0 we . isle . Oure generali desirous to have some news of his man , who he lose the year before , with some company with he repair with the ship boat to common , or sign with they for familiarity , whereunto he be persuaded to bring they . they at the first show make token , that three of his five man be alive , and desire 221 their usage in traffic or exchange . the people show themselves the three time . the people show themselves again on jirme land . the english voyage pen , ink , and paper , and that within three or four day they will return , and ( as we judge ) bring those of our man which be live , with they . they also make sign or token of their king , who they call Cacough , and how he be carry on man shoulder , and a man far surmount any of our company , in bigness and stature . with these token and sign of writing , pen , ink , and paper be deliver they , which they will not take at our hand , but be lay upon the shore , and the party go away , they take up : which likewise they do when they desire any thing for change of they , lay for that which be leave so much as they think will countervail the same , and not come near together . it seem they have be use to this trade or traffic , with some other people adjoin , or not far distant from their country . after 4. day some of they show themselves upon the firm land , but not where they be before . our general very glad thereof , suppose to hear of our man , go from the island , with the boat , and sufficient company with he . they seem very glad , and allure he about a certain point of the land : behind which they may perceive a company of the crafty villain to lie lurk , who our generali will not deal withal , for that he know not what company they be , and so with few sign dismiss they and return to his company . a other time as our say generali be coast the country with two little pinnace , whereby at our return he may make the better relation thereof , three of the crafty villain , with a white skin allure we to they . once again our generail , for that he hope to hear of his man , go towards they : at our come near the shore whereon they be , we may perceive a number of they lie hide behind great stone , and those 3. in sight labour by all mean possible that some will come on land : and perceive we make no haste 222 by word nor friendly sign , which they use by clap their first of their hand , and be without weapon , and but 3. in sight , they seek further mean to provoke we as^us 0 thereunto . one alone lay flesh on the shore , which their second we take up with the boat hook , as necessary victual mean . for the relieve of the man , woman , and child , who we have take : for that as yet they can not digest our meat : whereby they perceive themselves deceive of their expectation , for all their crafty allurement . yet once again to make ( as it be ) a full show of their their three crafty nature , and subtle sleight , to the intent thereby an^crafiest . 1 ° r allurement . to nave entrap and take some or our man , one or they counterfeit himself impotent and lame of his leg , who seem to descend to the water side , with great difficulty : and to cover his craft the more , one of his fellow come down with he , and in such place where he seem unable to pass , he take he on his shoulder , set he by the water side , and depart from he , leave he ( as it shall seem ) all alone , who play his counterfeit pageant very well , think thereby to provoke some of we to come on shore , not fear , but that one of we may make our party good with a lame man . Oure generali have compassion of his impotency , compassion to thought good ( if it be possible ) to cure he thereof : c “ re a crafty wherefore he cause a soldier to shoot at he with ’ his caleever , which graze before his face . the counterfeit villeine deliverly flee , without any impediment at all , and get he to his bow and arrow , and the rest from their lurk hole , with their weapon , bow , arrow , sling , and dart . Oure generali cause some caliver to be shoot off " at they , whereby some be hurt , they may hereafter stand in more fear of we . this be all the answer for this time we can have [ three . 37. ] of our man , or of our general letter . their crafty deal at these three several time be thus manifest unto we , may plain show their disposition in other thing to be correspondent . we judge that they use 223 these stratagem , thereby to have catch some of we , for the deliver of the man , woman and child who we have take . they be man of a large corporature , and good proportion : their colour be not much unlike the sun burn country man , who labour daily in the sun for his live . they wear their hair something long , and cut before either with stone or knife , very disorderly . their woman wear their hair long , and knit up with two loupe , show forth on either side of their face , and the rest foltre upon a knot . also some of their woman raze their face proportional , as chin , cheek , and forehead , and the wrist of their hand , whereupon they lie a colour which continue dark azurine . they eat their meat all raw , both flesh , fish , and foul , or something per boil with blood and a little water which they drink . for lack of water they will eat ice , that be hard freeze , as pleasant as we will do sugar Candie , or other sugar . if they for necessity sake stand in need of the premise , such grass as the country yield they pluck up and eat , not dainty , or salletwise to allure their stomach to appetite : but for necessity sake without either salt , oil or wash , like brute beast devour the same . they neither use table , stool , or table cloth for comeliness : but when they be imbrue with blood knuckle deep , and their knife in like sort , they use their tongue as apt instrument to lick they clean : in do whereof they be assure to loose none of their victual . dog like they frank or keep certain dog not much unlike unto wolf . wolf , which they yoke together , as we do ox and horse , to a sled or trade : and so carry their necessary over the ice and snow from place to place : as the captive , who we have , make perfect sign . and when those dog be not apt for the same use : or when with hunger they be constrain for lack of other victual , 224 > 577-they eat they : so that they be as needful for they they eat dtp in respect of their bigness , as our ox be for we . fresh - they apparel themselves in the skin of such beast as they kill , sew together with the sinew of they . all the foul which they kill , they skin , and make thereof one kind of garment or other , to defend they from the cold . they make their apparel with hood and tail , which hood and . tail they give when they think to gratify any friend - tatle ship show unto they : a great sign of friendship a " be ’ with they . the man have they not so side as the woman . the man and woman wear their hose close to their leg , from the waste to the knee without any open before , as well the one kind as the other . upon their leg they wear hose of leather , with the fur side inward two or three pair on at once , and especial the woman . in those hose they put their knife , needle , and other thing needful to bear about . they put a bone within their hose , which reach from the foot to the knee , whereupon they draw their say hose , and so in place of garter they be hold from fall down about their foot . they dress their skin very soft and souple with the hair on . in cold weather or winter they wear the fur side inward : and in summer outward . other apparel they have none but the say skin . those beast , fish , and fowl , which they kill , be their meat , drink , apparel , house , bed , hose , shoe , thread , and sail for their boat , with many other necessary whereof they stand in need , and almost all their riches . their house be tent make of seal skin , pitch up with 4. fir quarter four square meeting at the top , and the skin sew together with sinew , and lay thereupon : they be so pitch up , that the entrance into they be always south or against the sun . they have other sort of house which we find not their house of seal skin and fir . Vii 225 to be inhabit , which be raise with stone and whale bone , and a skin lay over they , to withstand the rain , or other weather : the entrance of they be not much unlike a oven mouth , whereto i think they resort for a time to fish , hunt , and foul , and so leave they until the next time they come thither again . their weapon their weapon be bow , arrow , dart , and sling . of defence . their bow be of wood of a yard long , sinew at the back with strong sinew , not glue too , but fast gird and tie on . their bow strings'are likewise sinew . their arrow be three piece nocked with bone , and end with bone , with those two end , and the wood in the midst , they pass not in length half a yard or little moor . they be feather with two feather the pen end be cut away , and the feather lay upon the arrow with the broad side to the wood ; insomuch [ three . 38. ] that they seem when they be tie on , to have four three sort of feather . they have also three sort of head to those head to their arrow . one sort of stone or iron , proportion like to ’ a heart : the second sort of bone , much like unto a stop head , with a hook on the same : the three sort of bone likewise make sharp at both side , and sharp point . they be not make very fast but light tie to , or else set in a knock , that upon small occasion the arrow leave these head behind they : and they be of small force , except they be very near when they shoot . two sort of their dart be make of two sort : the one with many rt ' fork of bone in the fore end and likewise in the midst : their proportion be not much unlike our toast - ing iron but long : these they cast out of a instrument of [ wood , very ready . the other sort be great than the first aforesaid , with a long bone make sharp on both side not much unlike a rapier , which i take to be their most hurtful weapon . two sort of they have two sort of boat make of leather , set out ather^ on * nner s^e quarter °f wood , artificial tie together with thong of the same : the great sort be not much unlike our wherry , wherein sixteen or 226 twenty man may sit : they have for a sail dress the gut of such beast as they kill very fine and thin , which they sew together : the other boat be but for one man to sit and row in with one oar . their order of fish , hunt , and foul be with these say weapon : but in what sort , or how they use they we have no perfect knowledge as yet . i can suppose their abode or habitation not to be here , for that neither their house or apparel , be of such force to withstand the extremity of cold , that the country seem to be infect with all : neither do i see any sign likely to perform the same . those house or rather den which stand there , have no sign of footway , or any thing else tread , which be one of the chief token of habitation . and those they use ft foul , fish , and hunt . it be to be suppose that their inhabit be elsewhere .. tent which they bring with they , when they have sufficient hunt and fish , they remove to other place : and when they have sufficient store they of such victual , as the country yield or bring forth , they return to their winter station or habitation . this conjecture do i make , for the infertility which i conjecture to be in that country . they have some iron whereof they make arrow head , t^ir ttse it knife , and other little instrument , to work their boat , bow , arrow , and dart withal , which be very unapt to do any thing withal but with great labour . it seem that they have conversation with some other people , of who for exchange they shall receive the same . they be great delight with any thing that be bright , or give a sound . what knowledge they have of God , or what idol anthropophagi . they adore , we have no perfect intelligence , i think they rather anthropophagi , or devourer of man flesh then otherwise : for that there be no flesh or fish which they find dead ( smell it never so filthy ) but they will eat it , as they find it without any other dress . a loathsome thing , either to the beholder or hearer . there be no manner of creep beast hurtful , except 227 signet of gold some spider ( which as many affirm , be sign of great eure - store of gold ) and also certain sting gnat , which bite so fierce , that the place where they bite short after swell and itch very sore . sign of gold they make sign of certain people that be bright from other plate of gold in their forehead , and other place of ' their body . description of the country on both side the strait lie very the country . high with rough stony mountain , and great quantity of snow thereon . there be very little plain ground and no grass , except a little which be much like unto moss that grow on soft ground , such as we get turffe in . there be no wood at all . to be brief there be nothing fit or profitable for the use of man , which that country with root yield or bring forth : howbeit there be great quantity of deer , who skin be like unto ass , there head or horn do far exceed , as well in length as also in breadth , any in these our part or country : their foot likewise be as great as our oxen , which we measure to be seven or eight inche in breadth . there be also hare , wolf , fish bear , and sea foul of sundry sort . as the country be barren and unfertile , so be they rude and of no capacity to culture the same to any perfection : but be content by their hunt , fish , and foul , with raw flesh and warm blood to satisfy their greedy paunch , which be their only glory . a sign oj there be great likelihood of earthquake or thunder : earthquake £or t^at there be huge and monstrous mountain , who great substance be stone , and those stone so shake with some extraordinary mean that one be separate from another , which be discordant from all other quarry . [ Iii . 39 ] there be no river or run spring , but such as uchatlhe111 trough heat of the sun , with such water as sun do descend from the mountain and hill , whereon cause to come great drift of snow do lie , be engender . of mow . it argue also that there shall be none : for that the earth , which with the extremity of the winter be so 228 1577-frosen within , that that water which shall have recourse probability within the same to maintain spring , have not his . motion , whereof great water have their originali , as by er experience be see otherwhere . such valley as be riser in the capable to receive the water , that in the summer time ground . by the operation of the sun descend from great abundance of snow , which continual lie on the mountain and have no passage , sink into the earth and so vanish away , without any runnell above the earth , by which occasion or continual stand of the say water , the earth be open , and the great frost yield to the force thereof , which in other place four or five fathom within the ground for lack of the say moisture , the earth ( even in the very summer time ) be freeze , and so combine the stone together , that scarce instrument with great force can unknit they . also where the water in those valley can have no such passage away , by the continuance of time in such order as be before rehearse , the yearly descent from the mountain fill they full , that at the low bank of the same , they fall into the valley , and so continue as fish pond or stagne in summer time full of water , and in the winter hard freeze : as by scar that remain thereof in summer may easy be perceive : so that the heat of summer be nothing comparable or of force to dissolve the extremity of cold that come in winter . nevertheless i be assure that below the force of the frost within the earth , the water have recourse , and empty themselves out of sight into the sea , which through the extremity of the frost be constrain to do the same : by which occasion the earth within be keep the warm , and spring have their recourse , which be the spring nou-onely nutriment of gold and mineral within the same . there be much to be say of the commodity of these country , which be couch within the bowel of the earth , which i let pass till more perfect trial be make thereof . 229 gur departure from those country . how when we lose our i . Barks , which God nevertheless restore . the conclusion . the english voyage the 24. of August , after we have satisfy our mind with fraught sufficient for our vessel , though not our covetous desire with such knowledge of the country , people , and other commodity as be before rehearse , we depart therehence . the 17. of September we fall with the land end of England , and so sail to Milford haven , from whence our generali road to the court for order , to what port or haven to conduct the ship . we lose our two bark in the way homeward , the one the 29. of August , the other the 31. of the same month , by occasion of great tempest and fog . howbeit God restore the one to Bristol , and the other make his course by Scotland to Yermouth . in this voyage we lose two man , one in the way by god visitation , and the other homeward cast over board with a surge of the sea . i can declare unto the reader , the latitude and longitude of such place and region as we have be at , but not altogether so perfect as our master and other , with many circumstance of tempest and other accident incident to sea fare man , which seem not altogether strange , but i let they pass to their report as man most apt to set forth and declare the same . i have also leave the name of the country on both the shore touch , for lack of understand the people yet to be declare . country new discover where commodity be to be look for , do better accord with a new name give by the discoverer , than a uncertain name by a doubtful author . our general name sundry island , mountain , cape , and harborough after the name of diverse noble man and other gendeman his friend , aswell on the one shore as also on the other . the three and last voyage unto Meta incognita , make by m. Martin Frobisher , in the year 1578. write by Thomas Ellis . these be to let you know , that upon the 25. of may , the Thomas Allen be vice-admiral who captain be m. York , m. Gibbes master , Christopher hall pilot , accompany with the rear-admiral name the hopewel , who captain be m. Henry carewe , the m. Andrew Dier , and certain other ship come to Gravesend , where we anchor and abide the come of certain of our fleet which be not yet come . the 27. of the same month our fleet be now come together , and all thing press in a readiness , the wind favour , and tide serve , we be of sail in number eight , weigh anchor and hoist our sail towards Harwich to meet with our admiral , and the residue which then and there abide our arrival : where we safe arrive the 28. thereof , find there our admiral , who we with the discharge of certain piece salute , accord to order and duty , and be welcome with the like courtesy : which be finish we land : where our generali continue mustering his soldier and miner , and set thing in order appertain to the voyage until the last of the say month of May , which day we hoist our sail , and commit our self to the conduct of almighty God , we set forward towards the west country in such lucky wise and good success , that by the five of June we pass the dursy , be the utmost part of Ireland to the westward . and here it be not much amiss nor far from our purpose , if i shall a little discourse and speak of our adventure and chance by the way , as our land at Plymouth , as also the meeting certain poor man , which be rob and spoil of all that they have by 231 master fork . Christopher hall . the hopewel . captain Carew . Andrew Dier . [ Iii . +o . i Harwich . dursy . Ireland . Plymouth . pirate and rover : among who be a man of Briitote . Bristol , on who our generali use his liberality , and send he away with letter into England . but because such thing be impertinent to the matter , i will return ( without any more mention of the same ) to that from the which i have digress and swerve , i mean our ship now sail on the surge sea , sometime pass at pleasure with a wish eastern wind , sometime hinder of our course again by the western blast , until the 20. day of the foresay month of June , Frizeland . on which day in the morning we fall with Frizeland , which be a very hie and crag land and be almost clean cover with snow , so that we may see nought but craggy rock and the top of high and huge hill , sometime ( and for the most part ) all cover with foggy mist . there might we also perceive the great isle of ice lie on the sea , like mountain , some small , some big , of sundry kind of shape , and such a number of they , that we can not come near the shore for they . thus sail alongst the coast , at the last we see a place somewhat void of ice , where our generali ( accompany with certain other ) go a shore , where they see certain tent make of beast skin , and boat much the like unto they of Meta incognita . the tent be furnish with flesh , fish , skin , and other trifle : among the which be find a box of nail : whereby we do conjecture , that they have either artificer among they , or else a traffic with some other nation . the man run away , so that we can have no conference or communication with they . Oure generali ( because he will have they no more to flee , but rather encourage the courtesy of to stay through his courteous deal ) give commaunde-our generali . ment that his man shall take nothing away with they , save only a couple of white dog , for the which he leave pin , point , knife , and other trifle thing , and depart without take or hurt any thing , and so come aboard , and hoist sail , and pass forward . 232 but be scarce out of the sight thereof , there fall such a fog and hideous mist that we can not see one another : whereupon we strike our drum , and sound our trumpet , to the end we may keep together : and so continue all that day and night till the next day that the mist break up : so that we may easy perceive all the ship thus sail together all that day , until the next day , be the 22. of the same : on which day we see a infinite number of ice , from the which we cast about to shun the danger thereof . but one of our small bark name the Michael , who master captain be master Kinderslie , the master Bartholomew bull , lose our company , insomuch that we can not ° mew ■ obtain the sight of her many day after , of who 1 mean to speak further anon when occasion shall be minister , and opportunity serve . thus we continue in our course until ! the second of July , on which day we fall with the queen foreland , where we see so much ice , that we think it unpossible to get into the strait : yet at the last we give the adventure and enter the ice . be among it we see the Michael , of who i Michael . speak before , accompany with the Judith , who captain be Master Fenton , the master Charles Jackman , Charles bear into the foresay ice , far distant from we , who Jackman . in a storm that fall that present night , ( whereof i will at large God willing , discourse hereafter ) be sever from we , and be in , wander up and down the strait among the ice many day in great peril , till at the last , ( by the providence of God ) they come safe to harbour in their wish port. in the countess countess of Warwick sound , the 20. of July aforesaid , ten day before any of the other ship : who go on ' shore find where the people of the country have be , and have hide their provision in great heap of stone be both of flesh and fish , which they have kill ; whereof we also find great store in other place after [ three . 41 . j our arrival . they find also diverse engine , as bow , 233 narrow shift fir safety . the english voyage sling , and dart . they find likewise certain piece of the pinnace which our generali leave there the year before , which pinnace he have sink , mind to have it again the next year . now see i have entreat so much of the Judith and the Michael : i will return to the rest of the other ship , and will speak a little of the storm which fall , with the mishap that we have , the night that we put into the ice : whereof i make mention before . at the first enter into the ice in the mouth of the strait , our passage be very narrow , and difficult but be once get in , we have a fair open place without any ice for the most part , be a league in compass , the ice be round about we and enclose we , as it be , within the pale of a park . in which place , ( because it be almost night ) we mind to take in our sail , and lie a hull all that night . but the storm so increase , and the wave begin to mount aloft , which bring the ice so near we , and come on so fast upon we , that we be fain to bear in and out , where we may espy a open place . thus the ice come on we so fast , we be in great danger , look every hour for death . and thus pass we on in that great danger , see both our self and the rest of our ship so trouble and toss among the ice , that it will make the strong heart to relent . at the last the bark Dionyse be but a weak ship , and bruise afore among the ice , be so leak that no long she can tarry above the water , sink without save any of the good which be within she : which sight so abash the whole fleet , that we think very we shall have taste of the same sauce . but nevertheless we see they in such danger , man our boat and save all the man in such wise , that not one perish : God be thank . the storm still increase and the ice enclose we , so that we be fain to take down top and top mast : for the ice have so environ we , that we can see neither 234 i578-land nor sea , as far as we can ken : so that we be fain to cut our cable to hang over board for fender , somewhat to ease the ship side from the great and driry stroke of the ice : some with capstan bar , some fend off with oar , some with plank of two inche thick , which be break immediate with the force of the ice , some go out upon the ice to bear it off with their shoulder from the ship . but the rigorousness of the tempest be such , and the force of the ice so great , that not only they burst and spoil the foresay provision , but likewise so raze the side of the ship , that it be pitiful to behold , and cause the heart of many to faint . thus we continue all that dismal and lamentable night plunge in this perplexity , look for instant death : but our god ( who never leave they destitute godsprwi-which faithful call upon he , although he often punish dence ' for amendment sake ) in the morning cause the wind to cease , and the fog which all that night lie on the face of the water to clear : so that we may perceive about a mile from we , a certain place clear from any ice , to the which with a easy breath of wind which our God send we , we bend our self . and furthermore , he provide better for we than we deserve or hope for : for when we be in the foresay clear place , he send we a fresh gale at west or at west Southwest , which set we clear without all the ice . and further he add more : for he send we so pleasant a day as the like we have not of a long time before , as after punishment consolation . thus we joyful wight be at liberty , take in all our sail and lay a hull , praise God for our deliverance , and stay to gather together our fleet : which once be do , we see that none of they have any great hurt , neither any of they want , save only they of who i speak before and the ship which be lose , then at the last we hoist our sail , and lay bult off and on , till such time as it will please God to take away the ice that we may get into the strait . 235 1578. a mountain of ice appear in sundry figure . and as we thus lay off and on we come by a marvellous huge mountain of ice , which surpass all the rest that ever we see : for we judge it to be near fourscore fathom above water , and we think it to be a ground for any thing that we can perceive , be there nine score fathom deep , and of compass about half a mile . a fog of long continuance . also the five of July there fall a hideous fog and mist , that continue till the nineteenth of the same : so that one ship can not see another . therefore we be fain to bear a small sail and to observe the time : a current to the'northwest . but there run such a current of a tide , that it set we to the northwest of the queen foreland the backside of all the strait : where ( through the contagious fog have no sight either of sun or star ) we scarce know where we be . in this fog the ten of July we lose the company of the vice-admiral , the anne Francis , the buss of Bridgewater , and the Francis of Foy . the 16. day one of our small bark name they the Gabriel . Gabriel be send by our generali to bear in with the land to descry it , where be on land , they meet with [ he . 42. ] the people offer to traffic with we . the people of the country , which seem very humane and civil , and offer to traffic with our man , proffer they fowl and skin for knife , and other trifle : who courtesy cause we to think , that they have small conversation with other of the strait . than we bear back again to go with the queen foreland : and the eighteenth day we come by two island whereon we go on shore , and find where the people have be : but we see none of they . this day we be again in the ice , and like to be in as great peril as we be at the first . for through the darkness and obscurity of the foggy mist , we be almost run on rock and island before we see they : but God ( even miraculous ) provide for we , open the fog that we may see clear , both where and in what danger we present be , and also the way to escape : or else without fade we have ruinous run upon the rock . 236 when we know perfect our instant case , we cast about to get again on seaboard , which ( God be thank ) by night we obtain and praise God . the clear continue scarce a hour , but the fog fall again as thick as ever it be . then the rearadmiral and the bear get themselves clear without danger of ice and rock , strike their sail and lay a hull , stay to have the rest of the fleet come forth : which as yet have not find the right way to clear themselves from the danger of rock and ice , until the next morning , at what time the rearadmiral discharge certain warning piece to give notice that she warn have escape , and that the rest ( by follow of she ) may set themselves free , which they do that day . charnd * then have gather our self together we proceed on our purpose voyage , bear off , and keep our self distant from the coast till the 19 day of July : at which time the fog break up and disperse , so that we may plain and clear behold the pleasant air , which so long have be take from we , by the obscurity of the foggy mist : and after that time we be not much encumber therewith until we have leave the con fine of the country . than we espy a fair sound , suppose it to go a fair sound into the strait between the queen foreland and between the jackmans sound , which prove as we imagine . for our generali scent forth again the Gabriel to discover it , who jackmans pass through with much difficulty : for there run such sound . a extreme current of a tide , with such a horrible gulf , that with a fresh gale of wind they be scarce able to stem it : yet at the length with great travail they pass it , and come to the strait , where they meet with the Thomas Allen , the Thomas of Ipswich , and the buss of Bridgewater : who altogether adventure to bear into the ice again , to see if they can obtain their wish port. but they be so encumber that with much difficulty they be able to get out again , yet at the last they escape , the Thomas Allen , and the Gabriel 237 the time of our set forward , etc the english voyage bear in with the western shore , where they find harbour , and there moar their ship until the four of August , at which time they come to we in the countess of Warwick sound . the Thomas of Ipswich catch a great leak which cause she to cast again to Seabord and so be mend . we sail along still by the coast until we come to the queen foreland , at the point whereof we meet with part of the gulf aforesaid , which place or gulf ( as some of our master do credible report ) do flow nine hour , and ebb but three . at that point we discover certain land southward , which neither time nor opportunity will serve to search . then be come to the mouth of the strait we meet with the anne Francis , who have lie bult up and down ever since her departure alone , never find any of her company . we meet then also the Francis of Foy , with who again we intend to venture and get in : but the ice be yet so thick , that we be compel again to retire and get we on seaboard . there fall also the same day be the 26. of July , such a horrible snow , that it lie a foot thick upon the hatch which freeze as it fall . we have also at other time diverse cruel storm both of snow and hail , which manifest declare the dis-temperature of the country : yet for all that we be so many time repulse and put back from our purpose , know that linger delay be not profitable for we , but hurtful to our voyage , we mutual consent to our valiant generali once again , to give the onset . the 28. day therefore of the same July we assay , and with little trouble ( God be praise ) we pass the danger by day light . then night fall on the face of the earth , we hull in the clear , till the cheerful light of the day have chase away the noisome darkness of the night : at which time we set forward towards our wish port : by the 30. day we obtain our expect desire , where we find the Judith , and the Michael : 238 which bring no small joy unto the general , and great consolation to the heavy heart of those weary wight . the 30. day of July we bring our ship into the [ three . 43. ] countess of Warwick sound , and moar they , namely these ship , the admiral , the rearadmiral , the Francis of Foy , the bear Armenel , the Salomon , and the buss of Bridgewater : which be do , our generali commanded we all to come a shore upon the countess hand , where he set his miner to work upon the mine , give charge with expedition to dispatch with their lade . Oure generali himself , accompany with his gentleman , diverse time make road into sundry part of the country , as well to find new mine , as also to find out and see the people of the country . he find out one mine upon a island by bear sound , and name it the countess of Sussex island . one other be find in countess winter furnace , with diverse other , to which the ship °f^sjex be send sunder to be lade . in the same rodes winter he meet with diverse of the people of the country at furnace . sundry time , as once at a place call David sound : who David sound . shoot at our man , and very desperate give they the onset , be not above three or four in number , there be of our country man above a dozen : but see themselves not able to prevail , they take themselves to flight : who our man pursue , but be not use to such craggy cliff , they soon lose the sight of they , and so in vain return . we also see of they at bear sound , both by sea the politic of and land in great company : but they will at all time the people fir keep the water between they and we . and if any of our ship chance to be in the sound ( as they come diverse time , because the harbour be not very good ) the ship jade , and depart again : then so long as any ship be in sight , the people will not be see . but when as they perceive the ship to be go , they will not only show themselves stand upon high clifle , and call we to come over unto they : but also 239 the english voyage will come in their boat very near to we , as it be to brag at we : whereof our generali have advertisement , send for the captain and gentleman of the ship , to accompany and attend upon he , with the captain also of the anne Francis , who be but the night before come unto we . for they , and the Fleebote have lose we the 26. day in the great snow , put into a harbour in the queen foreland , where they find good oar , wherewith they jade themselves , and come to seek the generali : so that now we have all our ship , save one bark , which be lose , and the Thomas of Ipswich , who ( compel by what fury i know not ) forsake our company , and return home without lade . Oure generali accompany with his gentleman , ( of who i speak ) come all together to the countess of Sussex island , near to bear sound : where he man out certain pinniss , and go over to the people : who perceive his arrival , flee away with all speed , and in haste leave certain dart and other engine behind they , which we find : but the people we can not find . the next morning our generali perceive certain of they in boat upon the sea , give chase to they in a pinnace under sail , with a fresh gale of wind , but can by no mean come near unto they : for the long he sail , the further off he be from they : which well show their cunning and activity . thus time wear away , and the day of our departure approach , our generali command we to lade with all expedition , that we may be again on Seaboard with our ship : for while we be in the country , we be in continual danger of freeze in : for often snow and hail often fall , the water be so much freeze and congeal in the night , that in the morning we can scarce row our boat or pinnace , especial in dyer sound , which be a calm and still water : which cause our generali to make the more haste , so that by the 30. day of August we be all lade , and make all thing ready to depart . 240 but before i proceed any further herein , to show what gentleman fortune befall at our departure , i will turn my pen a little to m. captain Fenton , and those gentleman which ' c^^gy* it shall have inhabit all the year in those country , who valiant mind be much to be commend : for doubtless they have do as they intend , if luck have not withstand their willingness . for the bark dionise which be lose , have in her much of their house which be prepare and shall have be build for they , with many other implement . also the Thomas of Ipswich which have most of their provision in she , come not into the strait at all : neither do we see she since the day we be separate in the great snow , of which i speak before . for these cause , have not their house , nor yet provision , they be disappoint of their pretence to tarry , and therefore jade their ship , and so come away with we . but before we take ship , we build a little house a house in the countess of Warwick island , and garnish it trick and with many kind of trifle , as pin , point , lace , iverstrin^s glass , kombe , babe on horseback and on foot , with innumerable other such fancy and toy : thereby to allure and entice the people to some familiarity against other year . thus have finish all thing we depart the [ three . 44. i country , as i say before : but because the buss have not lade enough in she , she put into bear sound to take in a little moor . in the mean while the admiral , and the rest without at sea stay for she . and that night fall such a outrageous tempest , beat a outragwus on our ship with such vehement rigor , that anchor and temfest-cable avail nought : for we be drive on rock and island of ice , insomuch that ( have not the great goodness of God be miraculous show to we ) we have be cast away every man . this danger be more doubtful and terrible , than any that precede or go before : for there be not any one ship ( i think ) that escape without damage . some lose anchor and vn 241 q our enter the coast dangerous . the english voyage also cable , some boat , some pinniss : some anchor , cable , boat and pinniss . this boisterous storm so sever we from one another , that one ship know not what be become of another . the admiral know not where to find the vice-admiral or rearadmiral , or any other ship of our company . Oure generali being on land in bear sound can not come to his ship , but be compel to go aboard the Gabriel where he continue all the way homeward : for the boisterous blast continue so extreme and so long a time , that they send we homeward ( which be God favour towards we ) will we , will we , in such haste , as not any one of we be able to keep in company with other , but be separate . and if by chance any one ship do overtake other , by swiftness of sail , or meet , as they often do : yet be the rigour of the wind so hideous , that they can not continue company together the space of one whole night . thus our journey outward be not so pleasant , but our come thither , enter the coast and country , by narrow strait , perilous ice , and swift tide , our time of abode there in snow and storm , and our departure from thence the 31. of August with dangerous bluster wind and tempest , which that night arise , be as uncomfortable : separate we so as we sail , that not any of we meet together , until the 28. of September , which day we fall on the english coast , between Sylley and the land end , and pass the channel , until our arrival in the river of Thames . 242 the report of Thomas wiars passenger in the Emanuel , otherwise call the buss of Bridgewater , wherein James Leech be master , one of the ship in the last voyage of master Martin Frobisher 1578. concern the discovery of a great island in their way homeward the 12. of September . he buss of Bridgewater be leave in bear sound at Meta incognita , the second day of September behind the fleet in some distress , through much wind , ride near the lee shore , and force there to ride it out upon the hazard of her cable and anchor , which be all aground but two . the three of September be fair weather , and the wind north northwest she set sail , and depart thence , and fall with Frisland on the 8. day of September at six of the clock at night , and then they set off from the southwest point of Frisland , the wind be at east , and east southeast , but that night the wind vear southerly , and shift oftentimes that night : but on the ten day in the morning , the wind at west northwest fair weather , they steer southeast , and by south , and continue that course until the 12. day of September , when about 11. a clock before noon , they descry a land , which be from they about five league , and the southermost part of it be southeast by east from they , and the northermost next , north Northeast , or Northeast . the master account that the southeast point of Frisland be from he at that instant when he first descry this new island , northwest by north , 50. league . they account this island to be 25. league long , and the long way of it southeast , and northwest . the southern part of it be in the latitude of 57 degree and 1. second part , or there about . they continue in sight of it , from the 12. day at a 11. of the clock , till the 243 the island in length z 5. league . this hand be in the latitude of^ . degree and 1 second pars . the english voyage 13. day three of the clock in the after noon , when they leave it : and the last part they see of it , bear from they northwest by north . there appear two harborough upon that coast : the great of they seven league to the northward of the southermost point , the other but four league . there be very much ice near the same land , and also twenty or thirty league from it , for they be not clear of ice , till the 15. day of September after noon . they ply their voyage homeward , and fall with the west part of Ireland about Galway , and have first sight of it on the 25. day of September . Notes frame by m. Richard Hakluyt of the middle temple esquire , give to certain gentleman that go with m. Frobisher in his northwest discovery , for their direction : and not unfit to be commit to print , consider the same may stir up consideration of these and of such other thing , not unmeet in such new voyage as may be attempt hereafter . hat the first seat be choose on the seaside , so as ( if it may be ) you may have your own navy within bay , river or lake , within your seat safe from the enemy : and so as the enemy shall|be force to lie in open road abroad without , to be disperse with all wind and tempest that shall arise . thus seat you shall be least subject to annoy of the enemy , so may you by your navy within pass out to all part of the world , and so may the ship of England have access to you to supply all want , so may your commodity be carry away also . this seat be to be choose in a temperate climate , in sweet air , where you may possess always sweet water , wood , seacole or turf , with 244 fish , flesh , grain , fruit , herb and root , or so many of those as may suffice very necessity for the life of such as shall plant there . and for the possess of mine of gold , of silver , copper , quicksilver , or of any such precious thing , the want of those needful thing may be supply from some other place by sea , etc stone to make lime of , ' slate stone to tile withal , or such clay as make tile , stone to wall withal , if Brycke may not be make , timber for building easy to * be convey to the place , reed to cover house or such like , if tile or slate be not . be to be look for as thing without which no city may be make nor people in civil sort be keep together . the people there to plant and to continue be either to live without traffic , or by traffic and by trade of merchandise . if they shall live without sea traffic , at the first they become naked by want of linen and woollen , and very miserable by infinite want that will otherwise ensue , and so will they be force of themselves to depart , or else easy they will be consume by the Spaniard , by the Frenchman , or by the naturali inhabitant of the country , and so the enterprise become reproachful to our nation , and a let to many other good purpose that may be take in hand . and by trade of merchandise they can not live , except the sea or the land there may yield commodity . and therefore you ought to have most speciali regard of that point , and so to plant , that the naturali commodity of the place and seat may draw to you access of navigation for the same , or that by your own navigation you may carry the same out , and fetch home the supply of the want of the seat . such navigation so to be employ shall , beside the supply of want , be able to encounter with foreign force . 245 and for that in the ample vent of such thing as be bring to you out of England by sea , stand a matter of great consequence , it behoove that all humanity and courtesy and much forbear of revenge to the inland people be use : so shall you have firm amity with your neighbour , so shall you have their inland commodity to maintain traffic , and so shall you wax rich and strong in force . diverse and several commodity of the inland be not in great plenty to be bring to your hand , without the aid of some portable or navigable river , or ample lake , and therefore to have the help of such a one be most requisite : and so be it of effect for the disperse of your own commodity in exchange into the inland . Nothing be more to be endeavour with the inland people than familiarity . for so may you best discover all the natural commodity of their country , and also all their want , all their strength , all their weakness , and with who they be in war , and with who confederate in peace and amity , etc which know you may work many great effect of great consequence . and in your plant the consideration of the climate and of the soil be matter that be to be respect . for if it be so that you may let in the salt sea water , not mix with the fresh into flat , where the sun be of the heat that it be at rochel , in the bay of Portugal , or in Spain , then may you procure a man of skill , and so you have win one noble commodity for the fish , and for trade of merchandise by make [ three . 46. ] or if the soil and climate be such as may yield you the grape as good as that at Bordeaux , as that in Portugal , or as that about Sivil in Spain , or that in the island of the canary , then there rest but a workman to put in execution to make wine , and to dress resign of the sun and other , etc or if you find a soil of the temperature of the south part of Spain or Barbary in the which you 246 find the olive tree to grow : than you may be assure of a noble merchandise for this realm , consider that our great trade of clothing do require oil , and weigh how dear of late it be become by the vent they have of that commodity in the west Indies , and if you find the wild olive there it may be graft . or if you can find the berry of cochenile with which we colour stammelle , or any root , berry , fruit , wood or earth fit for die , you win a notable thing fit for our state of clothing . this cochenile be naturali in the west Indies on that firm . or if you have hide of beast fit for sole leather , etc it will be a merchandise right good , and the savage there yet can not tanne leather after our kind , yet excellent after their own manner . or if the soil shall yield fig , almond , sugar cane , quince , orange , lemon , potato , etc there may arise some trade and traffic by fig , almond , sugar , Marmelade , sucket , etc or if great wood be find , if they be of cypress , chest may be make , if they be of some kind of tree , pitch and tar may be make , if they be of some other , than they may yield rosin , turpentine , etc and all for trade and traffic , and cask for wine and oil may be make , likewise ship and house , etc and because traffic be a thing so materiali , i wish that great observation be take what every soil yield natural , in what commodity soever , and what it may be make to yield by endeavour , and to send we notice home , that thereupon we may devise what mean may be think of to raise trade . now admit that we may not be suffer by the savage to enjoy any whole country or any more than the scope of a city , yet if we may enjoy traffic , and be assure of the same , we may be much enrich , our navy may be increase , and a place of safety may there be find , if change of religion or civil 247 war shall happen in this realm , which be thing of great benefit . but if we may enjoy any large territory of apt soil , we may so use the matter , as we shall not depend upon Spain for oil , sack , resign , orange , lemond , spanish skin , etc nor upon France for woad , baysalt , and Gascoyne wine , nor on Eastland for flax , pitch , tar , mast , etc so we shall not so exhaust our treasure , and so exceed enrich our doubtful friend , as we do , but shall purchase the commodity that we want for half the treasure that now we do : and shall by our own industry and the benefit of the soil there cheap purchase oil , wine , salt , fruit , pitch , tar , flax , hemp , mast , board , fish , gold , silver , copper , tallow , hide and many commodity : beside if there be no flat to make salt on , if you have plenty of wood you may make it in sufficient quantity for common use at home there . if you can keep a safe haven , although you have not the friendship of the near neighbour , yet you may have traffic by sea upon one shore or other , upon that firm in time to come , if not present . if you find great plenty of timber on the shore side or upon any portable river , you be best to cut down of the same the first winter , to be season for ship , bark , boat and house ; and if near such wood there be any river or brook upon the which a saw mill may be place , it will do great service , and therefore consideration will be have of such place . and if such port and choose place of settle be in possession and after fortify by art , although by the land side our Englishman be keep in , and may not enjoy any traffic with the next neighbour , nor any victual : yet may they victuali themselves of fish to serve very necessity , and enter into amity with the enemy of their next neighbour , and so have vent of their merchandise of England and also have victual , or by mean hereupon to be use , to force the next neigh-248 hour to amity . And keep a navy at the settle place , they shall find out along the tract of the land to have traffic , and at diverse island also . and so this first seat may in time become a stapling place of the commodity of many country and territory , and in time this place may become of all the province round about the only governor . and if the place first choose shall not so well please our people , as some other moor late find out : there may be a easy remove , and that may be raze , or rather keep for other of our nation to avoid a ill neighbour . if the soil adjoin to such convenient haven and settle place be find marshy and boggy , than man [ three . 47. ] skilful in drain be to be carry thither . for art may work wonderful effect therein , and make the soil rich for many use . to plant upon a island in the mouth of some notable river , or upon the point of the land enter into the river , if no such island be , be to great end . for if such river be navigable or portable far into the land , then will arise great hope of plant in fertile soil , and traffic on the one or on the other side of the river , or on both , or the link in amity with one or other petty king contend there for dominion . such river find , both barge and boat may be make for the safe passage of such as shall pierce the same . these be to be cover with double of course linen artificial wrought , to defend the arrow or the dart of the savage from the rower . since every soil of the world by art may be make to yield thing to feed and to clothe man , bring in your return a perfect note of the soil without and within , and we shall devise if need require to amend the same , and to draw it to more perfection . and if you find not fruit in your plant place to your like , we shall in five drifat furnish you with such kind of plant to be carry thither the winter after your plant , as shall the very next summer follow yield you some fruit , and 249 the year next follow , as much as shall suffice a town as big as Calais , and that short after shall be able to yield you great store of strong durable good sider to drink , and these tree shall be able to increase you within less than seven year as many tree present to bear , as may suffice the people of diverse parish , which at the first settle may stand you in great stead , if the soil have not the commodity of fruit of goodness already . and because you ought greedy to hunt after thing that yield present relief , without trouble of carriage thither , therefore i make mention of these thus special , to the end you may have it special in mind .  which thing be well consider , and familiar captain know to our generali captain Frobisher , aswell for f^uhers that he be thorough furnish of the knowledge of the 5 sphere and all other skill appertain to the art of navigation , as also for the confirmation he have of the same by many year experience both by sea and land , and be persuade of a new and near passage to Cataya then by Capo de buona speranda , which the Portugal yearly use : he begin first with himself to devise , and then with his friend to confer , and lay a plain plat unto they that that voyage be not only possible by the northwest , but also he can prove easy to be perform . and further , he determine and resolve with himself to go make full proof thereof , and to accomplish or bring true certificate of the truth , or else never [ in . 58. ] to return again , know this to be the only thing of the world that be leave yet undo , whereby a notable mind may be make famous and fortunate . but although his will be great to perform this notable voyage , whereof he have conceive in his mind a great hope by sundry sure reason and secret intelligence , which here for sundry cause i leave untouched , yet he want altogether mean and ability to set forward , and perform the same . long time he confer with his private friend of these secret , and make also many offer for the perform of the same in effect unto sundry merchant of our country above 15 year before he attempt the same , as by good witness shall well appear ( albeit some evil willer which challenge to themselves the fruit of other man labour have great injure he in the report of the same , say that they have be the first author of that action , and that they have learn he the way , which themselves as yet have never go ) but perceive that hardly he be hearken unto of the merchant , which never regard virtue without sure , certain , and present gain , he repair to the court ( from whence , as from the fountain of our common wealth , all good cause have their chief increase and maintenance ) and there lay open to many great estate and learned man the plot and sum of his device . and among many honourable mind which favour his honest and commendable enterprise , he be special bind and behold to the right honourable Ambrose Dudley earl of Warwick , who favourable mind and good disposition have always be ready to countenance and advance all honest action with the author and executer of the same : and so by mean of my lord his honourable countenance he receive some comfort of his cause , and by little and little , with no small expense and pain bring his cause to some perfection , and have draw together so many adventurer and such sum of money as may well defray a reasonable charge to furnish himself to sea withal . he prepare two small bark of twenty and five and 278 1578. twenty ton a piece , wherein he intend to accomplish his pretend voyage . wherefore , be furnish with the foresay two bark , and one small pinnace of ten tun burden , have therein victual and other necessary for twelve month provision , he depart upon the say voyage from black-wall the 15 or June anno domini 1576. one of the bark wherein he go be name the Gabriel , and the other the Michael ; and sail northwest from England upon the 11 of July he have sight of a high and ragged land , which he judge to be Frisland ( whereof some author have make mention ) but dare not approach the same by reason of the great store of ice that lie alongst the coast , and the great mist that trouble they not a little . not far from thence he lose company of his small pinnace , which by mean of the great storm he suppose to be swallow up of the sea , wherein he lose only four man . also the other bark name the Michael mistrust 7^ Michael the matter , convey themselves privy away from he , return and return home , with great report that he be cast me-away . the worthy captain notwithstanding these discomfort , although his mast be spring , and his top mast blow overboard with extreme foul weather , continue his course towards the northwest , know that the sea at length must needs have a end , and that some land shall have a beginning that way ; and determine therefore at the least to bring true proof what land and sea the same may be so far to the northwestwards , beyond any man that have heretofore discover . and the twenty of July he have sight of a high land , which he call queen Elizabeth foreland , after her majesty name . And sail more northerly alongst that coast , he descry another foreland with a great gut , bay , or passage , divide as it be two main land or continent asunder . there he meet with store of exceed great ice all this coast along , and covet still to continue his 279 " frobishers first entrance within you strait . frobishers straight . [ in . 59 - ] the english voyage course to the northward , be always by contrary wind detain overthwart these straight , and can not get beyond . within few day after he perceive the ice to be well consume and go , either there ingulf in by some swift current or indraft , carry more to the southward of the same straight , or else convey some other way : wherefore he determine to make proof of this place , to see how far that gut have continuance , and whether he may carry himself through the same into some open sea on the back side , whereof he conceive no small hope , and so enter the same the one and twenty of July , and pass above fifty league therein , as he report , have upon either hand a great main or continent . and that land upon his right hand as he sail westward he judge to be the continent of Asia , and there to be divide from the firm of America , which lie upon the left hand over against the same . this place he name after his name , frobisher strait , like as Magellanus at the southwest end of the world , have discover the passage to the south sea ( where America be divide from the continent of that land , which lie under the south pole ) and call the same straight , magellane strait . after he have pass 60 league into this foresay strait , he go ashore , and find sign where fire have be make . deer . he see mighty dear that seem to be mankind , which run at he , and hardly he escape with his life in a narrow way , where he be fain to use defence and policy to save his life . in this place he see and perceive sundry token of the people resort thither . And be ashore upon the top of a hill , he perceive a number of small thing fleet in the sea afar off , which he suppose to be porpose or seal , or some kind of strange fish ; but come near , he discover they to be man in small the first sight boat make of leather . and before he can descend of you Savages . down from the hill , certain of those people have almost 280 cut off his boat from he , have steal secret behind the rock for that purpose , where he speedy haste to his boat , and bend himself to his halberd , and narrow escape the danger , and save his boat . afterwards he have sundry conference with they , and they come aboard his ship , and bring he salmon salmon . and raw flesh and fish , and greedy devour the same before our man face . and to show their agility , they try many mastery upon the rope of the ship after our mariner fashion , and appear to be very strong of their arm , and nimble of their body . they exchange coat of seal , and bear skin , and such like , with our man ; and receive bell , look glass , and other toy , in recompense thereof again . after great courtesy , and many meeting , our mariner , contrary to their captain direction , begin more easy to trust they ; and five of our man go ashore be by five engrsh-them intercept with their boat , and be never since hear of to this day again : so that the captain be t^en destitute of boat , bark , and all company , have scarce sufficient number to conduct back his bark again . he can now neither convey himself ashore to rescue his man ( if he have be able ) for want of a boat ; and again the subtle traitor be so wary , as they will after that never come within our man danger . the captain notwithstanding desirous to bring some token from thence of his be there , be great discontent that he have not before apprehend some of they : and therefore to deceive the deceiver he wrought a pretty policy ; for know well how they great delight in our toy , and special in bell , he ring a pretty lowbell , make sign that he will give he the same that will come and fetch it . and because they will not come within his danger for fear , he fling one bell unto they , which of purpose he throw short , that it may fall into the sea and be lose . and to make take of the they more greedy of the matter he ring a loud bell , firstsava&-so that in the end one of they come near the ship 281 the take possession of Meta incognita . how the ore be find by chance . the english voyage side to receive the bel ; which when he think to take at the captain hand , he be thereby take himself : for the captain be ready provide let the bell fall , and catch the man fast , and pluck he with main force boat and all into his bark out of the sea . whereupon when he find himself in captivity , for very choler and disdain he bite his tongue in twain within his mouth : notwithstanding , he die not thereof , but live until he come in England , and then he die of cold which he have take at sea . now with this new prey ( which be a sufficient witness of the captain far and tedious travel towards the unknown part of the world , as do well appear by this strange infideli , who like be never see , read , nor hear of before , and who language be neither know nor understand of any ) the say captain Frobisher return homeward , and arrive in England in Harwich the 2 of October follow , and thence come to London 1576 , where he be high commend of all man for his great and notable attempt , but special famous for the great hope he bring of the passage to Cataya . and it be especial to be remember that at their first arrival in those part there lay so great store of ice all the coast along so thick together , that hardly his boat can pass unto the shore . at length , after diverse attempt he command his company , if by any possible mean they can get ashore , to bring he whatsoever thing they can first find , whether it be live or dead , stock or stone , in token of christian possession , which thereby he take in behalf of the queen most excellent majesty , think that thereby he may justify then have and enjoy of the same thing that grow in these unknown part . some of his company bring flower , some green grass ; and one bring a piece of black stone much like to a sea coal in colour , which by the weight seem to be some kind of metal or minerali . this 282 be a thing of no account in the judgement of the captain at the first sight ; and yet for novelty it be keep in respect of the place from whence it come . after his arrival in London , be demand of sundry his friend what thing he have bring they home out of that country , he have nothing leave to present they withal but a piece of this black stone . [ Iii . 60. ] and it fortune a gentlewoman one of the adventurer wife to have a piece thereof , which by chance she throw and burn in the fire , so long , that at the length be take forth , and quench in a little vinegar , it glister with a bright marquesset of gold . whereupon the matter be call in some question , it be bring to certain goldfiner in London to make assay thereof , who give out that it hold gold , and that very rich for the quantity . afterwards , the same goldfiner pro - many adven-mised great matter thereof if there be any store to turers-be find , and offer themselves to adventure for the search of those part from whence the same be bring . some that have great hope of the matter seek secret to have a lease at her majesty hand of those place , whereby to enjoy the mass of so great a public profit unto their own private gain . in conclusion , the hope of more of the same gold over to be find kindle a great opinion in the heart of many to advance the voyage again . whereupon preparation be make for a new voyage against the year follow , and the captain more special direct by commission for the search moor of this gold ore i » than for the search any further discovery of the v°ya& compassage . And be well accompany with diverse resolute and when me^ and forward gentleman , her majesty then lie at the fir the bring-right honourable the lord of Warwick house in Essex , mg of ore . he come to take his leave , and kiss her highness hand , with gracious countenance and comfortable word depart towards his charge . a true report of such thing as happen in the second voyage of captain Frobisher , pretend for the discovery of a new passage to Cataya , China and the east India , by the northwest . Ann. Dom. 1577. eing furnish with one tall ship of her majesty , name the aid , of two hundred ton , and two other small bark , the one name the Gabriel , the other the Michael , about thirty tun a piece , be fit appoint with man , munition , victual , and all thing niece - sary for the voyage , the say captain Frobisher , with the rest of his company come aboard his ship ride at Blackwall , intend ( with God help ) to take the first wind and tide serve he , the 25 day of May , in the year of our lord God 1577. the name of such gentleman as attempt this discovery , and the number of soldier and mariner in each ship , as follow . aboard the aid be admiral be the number of 100 man of all sort , whereof 30 or more be gentleman and soldier , the rest sufficient and tall sailor . aboard the Gabriel be vice-admiral , be in all 18 person , whereof six be soldier , the rest mariner . aboard the Michael be 16 person , whereof five be soldier , the rest mariner . 284 ' generali of the | whole company for her majesty encage Martin Frobisher . his lieutenant his ensign Corporali of the shot George Best . 1 Richard Philpot. Francis Forder . aboard the aid be the rest of the gentleman ' Henry Carew . Edmund Stafford . John Lee. m. Harvie . Matthew Kinersley . Abraham Lins . Robert Kinersley . Francis Brakenbury . William Armshow . aboard Gabrieli aboard Michael than i be | the i be ] the master the mate the pilot - the master gunner ' captain | one gentleman the master 1 captain | one gentleman the master encage ' Christopher hall . Charles Jackman . Andrew Dier . Richard Cox. ' Edward Fenton . [ he . 61. ] William Tamfield . William Smyth . " " Gilbert York . Thomas Chamberlaine . James bear . on Whitsunday be the 26 of may , anno 1577 , early in the morning , we weigh anchor at Blackwall , and fall that tie down to Gravesend , where we remain until Monday at night .. on Monday morning the 27 of may , aboard the aid the^mmun-we receive all the communion by the minister of ion 285 thefirst arrival after our departingfrom England . a i of silver find in Orkney . the english voyage Gravesend , and prepare we as good Christians towards God , and resolute man for all fortune : and towards night we depart to Tilbery hope . Tuesday the eight and twenty of may , about nine of the clock at night , we arrive at Harwitch in Essex and there stay for the take in of certain victual , until Friday be the thirty of May , during which time come letter from the lord of the council , straight command our generali , not to exceed his compliment and number appoint he , which be , one hundred and twenty person : whereupon he discharge many proper man which with unwilling mind depart . he also dismiss all his condemn man , which he think for some purpose very needful for the voyage , and towards night upon Friday the one and thirty of May we set sail , and put to the sea again . And sail northward alongst the east coast of England and Scotland , the seven day of June we arrive in saint magnus sound in Orkney hand , call in latin Orcades , and come to anchor on the south side of the bay , and this place be reckon from Blackwall where we set sail first league . here our company go on land , the inhabitant of these island begin to flee as from the enemy , whereupon the lieutenant will every man to stay together , and go himself unto their house to declare what we be and the cause of our come thither , which be understand , after their poor manner they friendly entreat we , and bring we for our money such thing as they have . and here our goldfiner find a i of silver . Orkney be the principali of the isle of the Orcades , and stand in the latitude of fifty nine degree and a half . the country be much subject to cold , answerable for such a climate , and yet yield some fruit , and sufficient maintenance for the people content so poor to live . there be plenty enough of poultrey , store of egg , fish , and foul . 286 for their bread they have oaten cake , and their drink be ewe milk , and in some part ale . their house be but poor without and sluttish enough within , and the people in nature thereunto agreeable . for their fire they burn heath and turf , the country in most part be void of wood . they have great want of leather , and desire our old shoe , apparel , and old rope ( before money ) for their victual , and yet be they not ignorant of the value of our coin . the chief town be call Kyrway . Kyrway then in this island have be sometime a abbey or a cq , fa ™ ne < > f religious house call saint Magnus , be on the west s magnus side of the he , whereof this sound bear name , through find why so which we pass . their governor or chief lord be call . call the lord Robert steward , who at our being there , as we understand , be in durance at Edinburgh , by the regent commandment of Scotland . after we have provide we here of matter sufficient for our voyage the eight of June we set sail again , and pass through saint magnus sound have a merry wind by night , come clear and lose sight of all the land , and keep our course west northwest by the space of two day , the wind shift upon we so that we lay in traverse on the sea , with contrary wind , make good ( as near as we can ) our course to the westward , and sometime to the northward , as the wind shift . and hereabout we meet with 3 sail of english fisherman from Iseland , bind homeward , by who we write our letter unto our friend in England . we traverse these sea by the space of 26 day without sight of any land , and meet with much drift wood , and whole body of tree . we see many monstrous fish and strange fowl , great body of tree drive in the sea . [ Iii . 62. ] monstrous fish in strange foul live which seem to live only by the sea , be there so far distant from any land . at length God favour we with more prosperous wind , and after we have sail four day with good wind in the poop , the four of July the Michael be foremost a head shoot off a piece sea 287 water be black and smooth signify land to be near . hand ofyce . we first sight of Frisland then . 4. of July . Frisland describe . a easy kind of fish . of ordinance , and strike all her sail , suppose that they descry land which by reason of the thick mist they can not make perfect : howbeit , as well our account as also the great alteration of the water , which become more black and smooth , do plain declare we be not far off the coast . Oure generali send his master aboard the Michael ( who have be with he the year before ) to bear in with the place to make proof thereof , who descry not the land perfect , but see sundry huge hand of ice , which we deem to be not pass twelve league from the shore , for about ten of the clock at night be the four of July , the weather be more clear , we make the land perfect and know it to be frislande . and the heighth be take here , we find our self to be in the latitude of 60 degree and a half , and be fall with the southermost part of this land . between Orkney and Frisland be reckon league . this frislande show a ragged and high lahde , have the mountain almost cover over with snow alongst the coast full of drift ice , and seem almost inaccessible , and be think to be a hand in bigness not inferior to England , and be call of some author , west Frislande , i think because it lie more west than any part of Europe . it extend in latitude to the northward very far as seem to we , and appear by a description set out by two brethren venetian , Nicholaus and Antonius Zeni , who be drive off from Ireland with a violent tempest make shipwreck here , and be the first know Christians that discover this land about two hundred year sithence , and they have in their sea-cardes set out every part thereof and describe the condition of the inhabitant , declare they to be as civil and religious people as we . and for so much of this land as we have sail alongst , compare their card with the coast , we find it very agreeable . this coast seem to have good fish , for we lie becalm let fall a hook without any bait and present 288 catch a great fish call a hollibut , who serve the whole company for a day meat , and be dangerous meat for surfeit . And sound about five league off from the shore , our lead bring up in the tallow a kind of coral almost white , and small stone as bright as crystal : and it be not to be doubt but that this land may be find very rich and beneficial if it be thorough discover , although we see no creature there but little bird . it be a marvellous thing to behold of what great bigness and depth some hand of ice be here , some seventie , some eighty fathom under water , beside that which be above , seem hand more than half a mile in circuit . all these ice be in taste fresh , and seem to be breed in the sound thereabouts , or in some land near the pole , and with the wind and tide be drive alongst the coast . we find none of these hand of ice salt in taste , whereby it appear that they be not congeal of the ocean sea water which be always salt , but of some stand or little move lake or great fresh water near the shore , cause either by melt snow from top of mountain , or by continual access of fresh river from the land , and intermingle with the sea water , bear yet the dominion ( by the force of extreme frost ) may cause some part of salt water to freeze so with it , and so seem a little brackish , but otherwise the main sea freeze not , and therefore there be no mare Glaciale or freeze sea , as the opinion hitherto have be . Oure generali prove land here twice , but by the sudden fall of mist ( whereunto this coast be much subject ) he be like to loose sight of his ship , and be greedy endanger with the drive ice alongst the coast , be force aboard and fain to surcease his pretence till a better opportunity may serve : and have spend four day and night sail alongst this land , find the coast subject to such bitter cold and continual mist , he determine to spend no more time therein , but to bear out his course towards the straight call frobisher strait after the general name , who seven 289 t White coral get by sound . monstrous isle of ice , in taste fresh , tohere-hence they be suppose to come . the opinion of the freeze sea be destroy by experience . be the first that ever pass beyond 58 degree to the northward , for any thing that have be yet know of certainty of new find land , otherwise call the continent or firm land land of America , discover the say straight this last year 1576. between Frisland and the straight we have one great storm , wherein the Michael be somewhat in danger , the stirrage have her stirrage break , and her top mast blow °bnkenb^ae^ over board , and be not pass 50 league short of the tempest ? straight by our account , we strike sail and lay a hull , fear the continuance of the storm , the wind be at the north-east , and have lose company of the bark the first en - in that flaw of wind , we happy meet again the seven-tranceofthe teenth day of July , have the evening before see * s' diverse hand of fleet ice , which give a argument that we be not far from land . Oure generali in the morning from the main top ( the weather be reasonfill . 63. ] able clear ) descry land , but to be better assure he send the two bark two contrary course , whereby they may descry either the south or north foreland , the aid lie off and on at sea , with a small sail by a hand of ice , which be the mark for we to meet together again . and about noon , the weather be more clear , we make the north foreland perfect , which hall Ilana otherwise be call Halles hand , and also the small hand bear the name of the say hall whence the ore be take up which be bring into England this last year 1576 then say hall be present at the find and take up thereof , who be then master in the gabrieli with captain Frobisher . at our arrival here all the sea about this coast be so cover over with huge quanti tie of great ice , that we think these place may only deserve the name of mare Glaciale , and be call the icy sea the descrip - this north foreland be think to be divide from the trafhb continent of the Northerland , by a little sound call ' Halles sound , which make it a hand , and be think little less than then he of wight , and be the first entrance 290 of the straight upon the norther side , and stand in the latitude of sixty two degree and fifty minute , and be reckon from Frisland league . God have bless we with so happy a landfall , we bear into the straight which run in next hand , and somewhat further up to the northward , and come as near the shore as we may for the ice , and upon the eighteenth day of July our generali take the goldfiner with he , attempt to go on shore with a small row pinnace , upon the small island where the ore be take up , to prove whether there be any store thereof to be find , but he can not get in all that hand a piece so big as a walnut , where the first be find . but our man which seek the other hand thereabouts find they all to have good store of the ore , whereupon our generali with these good tiding return aboard about ten of the clock at night , and be joyful welcome of the company with a volie of shot . he bring egg , fowl , and a young seal aboard , which the company have kill ashore , and have find upon those hand begin set to catch foul , and stick new cut , with other thing , he well perceive that not long before some of the country people have resort thither . have therefore find those token of the people access in those part , and be in his first voyage well acquaint with their subtle and cruel disposition , he provide well for his better safety , and on Friday the ninteenth of July in the morning early , with his best company of gentleman and soldier , to the number of forty person , go on shore , aswell to discover the inland and habitation of the people , as also to find out some fit harborowe for our ship . And pass towards the shore with no small difficulty by reason of the abundance of ice which lie alongst the coast so thick together • that hardly any passage through they may be discover , we arrive at length upon the main of hall great hand , and find there also aswell as in the other small hand good store of the ore . and no more gold over find in the first hand . egg in fowl of Meta incognita . snare set to catch bird withal . 291 the building of a column , call mount Warwick . the first sight of the country people , waft with a flag . the meeting apart of two Englishman , with two of that country . the order oj their traffic leave his boat here with sufficient guard we pass up into the country about two english mile , and recover the top of a high hill , on the top whereof our man make a column or cross of stone heap up of a good heighth together in good sort , and solemn sound a trumpet , and say certain prayer kneel about the ensign , and honour the place by the name of mount Warwick , in remembrance of the right honourable the lord Ambrose Dudley earl of Warwick , who noble mind and good countenance in this , as in all other good action , give great encouragement and good furtherance . this do , we retire our company not see any thing here worth further discovery , the country seem barren and full of ragged mountain and in most part cover with snow . and thus march towards our boat , we espy certain of the country people on the top of mount Warwick with a flag waft we back again and make great noise , with cry like the mow of Buis seem great desirous of conference with we : whereupon the generali be therewith better acquaint , answer they again with the like cry , whereat and with the noise of our trumpet they seem greedy to rejoice , skip , laugh and dance for joy . and hereupon we make sign unto they , hold up two finger , command two of our man to go apart from our company , whereby they may do the like . so that forthwith two of our man and two of they meet together a good space from company , neither party have their weapon about they . our man give they pin and point and such trifle as they have . and they likewise bestow on our man two bow case and such thing as they have . they earnest desire our man to go up into their country , and our man offer they like kindness aboard our ship , but neither part ( as it seem ) admit or trust the other courtesy . their manner of traffic be thus , they do use to lay down of their merchandise upon the ground , so much as they mean to part withal , and 292 so look that the other party with who they make trade shall do the like , they themselves do depart , and then if they do like of their mart they come again , and take in exchange the other merchandise , otherwise if they like not , they take their own and depart . the day be thus well near spend , in haste we retire our company into our boat again , mind forthwith to search alongst the coast for some harbour fit for our ship , for the present necessity thereof be much , consider that all this while they lie off and on between the two land , be continual subject aswell to great danger of fleet ice , which environ they , as to the sudden flaw which the coast seem much subject unto . but when the people perceive our departure , with great token of affection they earnest call we back again , follow we almost to our boat : whereupon our generali take his master with he , who be best acquaint with their manner , go apart unto two of they , mean , if they can lay sure hold upon they , forcible to bring they aboard , with intent to bestow certain toy and apparel upon the one , and so to dismiss he with all argument of courtesy , and retain the other for a interpreter . the generali and his master be meet with their two companion together , after they have exchange certain thing the one with the other , one of the savage for lack of better merchandise , cut off the tail of his coat ( which be a chief ornament among they ) and give it unto our generali for a present . but he present upon a watchword give with his master sudden lay hold upon the two savage . but the ground underfoot be slippery with the snow on the side of the hill , their handfast fail and their prey escape run away and light recover their bow and arrow , which they have hide not far from they behind the rock . And be only two savage in sight , they so fierce , desperate , and with such fury assault and pursue our generali and his master , be altogether unarm , and not mistrust their subtlety 293 another meeting of two of our man with two of they . the Englishman chase to their boat . one of that countryman take . the english voyage that they chase they to their boat , and hurt the generali in the buttock with a arrow , who the rather speedy flee back , because they suspect a great number behind the rock . our soldier ( which be command before to keep their boat ) perceive the danger , and hear our man call for shot come speedy to rescue , think there have be a great number . but when the savage hear the shot of one of our caliver ( and yet have first bestow their arrow ) they run away , our man speedy follow they . but a servant of my lord of Warwick , call Nicholas Conger a good footman , and uncumber with any furniture have only a dagger at his back overtook one of they , and be a Cornishman and a good wrestler , show his companion such a cornish trick , that he make his side ache against the ground for a month after . and so be stay , he be take alive and bring away , but the other escape . thus with their strange and new prey our man repair to their boat , and pass from the main to a small hand of a mile compass , where they resolve to tarry all night ; for even now a sudden storm be grow so great at sea , that by no mean they can recover their ship . and here every man refresh himself with a small portion of victual which be lay into the boat for their dinner , have neither eat nor drink all the day before . but because they know not how long the storm may last , nor how far off the ship may be put to sea , nor whither they shall ever recover they again or not , they make great spare of their victual , as it great behoove they : for they know full well that the best cheer the country can yield they , be rock and stone , a hard food to live withal , and the people more ready to eat they then to give they wherewithal ! to eat . and thus keep very good watch and ward , they lie there all night upon hard clifle of snow and ice both wet , cold , and comfortless . Theise thing thus happen with the company on land , 294 the danger of the ship at sea be no less perilous . for within one hour after the general depart in the morning by negligence of the cook in overheating , and the workman in make the chimney , the aid be set on fire , and have be the confusion of the whole if by chance a boy espy it , it have not be speedy with great labour and god help well extinguish . this day also be diverse storm and flaw , and by nine of the clock at night the storm be grow so great , and continue such until the morning , that it put our ship at sea in no small peril : for have mountain of fleet ice on every side , we go roomer for one , and loof for another , some scrape we , and some happy escape we , that the least of a m. be as dangerous to strike as any rock , and able to have split asunder the strong ship of the world . we have a scope of clear without ice , ( as God will ) wherein we turn , be otherwise compass on every side about : but so much be the wind and so little be our sea room , that be able to bear only our forecourse we cast so oft about , that we make fourteen horde in eight ' glass running , be but four hour : but God be our best steresman , and by the industry of Charles Jackman and Andrew Dyer the master mate , both very expert mariner , and Richard Cox you master gunner , with other very careful sailor , then within board , and also by the help of the clear night which be without darkness , we do happy avoid those present danger , whereat since we have more marvel then in the present danger fear , for that every man within board , both better and worse have enough to do with his hand to hale rope , and with his eye to look out for danger . but the next morning be the 20 of July , as God will , the storm cease , and the generali espy the ship with his new captive and whole company , come happy aboard , and report what have pass a shore , whereupon altogether upon our knee we give God humble and hearty thanks , for that it have please he , the aid set on fire . the great danger of those rock of ice . [ Iii . 65. ] night without darkness in that country . 295 from so speedy peril to send we such speedy deliverance , and so from this northern shore we strike over towards the Southerland . the one and twenty of July , we discover a bay which run into the land , that seem a likely harbour gur first come - for our ship , wherefore our generali row thither with his boat , to make proof thereof , and with his goldfiner fa , " » ™ to search for ore , have never assay any thing on the straight . south shore as yet , and the first small hand which we land upon . here all the sand and cliff do so glister and have so bright a marquesite , that it seem all to be gold , but upon trial make , it prove no better than a i of black-lead , and verify the proverb . all be not gold black lead . tjiat glister . upon the two and twenty of July we bear into the say sound , and come to anchor a reasonable breadth off the shore , where think our self in good security , we be great endanger with a piece of drift ice , which the ebb bring forth of the sound and come thwart we ere we be aware . but the gentleman and soldier within board take great pain at this pinch at the Capstone , overcome the most danger thereof , and yet for all that may be do , it strike on our stern such a blow , that we fear lest it have strike away our rudder , and be force to cut our cable in the hawse , we be fain to set our fore sail to run further up within , and if our stirrage have not be strong than in the present time we fear , we have run the ship upon the rock , have a very narrow channel to turn in , but as God will , all come well to pass . and this jackmans be name jackmans sound , after the name of the sound . master mate , who have first like unto the place . smith hand . upon a small hand , within this sound call smith hand ( because he first set up his forge there ) be find a i of silver , but be not win out of the rock without great labour . here our goldfiner make say of such ore as they find upon the Northerland , and find four sort thereof to hold gold in good quantity . 296 i577-upon another small hand here be also find a great dead fish , which as it shall seem , have be embay with ice , and be in proportion round like to a porpose , be about twelve foot long , and in bigness answerable , have a horn of two yard long grow out of Thejmdingtf the snout or nostril . this horn be wreathe and an " ic°rnes strait , like in fashion to a taper make of wax , and ’ may true be think to be the sea unicorn . this horn be to be see and reserve as a jewel by the queen majesty commandment , in her wardrobe of robe . Tuesday the three and twenty of July , our generali with his best company of gentleman , soldier and sailor , to the number of seventie person in all , march with ensign displayde , upon the continent of the Southerland ( the suppose continent of America ) where , command a trumpet to sound a call for every man to repair to the ensign , he declare to the whole company how much the cause import for the service of her majesty , our country , our credit , and the safety of our own life , and therefore require every man to be conformable to order , and to be direct by those he shall assign . and he appoint for leader , captain Fenton , captain York , and his lieutenant George Beste : which do , we cast our self into a ring , and altogether upon our knee , give God humble thank for that it have please he of his great goodness to preserve we from such imminent danger , beseech likewise the assistance of his holy spirit , so to deliver we in safety into our country , whereby the light and truth of these secret be know , it may redound to the more honour of his holy name , and consequent to the advancement of our common wealth . and so , in as good sort as the place suffer , we march towards the top of the mountain , which be no less painful in climb then dangerous in descend , by reason of their steepness and ice . and have pass about five mile , by such unwieldy way , we return unto our ship with - 297 out sight of any people , or likelihood of habitation . here diverse of the gentleman desire our generali to suffer they to the number of twenty or thirty person to march up thirty or forty league in the country , to the end they may discover the inland , and do some acceptable service for their country . but he not content with the matter he seek for , and well consider the short time he have in hand , and the greedy desire our country have to a present savour and return of gain , bend his whole endeavour only to find a i to fraught his ship , and to leave the rest ( by God [ three . 66. ] help ) hereafter to be well accomplish . and therefore the twenty six of July he depart over to the Northland , with the two bark , leave the aid ride in jackmans sound , and mean ( after he have find convenient harbour , and fraught there for his ship ) to discover further for the passage . the bark come the same night to anchor in a sound upon the Northerland , where the tide do run so swift , and the place be so subject to indraft of ice , that by reason thereof they be great endanger , and have find a very rich i , as they suppose , and get almost twenty ton of ore together , upon the 28 of July the ice come drive into the sound where the bark ride , in such sort , that they be therewith great distress . and the Gabrieli ride astern the Michael , have her cable gall asunder in the hawse with a piece of drive ice , and lose another anchor , and have but one cable and anchor leave , for she have lose two before , and the ice still drive upon she , she be ( by God help ) well fence from the danger of the rest , by one great hand of ice , which come a ground hard a head of she , which if it have not so chance , i think sure she have be cast upon the rock with the ice . the Michael more anchor upon this great ice , and ride under the lee thereof : but about midnight , by the weight of it self , and the set of the tide , the ice break within half the bark length , and make 298 unto the company within board a sudden and fearful noise . the next flood towards the morning we weigh anchor , and go further up the straight , and leave our ore behind we which we have dig , for haste leave the place by the name of bear sound after the master name of the Michael , and name the hand lecester hand . in one of the small hand here we find a tomb , wherein the bone of a dead man lie together , and our savage captive be with we , and be demand by sign whether his countryman have not slay this man and eat his flesh so from the bone , he make sign to the contrary , and that he be slay with wolf and wild beast . here also be find hide under stone good store of fish , and sundry other thing of the inhabitant ; as sled , bridle , kettle of fish-skinne , knife of bone , and such other like . and our savage declare unto we the use of all those thing . And take in his hand one of those country bridle , he catch one of our dog and hamper he handsome therein , as we do our horse , and with a whip in his hand , he teach the dog to draw in a sled as we do horse in a coach , set himself thereupon like a guide : so that we may see they use dog for that purpose that we do our horse . and we find since by experience , that the lesser sort of dog they feed fat , and keep they as domestical cattle in their tent for their eat , and the great sort serve for the use of draw their sled . the twenty nine of July , about five league from bear sound , we discover a bay which be fence on each side with small hand lie off the main , which break the force of the tide , and make the place free from any indraft of ice , do prove a very fit harbour for our ship , where we come to anchor under a small island , which now together with the sound be call by the name of that right honourable and virtuous lady , anne countess of Warwick . and this be the further place that this year we have enter up 299 bear sound . lecesters hand . a tomb with a dead man bone in it . bridle , knife , and other instrument find hide among the rock . they use great dog to draw sleds , and title dog for their meat . thirty league discover within the strait . a good precedent of a good captain show by captain Frobisher . the english voyage within the streite , and be reckon from the cape of the queen foreland , which be the entrance of the streite not above 30 league . upon this hand be find good store of the ore , which in the wash hold gold to our think plain to be see : whereupon it be think best rather to load here , where there be store and indifferent good , than to seek further for better , and spend time with jeoperdie . and therefore our generali set the miner to work , and show first a good precedent of a painful labourer and a good captain in himself , give good example for other to follow he : whereupon every man both better and worse , with their best endeavour willing lay to their help hand . and the next day , be the thirty of July , the Michael be send over to jackmans sound , for the ay de and the whole company to come thither . upon the main land over against the countess hand we discover and behold to our the manner of great marvel the poor cave and house of those their house in country people , which serve they ( as it shall seem ) t country . por tjjejr winfer dwelling , and be make two fathom under ground , in compass round , like to a oven , be join fast one by another , have hole like to a fox or Conny berry , to keep and come together . they undertrench these place with gutter so , that the water fall from the hill above they , may slide away without their annoyance : and be seat common in the foot of a hill , to shield they better from the cold wind , have their door and entrance whale bone ever open towards the south . from the ground up-timber^ ward they build with whale bone , for lack of m er ' timber , which bend one over another , be handsome compact in the top together , and be cover over with sealesskinne , which in stead of tile , fence they from the rain . in which house they have only one room , have the one half of the flower raise with broad stone a foot high than the other , whereon straw moss , they make their nest to sleep in . 300 they defile these den most filthy with their beastly [ hl 67. ] feed , and dwell so long in a place ( as we think ) until their sluttishness loathe they , they be force to S‘ seek a sweet air , and a new seat , and be ( no doubt ) a disperse and wander nation , as the tar-tarians , and live in hold and troop , without any certain abode , as may appear by sundry circumstance of our experience . here our captive be ashore with we , to declare set up the use of such thing as we see , stay himself alone behind the company , and do set up five small stick mean round in a circle one by another , with one small bone thereof . place just in the midst of all : which thing when one of our man perceive , he call we back to behold the matter , think that he have mean some charm or witchcraft therein . but the best conjecture we can make thereof be , that he will thereby his countryman shall understand , that for our five man which they betray the last year ( who he signify by the five stick ) he be take and keep prisoner , which he signify by the bone in the midst . for afterward the savage when we show he the picture of his countreman , which the last year be bring into England ( who countreiman counterfeit we have draw , with boat and other furni - picture . ture , both as he be in his own , and also in english apparel ) he be upon the sudden much amaze thereat , and behold advise the same with silence a good while , as though he will strain courtesy whether shall begin the speech ( for he think he no doubt a lively creature ) at length begin to question with he , as with his companion , and find he dumb and mute , seem to suspect he , as one disdeinfull , and will with a little help have grow into choler at the matter , until at last by feel and handle , he find he but a deceive picture . and then with great noise and cry , cease not wonder , think that we can make man live or die at our pleasure . and thereupon call the matter to his remembrance , 301 another show of twenty person of that country in one boat . the english voyage he give we plain to understand by sign , that he have knowledge of the take of our five man the last year , and confess the manner of each thing , numbered the five man upon his five finger , and point unto a boat in our ship , which be like unto that wherein our man be betray : and when we make he sign , that they be slay and eat , he earnest deny , and make sign to the contrary . the last of July the Michael return with the aid to we from the Southerland , and come to anchor by we in the countess of Warwick sound , and report that since we depart from jackmans sound there happen nothing among they there great worth the remembrance , until the thirty of July , when certain of our company be a shore upon a small island within the say jackmans sound , near the place where the aid ride , do espy a long boat with diverse of the country people therein , to the number of eighteen or twenty person , who so soon as our man perceive , they return speedy aboard , to give notice thereof unto our company . they may perceive these people climb up to the top of a hill , where with a flag , they waft unto our ship , and make great outcry and noise , like so many Buis . hereupon our man do present man forth a small skiff , have not above six or seven person therein , which row near the place where those people be , to prove if they can have any conference with they . but after this small boat be send a great , be well appoint for their rescue , if need require . as soon as they espy our company come near they , they take their boat and haste away , either for fear , or else for policy , to draw our man from rescue further within their danger : wherefore our man construe that their come thither be but to seek advantage , follow speedy after they , but they row so swift away , that our man can come nothing near they . howbeit they fail not of their best endeavour in 302 row , and have chase they above two mile into the sea , return into their ship again . the morning follow be the first of August , captain York with the Michael come into jackmans sound , and declare unto the company there , that the last night pass he come to anchor in a certain bay ( which since be name York sound ) about four league distant from jackmans sound , be put to leeward of that place for lack of wind , where he discover certain tent of the country people , where go with his company ashore , he enter into they , but find the people depart , as it shall seem , for fear of their come . but among sundry strange thing which in these tent they find , there be raw and new kill flesh of unknown sort , with dead carcase and bone York sound . the apparel of dog , and i know not what . they also behold ( to their great marveile ) a doublet of canvas make after f0 ™ * 1 a^n^ . , the english fashion , a shirt , a girdle , three shoe for jman which the contrary foot , and of unequal bigness , which they well year before conjecture to be the apparel of our five poor country - be take man , which be intercept the last year by these captwe-countrey people , about fifty league from this place , further within the strait . whereupon our man be in good hope , that some of they may be here , and [ hl 68 ] yet live : the captain devise for the best leave his mind behind he in write , with pen , ink , and paper also , whereby our poor captive countryman , if it may come to their hand , may know their friend mind , and of their arrival , and likewise return their answer . and so without take any thing away in their tent , leave there also look glass , point , and other of our toy ( the better to allure they by such friendly mean ) depart aboard his bark , with intent to make haste to the aid , to give notice unto the company of all such thing as he have there discover : and so mean to return to these tent again , hope that he may by force or policy entrap or entice the people to some friendly conference . which thing when he have deliver a good devise of captain York . 3°3 to the whole company there , they determine forthwith to go in hand with the matter . hereupon captain York with the master of the aid and his mate ( who the night before have be at the tent , and come over from the other side in the Michael with he ) be accompany with the gentleman and soldier to the number of thirty or forty person in two small row pinnace make towards the place , where the night before they discover the tent of those people , and set Charles Jackman , be the master mate , ashore with a convenient number , for that he can best guide they to the place , they march over land , mean to compass they on the one side , while the captain with his boat may entrap they on the other side . but land at last at the place where the night before they leave they , they find they with their tent remove . notwithstanding , our man which march up into the country , pass over two or three mountain , by chance espy certain tent in a valley underneath they near unto a creek by the sea side , which because it be not the place where the guide have be the night before , they judge they to be another company , and besetting the Savages they about , determine to take they if they can . but have boat of they have quick descry our company , launch one 3 ™ ’ great and another small boat , be about 16 or 18 person , and very narrow escape , put themselves to sea . the english whereupon our soldier discharge their caliver , and " those^people of f°^owed they , think the noise thereof be hear that country . to our boat at sea , our man there will make what speed they may to that place . and thereupon indeed our man which be in the boat ( cross upon ' they in the mouth of the sound whereby their passage be let from get sea room , wherein it have be impossible the swift for we to overtake they by row ) force they to put rowtngof those themselves ashore upon a point of land within the say * e < * e ' sound ( which upon the occasion of the slaughter there , the bloody be since name the bloody point ) whereunto our man five ™ * ' so speedy follow , that they have little leisure leave they 304 to make any escape . but so soon as they land , each of they break his oar , think by that mean to prevent we , in carry away their boat for want of oar . and desperate return upon our man , resist they manful in their land , so long as their arrow and dart last , and after gather up those arrow which our man shoot at they , yea , and pluck our arrow out of their body encounter afresh again , and maintain their cause until both weapon and life fail they . and when they find they be mortal wound , be ignorant what mercy mean , with deadly fury they cast themselves headlong from off the rock into the sea , lest perhaps their enemy shall receive glory or prey of their dead carcaise , for they suppose we belike to be cannibal or eater of man flesh . in this conflict one of our man be dangerous hurt in the belly with one of their arrow , and of they be slay five or six , the rest by flight escape among the rock , save two woman , whereof the one be old and ugly , our man think she have be a devil or some witch , and therefore let she go : the other be young , and cumber with a suck child at her back , hide her self behind the rock , be espy by one of our man , who suppose she have be a man , shoot through the hair of her head , and pierce through the child arm , whereupon she cry out , and our surgeon mean to heal her child arm , apply salve thereunto . but she not acquaint with such kind of surgery , pluck those salve away , and by continual lick with her own tongue , not much unlike our dog , heal up the child arm . and because the day be wellnear spend our man make haste unto the rest of our company which on the other side of the water remain at the tent , where they find by the apparel , letter , and other english furniture , that they be the same company which captain York discover the night before , have remove themselves from the place where he leave they . and now consider their sudden fly from our vn 305 u York sound . a hot skirmish between the english and they of that country . the desperate nature of those people . the take of the woman and her child . a pretty kind of surgery which nature teach . man , and their desperate manner of fight , we begin to suspect that we have hear the last news of our man which the last year be betray of these people . And consider also their ravenous and bloody disposition in eat any kind of raw flesh or carrion howsoever stink , it be to be think that they have slay and devour our man : for the doublet which be find in their tent have many hole therein be make with their arrow and dart . [ Iii . 69. ] but now the night be at hand , our man with their captive and such poor stufie as they find in their tent , return towards their ship , when be at sea , there arise a sudden flaw of wind , which be not a little dangerous for their small boat : but as God will they come all safe aboard . and with these good news they return ( as before mention ) into the countess of Warwick sound unto we . and between jackmans sound , from whence they come , and the countess of Warwick sound between land and land , be think the narrow the narrow place of the strait be judge nine raius^s league over at the least : and jackmans sound be league over . upon the Southerland , lie direct almost over against the countess sound , as be reckon scarce thirty league the queen within the strait from the queen cape , which be the entrance of the streit of the Southerland . this cape be name queen Elizabeth cape , stand in the latitude of 62 degree and a half to the northward of new find land , and upon the same continent , for any thing that be yet know to the contrary . the manner of have now get a woman captive for the comfort the meeting of qf our manj we bring they both together , and every five , and their man with silence desire to behold the manner of their entertainment , meet and entertainment , the which be more worth the behold then can be well express by writing . at their first encounter they behold each the other very wistly a good space , without speech or word utter , with great change of colour and countenance , as though it seem the grief and disdeine of their captivity have 306 take away the use of their tongue and utterance : the woman at the first very sudden , as though she disdain or regard not the man , turn away , and begin to sing as though she mind another matter : but be again bring together , the man break up the silence first , and with stern and stay countenance , begin to tell a long solemn tale to the woman , whereunto she give good hear , and interrupt he nothing , till he have finish , and afterward , be grow into more familiar acquaintance by speech , they be turn together , so that ( i think ) the one will hardly have live without the comfort of the other . and for so much as we can perceive , albeit they live continual together , yet they do never use as man and wife , though the woman spare not to do all necessary thing that appertain to a good housewife indifferent for they both , as in make clean their cabin , and every other thing that appertain to his ease : for when he be seasick , she will make he clean , she will kill and flay the dog for their eat , and dress his meat . only i think it worth the note , the continency of they both : for the man will never shift himself , except he have first cause the woman to depart out of his cabin , and they both be most shamefast , lest any of their privy part shall be discover , either of themselves , or any other body . on Monday the six of August , the lieutenant with all the soldier , for the better guard of the miner and the other thing a shore , pitch their tent in the countess island , and fortify the place for their better defence as well as they can , and be to the number of forty person , when be all at labour , they may perceive upon the top of a hill over against they a number of the country people waft with a flag , and make great outcry unto they , and be of the same company , which have encounter late our man upon the other shore , be come to complain their late loss , and to entreat ( as it seem ) for restitution of the shamefastness and chastity of those savage captive . another appearance of the country people . 307 these people know the use of writing . a letter send unto the five english captive . [ in . 70. ] the english voyage the woman and child , which our man in the late conflict have take and bring away ; whereupon the generali take the savage captive with he , and set the woman where they may best perceive she in the high place of the island , go over to talk with they . this captive at his first encounter of his friend fall so out into tear that he can not speak a word in a great space , but after a while , overcome his kindness , he talk at full with his companion , and bestow friendly upon they such toy and trifle as we have give he , whereby we note , that they be very kind one to another , and greedy sorrowful for the loss of their friend . Oure generali by sign require his five man which they take captive the last year , and promise they , not only to release those which he have take , but also to reward they with great gift and friendship . our savage make sign in answer from they that our man shall be deliver we , and be yet live , and make sign likewise unto we that we shall write our letter unto they , for they know very well the use we have of writing , and receive knowledge thereof , either of our poor captive countryman which they betray , or else by this our new captive who have see we daily write , and repeat again such word of his language as we desire to learn : but they for this night , because it be late , depart without any letter , although they call earnest in haste for the same . and the next morning early be the seven of August , they call again for the letter , which be deliver unto they , they speedy depart , make sign with three finger , and point to the sun , that they mean to return within 3 day , until which time we hear no more of they , and about the time appoint they return , in such sort as you shall afterward hear . this night because the people be very near unto we , the lieutenant cause the trumpet to sound a call , and every man in the island repair to the ensign , he put they in mind of the place so far from their 308 country wherein they live , and the danger of a great multitude which they be subject unto , if good watch and ward be not keep , for at every low water the enemy may come almost dryfoot from the main unto we , wherefore he will every man to prepare he in good readiness upon all sudden occasion , and so give the watch their charge , the company depart to rest . i think the captain letter well worth the remembering , not for the circumstance of curious endite , but for the substance and good meaning therein contain , and therefore have repeat here the same , as by himself it be hasty write . the form of m. Martin Frobishers letter to the english captive . in the name of God , in who we all believe , who ( i trust ) have preserve your body and soul among these infidel , i commend i unto you . i will be glad to seek by all mean you can devise for your deliverance , either with force , or with any commodity within my ship , which i will not spare for your sake , or any thing else i can do for you . i have aboard , of they , a man , a woman , and a child , which i be content to deliver for you , but the man which i carry away from hence the last year be dead in England . Moreover you may declare unto they , that if they deliver you not , i will not leave a man alive in their country . and thus , if one of you can come to speak with i , they shall have either the man , woman , or child in pawn for you . and thus unto God who i trust you do serve , in haste i leave you , and to he we will daily pray for you . This Tuesday morning the seven of August . anno 1557. you to the uttermost of my power , Martin Frobisher . i have send you by these bearer , pen , ink , and postscript paper , to write back unto i again , if personal you can come to certify i of your estate . 3°9 the cause why m , Frobisher enter no fur-therwithin the streit this year . best bulwark . their king calledCatchoe . how he be honour . the english voyage now have the generali alter his determination for go any further into the streite at this time for any further discovery of the passage , have take a man and a woman of that country , which he think sufficient for the use of language : and have also meet with these people here , which intercept his man the last year , ( as the apparel and english furniture which be find in their tent , very well declare ) he know it be but a labour lose to seek they further off , when he have find they there at hand . And consider also the short time he have in hand , he think it best to bend his whole endeavour for the get of i , and to leave the passage further to be discover hereafter . for his commission direct he in this voyage , only for the search of the ore , and to defer the further discovery of the passage until another time . on Thursday the nine of August we begin to make a small fort for our defence in the countess island , and entrench a corner of a cliff , which on three part like a wall of good heighth be compass and well fence with the sea , and we finish the rest with cask of the earth , to good purpose , and this be call best bulwark , after the lieutenant name , who first devise - the same . this be do for that we suspect more lest the desperate man may oppress we with multitude , than any fear we have of their force , weapon , or policy of battle : but as wisdom will we in such place ( so far from home ) not to be of our self altogether careless : so the sign which our captive make unto we , of the come down of his governor or prince , which he call Catchoe , give we occasion to foresee what may ensue thereof , for he show by sign that this Catchoe be a man of high stature far then any of our nation be , and he be accustom to be carry upon man shoulder . about midnight the lieutenant cause a false alarm to be give in the island , to prove as well the readiness of the company there ashore , as also what help may be 310 hope for upon the sudden from the ship if need so require , and every part be find in good readiness upon such a sudden . Saturday the eleven of August the people show themselves again , and call unto we from the side of a hill over against we . the general ( with good hope to hear of his man , and to have answer of his letter ) go over unto they , where they present themselves not above three in sight , but be hide indeed in great number behind the rock , and make sign of delay with we to entrap some of we to redeem their own , do only seek advantage to train our boat about a point of land from sight of our company : whereupon our man just suspect they , keep aloof without their danger , and yet set one of our company ashore , which take up a great bladder which one of they offer we , and leave a look glass in the place , come into the boat again . in the mean while our man which stand in the countess island to behold , who may better discern they , than those of the boat , by reason they be on high ground , make a great outcry unto our man in the boat , for that they see diverse of the savage creep behind the rock towards our man , whereupon the generali present return without tiding of his man . concern this bladder which we receive , our captive make sign that it be give he to keep water and drink in , but we suspect rather it be give he to swim and shift away withal , for he and the woman seek diverse time to escape , have loose our boat from astern our ship , and we never a boat leave to pursue they withal , and have prevail very far , have they not be very timely espy and prevent therein . after our general come away from they they muster themselves in our sight , upon the top of a hill , to the number of twenty in a rank , all hold hand over their head , and dance with great noise and song 3 “ [ he - 7i . ] a bladder change fir a looking-glass . no news oj the english captive . to what end the bladder be deliver . those people dance upon the hill top . a skirmish show to those people . their flag make of bladder . the english voyage together : we suppose they make this dance and show for we to understand , that we may take view of their whole company and force , mean belike that we shall do the same . and thus they continue upon the hill top until night , when hear a piece of our great ordinance , which thunder in the hollowness of the high hill , it make unto they so fearful a noise , that they have no great will to tarry long after . and this be do more to make they know our force then to do they any hurt at all . on Sunday the 12 of August , captain Fenton train the company , and make the soldier maintain skirmish among themselves , as well for their exercise , as for the country people to behold in what readiness our man be always to be find , for it be to be think , that they lie hide in the hill thereabouts , and observe all the manner of our proceed . on Wednesday the fourteenth of August , our generali with two small boat well appoint , for that he suspect the country people to lie lurk thereabouts , go up a certain bay within the countess sound , to search for ore , and meet again with the country people , who so soon as they see our man make great outcry , and with a white flag make of bladder sow together with the gut and sinew of beast , waft we amain unto they , but show not above three of their company . but when we come near they , we may perceive a great multitude creep behind the rock , which give we good cause to suspect their traitorous meaning : whereupon we make they sign , that if they will lay their weapon aside , and come forth , we will deal friendly with they , although their intent be manifest unto we : but for all the sign of friendship we can make they they come still creep towards we behind the rock to get more advantage of we , as though we have no eye to see they , think belike that our single wit can not discover so bare devise and simple drift of they . their spokesman earnest persuade we with 312 ... I577 > many entice show , to come eat and sleep ashore , with great argument of courtesy , and clap his bare hand over his head in token of peace and innocence , will we to do the like . but the better to allure our hungry stomach , he bring we a trim bait of raw great offer . flesh , which for fashion sake with a boathook we catch into our boat : but when the cunning cater perceive his first cold morsel can nothing sharpen our stomach , he cast about for a new train of warm flesh to procure our appetite , wherefore he cause one of his fellow in halt manner , to come forth as a lame man from behind the rock , and the better to declare his kindness in carve , he hoist he upon his shoulder , and bring he hard to the water side where we be , leave he there limp as a easy prey to be take of we . his hope be that we will bite at this bait , and speedy leap ashore within their danger , whereby they may have apprehend some of we , to ransom their friend home again , which before we have take . the gentleman and soldier have great will to encounter they ashore , but the generali moor careful by process of time to win they , then wilful at the first to spoil they , will in no wise admit that any man shall put himself in hazard ashore , consider the matter he now intend be for the ore , and not for the conquest : notwithstanding to prove this cripple footmanship , he give liberty for one to shoot : whereupon the cripple have a part blow , light recover a rock and go away a true and no feign cripple , and have learn his lesson for ever halt afore such cripple again . but his fellow which lie hide before , full quick then appear in their likeness , and maintain the skirmish with their sling , bow and arrow very fierce , and come as near as the water suflr they : and with as desperate mind as have be see in any man , without fear of shcrtte or any thing , follow we all along the coast , but all their shot fall short of we , and be of little danger . they have belay all the coast along for we , [ in . 72. ] 313 and be disperse so , be not well to be number , a hundred but we may discern of they above a hundred perSavages . sonsj anj bad cause to suspect a great number . and thus without loss or hurt we return to our ship again . now our work grow to a end , and have , only with five poor miner , and the help of a few gentleman and soldier , bring aboard almost two hundred ton of ore in the space of twenty day , every man therewithal ! well comfort , determine lusty to work a fresh for a bone voyage , to bring our labour to a speedy and happy end . and upon Wednesday at night be the one and twenty of August , we full finish the whole work . and it be now good time to leave , for as the man be well weary , so their shoe and clothes be well wear , their basket bottom tear out , their tool break , and the ship reasonable well fill . some with overstraining themselves receive hurt not a little dangerous , some have their belly break , and other their leg make lame . and about this time the ice begin to congeal and freeze about our ship side a night , which give we a good argument of the sun decline southward , and put we in mind to make more haste homeward . it be not a little worth the memory , to the commendation of the gentleman and soldier herein , who leave all reputation apart , with so great willingness and with courageous stomach , have themselves almost overcome in so short a time the difficulty of this so great a labour . and this to be true , the matter , if it be well weigh without further proof , now bring home do well witness . Thursday the 22 of August , we pluck down our tent , and every man haste homeward , and make bonfire upon the top of the high mount of the island , and march with ensign display round about the island , we give a volley of shot for a farewell , in honour of the right honourable lady Anne , countess of Warwick , who name it bearethi : and so depart aboard . the 23 of August have the wind large at west , we set sail from out of the countess sound homeward , they return . but the wind calm we come to anchor within the point of the same sound again . the 24 of August about three of the clock in the morning , have the wind large at west , we set sail again , and by nine of the clock at night , we leave the queen foreland astern of we , and be clear of the streite , we bear further into the main ocean , keep our course more southerly , to bring our self the soon under the latitude of our own climate . the wind be very great at sea , so that we lay a hull all night , and have snow half a foot deep on the snow a hatch . fauus ? e from the 24 until the 28 we have very much wind , * ' but large , keep our course southsoutheast , and have like to have lose the bark , but by good hap we meet again . the height be take , we be in degree and a half . the 29 of August the wind blow much at Northeast , so that we can bear but only a bunt of our foresail , and the bark be not able to carry any sail at all . the Michael lose company of we and shape her course towards Orkney because that way be better know unto they , and arrive at Yermouth . the 30 of August with the force of the wind , and a surge of the sea , the master of the Gabriel and than the master boatswain be strike both overboard , and hardly be the boatswain recover , have hold on a rope hang overboard in the sea , and yet the bark be lace fore and after with rope a breast high within board . this master be call William smith , be but a young man and a very sufficient mariner , who be all the morning before exceed pleasant , tell his captain he dream that he be cast overboard , and that the 315 boatswain have he by the hand , and can not save he , and so immediate upon the end of his tale , his dream come right evil to pass , and indeed the boatswain in like sort hold he by one hand , have hold on a rope with the other , until his force fail , and the master drown . the height be take we find our self to be in the latitude of degree and a half , and reckon our self from the queen cape homeward about two hundred league . the last of August about midnight , we have two or three great and sudden flaw or storm . the first of September the storm be grow very great , and continue almost the whole day and night , and lie a hull to tarry for the bark our ship be much beat with the sea , every sea almost overtake our poop , so that we be constrain with a bunt of our sail to try it out , and ease the roll of our ship . and so the Gabriel not able to bear any sail to keep company with we , and our ship be high in the poop , [ three . 73. ] and a tall ship , whereon the wind have more force to drive , go so fast away that we lose sight of they , and leave they to God and their good fortune of sea the second day of September in the morning , it please God of his goodness to send we a calm , whereby we perth rudder of ceive the rudder of our ship tear in twain , and almost the aid tome ready to fap away . wherefore take the benefit of the ’ time , we fling half a dozen couple of our best man over board , who take great pain under water , drive plank , and bind with rope , do well strengthen and mend the matter , who return the most part more than half dead out of the water , and as god pleasure be , the sea be calm until the work be finish . how the lati - the September , the height of the sun be tude be take , we find our self to be in the latitude of always take degree and a half . in this voyage common we ' ratte-mth^^ take the latitude of the place by the height of the sun , staff then because the long day take away the light not only of astrolabe . the polar , but also of all other fix star . and here 316 the north star be so much elevate above the horizon , that with the staff it be hardly to be well observe , and the degree in the astrolabe be too small to observe minute . therefore we always use the staff and the sun as fit instrument for this use . have spend four or five day in traverse of the sea with contrary wind , make our Souther way good as near as we can , to raise our degree to bring our self with the latitude of Sylley , we take the height the ten of September , and find our self in the latitude of degree and ten minute . the eleven of September about six a clock at night the wind come good Southwest , our vex sb eat and set our course southeast . and upon Thursday , the twelve of September , take the height , we be in the latitude of and a half , and reckon our self not past one hundred and fifty league short of Sylley , the weather fair , the wind large at Westsouth west , we keep our course southeast . the thirteenth day the height be take , we find our self to be in the latitude of degree , the wind Westsouthwest , then be in the height of Sylley , and we keep our course east , to run in with the sleeve or chanel so call , be our narrow sea , and reckon we short of Sylley twelve league . Sunday , the 15 of September about four of the clock , we begin to sound with our lead , and have ground at 61 fathom depth , white small sandy ground , and reckon we upon the back of Sylley , and set our course east and by north , Eastnortheast , and Northeast among . the sixteenth of September , about eight of the clock in the morning sound , we have 65. fathom osey sand , and think our self thwart of saint George channel a little within the bank . And bear a small sail all night , we make many sounding , which be about forty fathom , and so shallow , that we can not well tell where we be . 317 the seventeenth of September we sound , and have forty fathom , and be not far off the land end , find brand sand with small worm and cockle shell , and be shoot between Sylley and the land end , and be within the bay , we be not able to double the point with a south and by east way , but be fain to make another board , the wind be at southwest and by west , and yet can not double the point to come clear of the land end , to bear along the channel : and the weather clear up when we be hard aboard the shore , and we make the land end perfect , and so put up along saint George chanel . and the weather be very foul at sea , we covet some harbour , because the arrival of our steerage be break , and so come to anchor in Padstow ? road in Cornwall . but ride there a very dangerous Cornwall ride , we be advise by the country , to put to sea again , and of the two evil , to choose the less , for there be nothing but present peril where we ride : whereupon we ply along the channel to get to Londy , from whence we be again drive , be but a open road , where our anchor come home , and with force of weather put to sea again , and about the three and twenty our cam of September , arrive at Milford haven in wale , which ^haven^ be a very good harbour , make we happy man , that ’ we have receive such long desire safety . about one month after our arrival ! here , by order from the lord of the counsel , the ship come up to the arrival Bristol , where the ore be commit to keep in the ^qrhtow^1 castle there . here we find the Gabriel one of the ’ bark , arrive in good safety , who have never a man within board very sufficient to bring home the ship , after the master be lose , by good fortune , when she come upon the coast , meet with a ship of Bristol at sea , who conduct she in safety thither . the Michael here we hear good tiding also of the arrival of the “ llorth ' art^ other bark call the Michael , in the north part , which cr pars . as not a ttie joyful unto we , that it please God so to bring we to a safe meeting again , and we lose in 318 all the voyage only one man , beside one that die only one man at sea , which be sick before he come aboard , and be die the so desirous to follow this enterprise , that he rather choose to dye therein , than not to be one to attempt so notable a voyage .a generail and brief description of the country , and condition of the people , which be find in Meta incognita . ave now sufficient and true set forth the whole circumstance , and particular handle of every occurrent in the 3. voyage of our worthy generali , captain Frobisher , it shall not be from the purpose to speak somewhat in generali of the nature of this country call Meta incognita , and the condition of the savage there inhabit . First therefore touch the Topographical description of the place , it be now find in the last voyage , that queen Elizabeth cape be situate in latitude at 61. 367 a topographical description of Meta incognita . the people of Meta incognita like unto samoed . their native colour . the english voyage degree and a half , which before be suppose to be part of the firm land of America , and also all the rest of the south side of frobishers strait , be all several island and break land , and likewise so will all the north side of the say strait fall out to be as i think . and some of our company be enter above 60. league within the mistake strait in the three voyage mention , think certain that they have descry the firm land of America towards the south , which i think will fall out so to be . Theise break land and island be very many in number , do seem to make there a archipelagus , which as they all differ in greatness , form , and fashion one from another ; so be they in goodness , colour , arid soil much unlike . they all be very high land , mountains , and in most part cover with snow even all the summer long . the norther land have less store of snow , more grass , and be more plain country : the cause whereof may be , for that the Souther hand receive all the snow , that the cold wind and pierce air bring out of the north . and contrary , the north part receive more warm blast of mild air from the south , whereupon may grow the cause why the people covet to inhabit more upon the north part then the south , as far as we can yet by our experience perceive they do . Theise people i judge to be a kind of Tartar , or rather a kind of Samoed , of the same sort and condition of life that the samoed be to the northeastwards beyond Moscovy , who be call samoeds , which be as much to say in the Moscovy tongue as eater of themselves , and so the russian their borderer do name they . and by late conference with a friend of i ( with who i do sometime travel in the part of Moscovy ) who have great experience of those samoed and people of the north-east , i find that in all their manner of live , those people of the north-east , and these of they northwest be like . they be of the colour of a ripe olive , which how it may come to pass , be bear 368 description of Meta incognita a.d. in so cold a climate i refer to the judgement of other , for they be natural bear child of the same colour and complexion that all the american be , which dwell under the equinoctial line . they be man very active and nimble . they be a strong people and very warlike , for in our sight upon the top of the hill they will often muster themselves , and after the manner of a skirmish trace their ground very nimble , and manage their bow and dart with great dexterity . they go clad in coat make of theirapparel . the skin of beast , as of seal , deer , bear , fox , and hare . they have also some garment of feather , be make of the case of fowl , fine sow and compact together . of all which sort we bring home some with we into England , which we find in their tent . in summer they use to wear the hairy side of their coat outward , and sometime go naked for too much heat . and in winter ( as by sign they have declare ) they be four or five fold upon their body with the hair ( for warmth ) turn inward . hereby it appear , that the air there be not indifferent , but either it be fervent hot , or else extreme cold , and far more excessive in both quality , than the reason of the climate shall yield . for there it be cold , be under 62. degree in latitude , than it be at Wardhouse in the voyage to saint Nicholas in Moscovie , be at above 72. degree in latitude . the reason hereof perhaps acdden-may be , that this Meta incognita be much frequent taucauserjftlie and vex with eastern and northeastern wind , which metalncog-from the sea and ice bring often a intolerable cold nita . air , which be also the cause that this year our strait be so long shut up with so great store of ice . but there be great hope and likelihood , that further within [ ill . 94. ] the strait it will be more constant and temperate weather . Theise people be in nature very subtle and sharp witted , ready to conceive our meaning by sign , and to make answer well to be understand again . and if unto 369 2 a they have not see the thing whereof you ask they , they will wink , or cover their eye with their hand , as who will say , it have be hide from their sight . if they understand you not whereof you ask they , they will stop their ear . they will teach we the name of each thing in their language which we desire to learn , and be apt to learn any thing of we . they the savage delight in music above measure , and will keep time dehghtin anj stroke to any tune which you shall sing , both with ustc e ' their voice , head , hand and foot , and will sing the same tune apt after you . they will row with our oar in our boat , and keep a true stroke with our mariner , and seem to take great delight therein . hard kind of they live in cave of the earth , and hunt for their live . dinner or prey , even as the bear or other wild beast do . they eat raw flesh and fish , and refuse no meat howsoever it be stink . they be desperate in their fight , sullen of nature , and ravenous in their manner of feed . their sullen and desperate nature do herein manifest appear , that a company of they be environ by our man on the top of a high cliff , so that they can by no mean escape our hand , find themselves in this case distress , choose rather to cast themselves headlong down the rock into the sea , and so be bruise and drown , rather than to yield themselves to our man mercy . their wea - for their weapon to offend their enemy or kill it " ™ - their prey withal , they have dart , sling , bow , and arrow head with sharp stone , bone , and some with iron . they be exceed friendly and kind heart one to the other , and mourn great at the loss or harm of their fellow , and express their grief of mind , when they part one from another with a their chastity , mournful song , and dirge . they be very shamefast in betray the secret of nature , and very chaste in the manner of their live : for when the man , which we bring from thence into England the last voyage , 370 description of Meta incognita a.d. ... T578 - shall put off his coat or discover his whole body for change , he will not suffer the woman to be present , but put she forth of his cabin . and in all the space of two or three month , while the man live in company of the woman , there be never any thing see or perceive between they , more than may have pass between brother and sister : but the woman be in all thing very serviceable for the man , attend he careful when he be sick , and he likewise in all the meat which they do eat together , will carve unto she of the sweet , fat , and best morsel they have . they wonder much at all our thing , and be afraid of our horse and other beast out of measure . they begin to grow more civil , familiar , pleasant , and docible among we in very short time . they have boat make of leather , and cover clean their boat . over save one place in the middle to sit in , plank within with timber , and they use to row therein with one ore , more swift a great deal , than we in our boat can do with twenty . they have one sort of great boat wherein they can carry above twenty person , and have a mast with a sail thereon , which sail be make of thin skin or bladder , sow together with the sinew of fish . they be good fisherman , and in their small boat be disguise with their coat of seal skin , they deceive the fish , who take they rather for their fellow seal , then for deceive man . they be good marksman . with their dart or arrow they will common kill a duck , or any other foul in the head , and common in the eye . when they shoot at a great fish with any of their dart , they use to tie a bladder thereunto , whereby they may the better find they again , and the fish not able to carry it so easy away ( for that the bladder do boy the dart ) will at length be weary , and dye therewith . they use to traffic and exchange their commodity Sna^ with some other people , of who they have such thing know . 371 [ hl 95 - ] how they make fire . their kettle and pan . the people eat grass and shrub . the english voyage as their miserable country , and ignorance of art to make , deny they to have , as bar of iron , head of iron for their dart , needle make four square , certain button of copper , which they use to wear upon their forehad for ornament , as our lady in the court of England do use great pearl . also they have make sign unto we , that they have see gold , and such bright plate of metal , which be use for ornament among some people with who they have conference . we find also in their tent a guiny bean of red colour , the which do usual grow in they hight country : whereby it appear they trade with other nation which dwell far off , or else themselves be great traveller . they have nothing in use among they to make fire withal , save a kind of heath and moss which grow there . and they kindle their fire with continual rub and fret one stick against another , as we do with flint . they draw with dog in slead upon the ice , and remove their tent therewithal ! wherein they dwell in summer , when they go a hunt for their prey and provision against winter . they do sometime parboil their meat a little and see the same in kettle make of beast skin : they have also pan cut and make of stone very artificial ; they use pretty begin wherewith they take foul . the woman carry their suck child at their back , and do feed they with raw flesh , which first they do a little chaw in their own mouth . the woman have their face mark or paint over with small blow spot : they have black and long hair on their head , and trim the same in a decent order . the man have but little hair on their face , and very thin beard . for their common drink , they eat ice to quench their thirst withal . their earth yield no grain or fruit of sustenance for man , or almost for beast to live upon : and the people will eat grass and shrub 372 description of Meta incognita a.d. J578 - of the ground , even as our cow do . they have no wood grow in their country thereabouts , and yet we find they have some timber among they , which we think do grow far off to the southward of this place , about Canada , or some other part of new find land : for there belike , the tree stand on the cliff of the sea side , by the weight of ice and snow in winter overcharge they with weight , when the summer thaw come above , and also the sea underfretting they beneath , which win daily of the land , they be undermine and fall down from those cliff into the sea , and with the tide and current be drive to and fro upon the coast further off , and by conjecture be take up here by these country people , to serve they to plank and strengthen their boat withal , and to make dart , bow , and arrow , and such other thing necessary for their use . and of this kind of drift wood we find all the sea over great store , which be cut or saw asunder , by reason of long drive in the sea be eat of worm , and full of hole , of which sort they be find to be . we have not yet find any venomous serpent or a strange land other hurtful thing in these part , but there be a kind of °f small fly or gnat that stinge and offend sore , leave many red spot in the face , and other place where she stinge . they have snow and hail in the best time of their summer , and the ground freeze three fathom deep . Theise people be great enchanter , and use many enchanters . charm of witchcraft : for when their head do ache , they tie a great stone with a string unto a stick , and with certain prayer and word do to the stick , they lift up the stone from ground , which sometime with all a man force they can stir , and sometime again they lift as easy as a feather , and hope thereby with certain ceremonious word to have ease and help . and they make we by sign to understand , lie grovel with their face upon the ground , and make 373 the beast and fowl of the country . Ihe length of their day . the english voyage a noise downward , that they worship the devil under they . they have great store of deer , bear , hare , fox , and innumerable number of sundry sort of wild foul , as seawmewes , guile , Wilmotes , duck , etc whereof our man kill in one day fifteen hundred . they have also store of hawk , as falcon , tassel , etc whereof two alight upon one of our ship at their return , and be bring into England , which some think will prove very good . there be also great store of raven , lark , and partridge , whereof the country people feed . all these fowl be far thick clothe with down and feather , and have thick skin than any in England have : for as that country be cold , so nature have provide a remedy thereunto . our man have eat of the bear , hare , partridge , lark , and of their wild foul , and find they reasonable good meat , but not so delectable as we . their wild foul must be all fleine , their skin be so thick : and they taste best fry in pan . the country seem to be much subject to earthquake . the air be very subtle , pierce and search , so that if any corrupt or infect body , especial with the disease call morbus Gallicus come there , it will present break forth and show it self , and can there by any kind of salve or medicine be cure . their long summer day be of great length , without any dark night , so that in July all the night long , we may perfidy and easy write and read whatsoever have please we , which lightsome night be very beneficial unto we , be so distress with abundance of ice as we be . the sun set to they in the evening at a quarter of a hour after ten of the clock , and rise again in the morning at three quarter of a hour after one of the clock , so that in summer their sun shine to 374 they twenty hour and a half , and in the night be absent three hour and a half . and although the sun be absent these 3. hour and a half , yet it be not dark that time , for that the sun be never above three or four degree under the edge of their horizon : the cause be , that the Tropic of Cancer do cut their horizon at very uneven and oblique angle . but the moon at any time of the year be in cancer , have north latitude , do make a full revolution above their horizon , so that sometime they see the moon above 24. hour together . some of our company of the more ignorant sort , think we may continual have see the sun and the moon , have it not be for two or three high mountain . the people be now become so wary , and so circumspect , by reason of their former loss , that by no mean we can apprehend any of they , although we attempt often in this last voyage . but to say truth , we can not bestow any great time in pursue they , because of our great business in lade , and other thing . A.D. 158 ? . [ Iii . 96. ] a full revolution of the moon above their horizon . the first voyage of m. John Davis , undertake in June 1585. for the discovery of they northwest passage , write by m. John Janes merchant , sometime servant to the worshipful master William Sanderson . ertaine honourable personage and worthy gentleman of the court and country , with diverse worshipful merchant of London and of the west country , move with desire to advance God glory and to seek the good of their native country , consult together of the likelihood of the discovery of they northwest passage , which heretofore have be attempt , but unhappy give over by accident unlooked for , which turn the enterpriser from their principali purpose , resolve after good deliberation , to put down their adventure to provide for necessary ship , and a fit man to be chief conductor of this so hard a enterprise . the set forth of this action be commit by the adventurer , especial to the care of m. William Sanderson merchant of London , who be so forward therein , that beside his travail which be not small , he become the great adventurer with his purse , and commend unto the rest of the company one m. John Davis , a man very well ground in the principle of the art of navigation , for captain and chief pilot of this exploit . thus therefore all thing be put in a readiness , we depart from Dartmouth the seven of June , towards the discovery of the aforesaid northwest passage , with two bark , the one be of 50. ton , 381 name the sunshine of London , and the other be 35. ton , name the moonshine of Dartmouth . in the sunshine we have 23. person , who name be these follow , m. John Davis captain , William Eston master , Richard pope master mate , John Jane merchant , Henry Davie gunner , William across boatswain , John bag , Walter Arthur , luke Adam , Robert coxworthie , John Ellis , John Kelley , Edward Helman , musician . William Dick , Andrew Maddock , Thomas hill , Robert wat carpenter , William Russell , Christopher Gorney boy : James coal , Francis Ridley , John Russell , Robert Cornish musician . the moonshine have 19 person , William Bruton captain , John Ellis master , the rest mariner . the 7. of June the captain and the master draw out a proportion for the continuance of our victual . the 8. day the wind be at southwest and west southwest , we put in for Falmouth , where we remain until the 13. the 13. the wind blow at north , and be fair weather we depart . the 14. with contrary wind we be force to put into Silley . the 15. we depart thence , have the wind north and by east moderate and fair weather . the 16. we be drive back again , and be constrain to arrive at new Grymsby in Silley : here the wind remain contrary 12. day , and in that space the captain , the master and i go about all the hand , and the captain do plat out and describe the situation of all the hand , rock and harborough to the exact use of navigation , with line and scale thereunto convenient . they depart the 28. in God name we depart the wind be from Silley . Easterly but calm . July . the first of July we see great store of porpoise ; the master call for a harp iron , and shoot twice or thrice : sometime he miss , and at last shoot one 382 and strike he in the side , and wound he into the [ three . 99 ] ship ; when we have he aboard , the master say it be a darlie head . the 2. we have some of the fish sodden , and it do eat as sweet as any mutton . the 3. we have moor in sight , and the master go to shoot at they , but they be so great , that they burst our iron , and we lose both fish , iron , pastime and all : yet nevertheless the master shoot at they with a pike , and have wellnigh get one , but he be so strong that he burst off the bar of the pike and go away : than he take the boathook , and hit one with that , but all will not prevail , so at length we let they alone . the 6. we see a very great whale , and every day we see whale continual . the 16. 17. and 18. we see great store of whale . great store of the 19 of July we fall into a great whirl and us . brustle of a tide , set to the northward : and sail about half a league we come into a very calm sea , which bend to the southsouthwest . here we hear a mighty great roar of the sea , as if it have be the breach of some shore , the air be so foggy and full of thick mist , that we can not see the one ship from the other , be a very small distance asunder : so the captain and the master be in distrust how the tide may set they , cause the moonshine to hoist out her boat and to sound , but they can not find ground in 300. fathom and better . then the captain , master , and i go towards the breach , to see what it shall be , give charge to our gunner that at every glass they shall shoot off a musketshot , to the intent we may keep our self from loose they . then come near to the breach , we meet many hand of ice dote , which have quick compass we about : than we go upon some of they , and do perceive that all the roar which we hear , be cause only by the roll of this ice together : our company see we not to return 383 the rout if the ice together make a great roar . the english voyage accord to our appointment , leave off shoot musket , and begin to shoot falkonet , for they fear some mishap have befall we , but before night we come aboard again with our boat lade with ice , which make very good fresh water . than we bend our course towards the north , hope by that mean to double the land . the 20. as we sail along the coast the fog break up , and we discover the land , which be the most deform rocky and mountainous land that ever we see : the first sight whereof do show as if it have be in form of a sugarloaf , stand to our sight above the cloud , for that it do show over the fog like a white list in the sky , the top altogether cover with snow , and the shore beset with ice a league off into the sea , make such irksome noise as that it seem to be the true pattern of desolation , and after the same our captain name it , the land of desolation . the 21. the wind come northerly and overblew , so that we be constrain to bend our course south again , for we perceive that we be run into a very deep bay , where we be almost compass with ice , for we see very much towards the northnortheast , west , and Southwest : and this day and this night we clear our self of the ice , run southsouthwest along the shore . upon Thursday be the 22. of this month , about three of the clock in the morning , we hoist out our boat , and the captain with six sailor go towards the shore , think to find a land place , for the night before we do perceive the coast to be void of ice to our judgement , and the same night we be all persuaded that we have see a Canoa row along the shore , but afterward we fall in some doubt of it , but we have no great reason so to do . the captain row towards the shore , will the master to bear in with the land after he , and before he come near the shore by the space of a league , or about two mile , he find so much ice , that he can not get to land by any 384 mean . here our mariner put to their line to see if they can get any fish , because there be so many seal upon the coast , and the bird do beat upon the water , but all be in vain : the water about this place be very black and thick like to a filthy stand pool , we sound and have ground in 120. fathom . while the captain be row to the shore , our man see wood upon the rock like to the rock of Newfoundland , but i can not discern they , yet it may be so very well : for we have wood float upon the coast every day , and the moonshine take up a tree at sea not far from the coast be sixty foot of length and fourteen handful about , have the root upon it : after this the captain come aboard , the weather be very calm and fair we bend our course towards the south , with intent to double the land . the 23. we coast the land which do lie Eastnortheast and Westsouthwest . the 24. the wind be very fair at east , we coast the land which do lie east and west , not be able to come near the shore by reason of the great quantity of ice . at this place , because the weather be somewhat cold by reason of the ice , and the better to encourage our man , their allowance be increase : the captain and the master , take order that every mess , be five person , shall have half a pound of bread and a can of beer every morning to breakfast . the weather be not very cold , but the air be moderate like to our april-weather in England : when the wind come from the land , or the ice , it be some what cold , but when it come off the sea it be very hot . the 25 of this month we depart from sight of this land at six of the clock in the morning , direct our course to the northwestward , hope in God mercy to find our desire passage , and so continue above four day . the 29 of July we discover land in 64 degree 15 minute of latitude , bear Northeast from we . the vn 385 2 b very black water . float wood . coldebyreason ofyce . [ Iii . 100 ] they sail northwestward above four day . land in 64 degree 15 min. the sound where our ship do ride be call gilbert sound . musician . the people of the country come and confer with man . the english voyage wind be contrary to go to the northwestwards , we bear in with this land to take some view of it , be utter void of the pester of ice and very temperate . come near the coast , we find many fair sound and good road for ship , and many great inlet into the land , whereby we judge this land to be a great number of island stand together . here have more our bark in good order , we go on shore upon a small island to seek for water and wood . upon this island we do perceive that there have be people : for we find a small shoe and piece of leather sow with sinew , and a piece of fur , and wool like to Bever . than we go upon another island on the other side of our ship : and the captain , the master , and i , be get up to the top of a high rock , the people of the country have espy we , make a lamentable noise , as we think , with great outcry and skreeching : our hear they , think it have be the howl of wolf . at last i hallow again , and they likewise cry . than we perceive where they stand , some on the shore , and one row in a Canoa about a small island fast by they , we make a great noise , partly to allure they to we , and partly to warn our company of they . whereupon m. Bruton and the master of his ship , with other of their company , make great haste towards we , and bring our musician with they from our ship , purpose either by force to rescue we , if need shall so require , or with courtesy to allure the people . when they come unto we , we cause our musician to play , our self dance , and make many sign of friendship . at length there come ten canoas from the other island , and two of they come so near the shore where we be , that they talk with we , the other be in their boat a pretty way off . their pronunciation be very hollow through the throat , and their speech such as we can not understand : only we allure they by friendly embrace and sign of courtesy . at length one of they point up to the sun with his hand , will present strike his breast so 386 .. I585 ' hard that we may hear the blow . this he do many time before he will any way trust we . then John Ellis the master of the moonshine be appoint to use his best policy to gain their friendship ; who strike his breast , and point to the sun after their order : which when he have diverse time do , they begin to trust he , and one of they come on shore , to who we throw our cap , stocking and glove , and such other thing as than we have about we , play with our music , and make sign of joy , and dance . So the night come , we bid they farewell , and go aboard our bark . the next morning be the 30 of July there come 37 thirty seven canoas row by our ship , call to we to come on canms-shoare : we not make any great haste unto they , one of they go up to the top of the rock , and leap and dance as they have do the day before , show we a seal skin , and another thing make like a timbrel , which he do beat upon with a stick , make a noise their music . like a small drum . whereupon we man our boat and come to they , they all stay in their canoas : we come to the water side be they be : and after we have swear by the sun after their fashion , they do trust we . so i shake hand with one of they , and he kiss my hand , and we be very familiar with they . we be in so great credit with they upon this single great famill-acquaintance , that we can have any thing they have . with the we buy five canoas of they : we buy their clothes from their back , which be all make of seal skin and bird skin ; their buskin , their hose , their glove , all be common sow and well dress : so that we be full persuade that they have diverse artificer among they . we have a pair of buskin of they full of fine wool like beaver . their apparel for heat be make of bird skin with their feather on they . we see among they leather dress like glover leather , and thick thong like white leather of a good length . we have of their dart and oar , and find in they that 387 they may •make much train , if they have mean how to use it . Moscovie glass . a fruit like corinth . the english voyage they will by no mean displease we , but will give we whatsoever we ask of they , and will be satisfy with whatsoever we give they . they take great care one of another : for when we have buy their boat , than two other will come and carry he away between they that have sell we his . they be very tractable people , void of craft or double deal , and easy to be bring to any civility or good order : but we judge they to be idolater and to worship the sun . during the time of our abode among these island we find reasonable quantity of wood , both fir , spruce and juniper ; which whether it come float any great distance to these place where we find it , or whether it grow in some great island near the same place by we not yet discover , we know not ; but we judge that it grow there further into the land than we be , because the people have great store of dart and oar which they make none account of , but give they to we for small trifle , as point and piece of paper . we see about this coast marvelous great abundance of seal skull together like skull of small fish . we find no fresh water among these island , but only snow water , whereof we find great pool . the cliflfe be all of such oar as m. Frobisher bring from Meta incognita . we have diverse show of study or Muscovy glass shine not altogether unlike to crystal . we find a herb grow upon the rock , who fruit be sweet , full of red juice , and the ripe one be like corinth . we find also birch and willow grow like shrub low to the ground . Theise people have great store of fur as we judge . they make show unto we the 30 of this present , which be the second time of our be with they , after they perceive we will have skin and fur , that they will go into the country and come again the next day with such thing as they have : but this night the wind come fair , the captain and the master will by no mean detract the purpose of our discovery . and so the last of this month about four 388 of the clock in the morning in God name we set sail , and be all that day becalm upon the coast . the first of August we have a fair wind , and so pro - August . ceed towards the northwest for our discovery . the sixth of August we discover land in 66 degree land in 66 40 minute of latitude , altogether void from the pester of degree +° ice : we anchor in a very fair road under a brave ' mount , the cliflfe whereof be as orient as gold . this mount be name mount Raleigh . the road where our ship lay at anchor be call Totnes ride . the sound which do compass the mount be name Exeter sound . the foreland towards the north be call dyer cape . the foreland towards the south be name cape Walsingham . so soon as we be come to a anchor in Totnes ride under mount Raleigh , we espy four white four white bear at the foot of the mount : we suppose they to eares-be goat or wolf , man our boat and go towards they : but when we come near the shore , we find they to be white bear of a monstrous bigness : we be desirous of fresh victuali and the sport , begin to assault they , and i be on land , one of they come down the hill right against i : my piece be charge with hailshot and a bullet : i discharge my piece and shoot he in the neck ; he roar a little , and take the water straight , make small account of his hurt . than we follow he with our boat , and kill he with boar-spear , and two more that night . we find nothing in their maw ; but we judge by their dung that they feed upon grass , because it appear in all respect like the dung of a horse , wherein we may very plain see the very straw . the 7 we go on shore to another bear which lie all night upon the top of a island under mount Raleigh , and when we come up to he he lie fast asleep . i level at his head , and the stone of my piece give no fire : with that he look up , and lay down his head huge white again : then i shoot be charge with two bullet , and strike he in the head : he be but amaze fell 389 backwards : whereupon we run all upon he with boar-spear , and thrust he in the body : yet for all that he grip away our boar-spear , and go towards the water ; and as he be go down , he come back again . than our master shoot his boar-spear , and strike he in the head , and make he to take the water , and swim into a cove fast by , where we kill he , and bring he aboard . the breadth of his forefoot from one side to the other be fourteen inch over . they be very fat , so as we be constrain to cast the fat away . we see a raven upon mount Raleigh . we find withy also grow like low shrub and flower like primrose in the say place . the coast be very mountainous , altogether without wood , grass , or earth , and be only huge mountain of stone ; but the brave stone that ever we see . the air be very moderate in this country . the 8 we depart from mount Raleigh , coast along the shore , which lie Southsouthwest , and eastnortheast . the 9 our man fall in dislike of their allowance , because it be too small as they think : whereupon we make a new proportion ; every mess be five to a mess shall have four pound of bread a day , twelve wine quart of beer , six Newland fish ; and the flesh day a gill of pease more : so we restrain they from their butter and cheese . the both we come to the most southerly cape of this land , which we name the cape of God mercy , as be the place of our first entrance for the discovery . the weather be very foggy we coast this north land ; at length when it break up , we perceive that we be shoot into a very fair entrance or passage , be in some place twenty league broad , and in some thirty , altogether void of any pester of ice , the weather very tolerable , and the water of the very colour , nature and quality of the main ocean , which give we the great hope of our passage . Having sail northwest sixty league in this entrance 39° we discover certain island stand in the midst thereof , have open passage on both side . whereupon our ship divide themselves , the one sail on the north side , the other on the south side of the say isle , where we stay five day , have the wind at southeast , very foggy and foul weather . the 14 we go on shore and find sign of people , for we find stone lay up together like a wall , and see the skull of a man or a woman . the 15 we hear dog howl on the shore , which we think have be wolf , and therefore we go on shore to kill they . when we come on land the dog come present to our boat very gentle , yet we think they come to pray upon we , and therefore we shoot at they , and kill two : and about the neck of one of they we find a leathern collar , whereupon we think they to be tame dog . there be twenty dog like mastiff with prick ear and long bush tail : we find a bone in the pizzle of their dog . than we go far , and find two slead make like we in England : the one be make of fir , spruce and oaken board sawen timber like inch board : the other be make all of whale bone , sawen-& there hang on the top of the slead three head of beast which they have kill . we see here lark , raven , foul . and partridge . the 17 we go on shore , and in a little thing make like a oven with stone i find many small trifle , as a small canoa make of wood , a piece of wood make like a image , a bird make of bone , bead have small hole a image . in one end of they to hang about their neck , and other small thing . the coast be very barren without wood or grass : the rock be very fair like marble , full of vein of diverse colour . we find a seal which be kill not long before , be flean , and hide under stone . our captain and master search still for proba - probability bility of the passage , and first find , two that this place fi^the passage . be all island , with great sound pass between they . 391 we never come into any bay before or after , but the water colour be alter very blackish . the english Voyages second , the water remain of one colour with the main ocean without alter . third , we see to the west of those isle three or four whale in a skull , which they judge to come from a westerly sea , because to the eastward we see not any whale . also as we be row into a very great sound lie southwest , from whence these whale come , upon the sudden there come a violent countercheck of a tide from the southwest against the flood which we come with , not know from whence it be maintain . five , in sail twenty league within the mouth of this entrance we have sound in 90 fathom , fair grey osie sand , and the further we run into the westwards the deep be the water ; so that hard aboard the shore among these isle we can not have ground in 330 fathom . last , it do ebb and flow six or seven fathom up and down , the flood come from diverse part , so as we can not perceive the chief maintenance thereof . the 18 and 19 our captain and master determine what be best to do , both for the safeguard of their credit , and satisfy of the adventurer , and resolve , if the weather break up , to make further search . the 20 the wind come direct against we : so they alter their purpose , and reason both for proceed and return . the 21 the wind be northwest , we depart from these island ; and as we coast the south shore we see many fair sound , whereby we be persuade that it be no firm land but island . the 23 of this month the wind come southeast , with very stormy and foul weather : so we be constrain to seek harbour upon the south coast of this entrance , where we fall into a very fair sound , and anchor in 25 fathom green osie sand . here we go on shore , where we have manifest sign of people where they have make their fire , and lay stone like a wall . in this place we 392 letter from John Davis to Walsingham , 3rd October , 1585 the material original position here be too large for reproduction in this downioarnmwsy / ^ lwon « sgm^ to 1585. see four very fair falcon ; and m. Bruton take Faukens . from one of they his prey , which we judge by the wing and leg to be a snite , for the head be eat off . the 24 in the afternoon , the wind come somewhat fair , we depart from this road , purpose by God grace to return for England . the 26 we depart from sight of the north land of their return . this entrance , direct our course homeward until the ten of the next month . the 10. of September we fall with the land of desola - September . cion , think to go on shore , but we can get never IO3'J a good harbour . that night we put to sea again think to search it the next day : but this night arise a very great storm , and separate our ship , so that we lose the sight of the moonshine . the 13. about noon ( have try all the night before with a goose wing ) we set sail , and within two hour after we have sight of the moonshine again : this day England in we depart from this land . 14. day . the 27. of this month we fall with sight of England . this night we have a marvelous storm and lose the moonshine . the 30. of September we come into Dartmouth , where we find the moonshine be come in not two hour before . the second voyage attempt by m. John Davis with other , for the discovery of they northwest passage , in anno 1586. he 7. day of May , i depart from the port of Dartmouth for the discovery of they northwest passage , with a ship of a hundred and twenty ton name the mermaid , a bark of 60. ton name the sunshine , a bark of 35. ton name the moonshine , and a pinnace of ten ton name the north star . 393 and the 15. of June i discover land in the latitude of 60. degree , and in longitude from the meridian of London Westward 47. degree , mighty pester with ice and snow , so that there be no hope of land : the ice lie in some place ten league , in some 20. and in some 50. league off the shore , so that we be constrain to bear into 57 degree to double the same , and to recover a free sea , which through God favourable mercy we at length obtain . the 29. of June after many tempestuous storm we again discover land , in longitude from the meridian of London 58. degr . 30. min. and in latitude 64. being east from we : into which course sith it please God by contrary wind to force we , i think it very necessary to bear in with it , and there to set up our pinnace , provide in the mermaid to be our scout for this discovery , and so much the rather because the year before i have be in the same place , and find it very convenient for such a purpose , well store with float wood , and possess by a people of tractable conversation : so that the 29. of this month we arrive within the isle which lie before this land , lie north northwest , and south southeast , we know not how far . this land be very high and mountainous , have before it on the west side a mighty company of isle full of fair sound , and harborough . this land be very little trouble with snow , and the sea altogether void of ice . the ship be within the sound we send our boat to search for shoal water , where we may anchor , which in this place be very hard to find : and as the boat go sound and search , the people of the country have espy they , come in their canoas towards they with many shout and cry : but after they have espy in the boat , some of our company that be , the year before here with we , they present row to the boat , and take hold on the oar , and hang about the boat with such comfortable joy , as will require a long discourse to be utter : they come with the boat to our 394 ship , make sign that they know all those that the year before have be with they . after i perceive their gentle and joy and small fear of we , my self with the merchant and : other of the company go a shore , bear with ' i twenty knife : i have no soon land , but they leap out of their canoas and come run to i and the rest , and embrace we with many sign of hearty welcome : at this present there be eighteen of they , and to each of they i give a knife : they oflr skin to i for reward , but i make sign that they be not sell , but give they of courtesy : and so dismiss they for that time , with sign that they shall return again after certain hour . the next day with all possible speed the pinnace be ^ » 100 land upon a isle there to be finish to serve our purpose for the discovery , which isle be so convenient mo^et for that purpose , as that we be very well able to defend our self against many enemy . during the time that the pinnace , be there set up , the people come continual unto we sometime a hundred canoas at a time , sometime fourty , fifty , more and less , as occasion serve . they bring with they seal skin , stag skin , white hare , seal fish , salmon peal , small cod , dry caplin , with other fish , and bird such as the country do yield . my self still desirous to have a further search of this place , send one of the shipboat to one part of the land , and my self go to another part to search for the habitation of this people , with straight commandment [ three . 104. ] that there shall be no injury offer to any of the people , neither any gun shoot . the boat that go from i find the tent of the image , trane people make with seal skin set up upon timber , where - c > I|will > an‘i seal in they find great store of dry caplin , be a little st^ m tan fish no big than a pilchard : they find bag of Trane oil , many little image cut in wood , seal skin in tan-tub , with many other such trifle , whereof they diminish nothing . 395 a grave with a cross lay over . the english voyage they also find ten mile within the snowy mountains a plain champion country , with earth and grass , such as our moory and waste ground of England be : they go up into a ri^er ( which in the narrow place be two league broad ) about ten league , find it still to continue they know not how far : but i with my company take another river , which although at the first it offer a large inlet , yet it prove but a deep bay , the end whereof in four hour i attain , and there leave the boat well man , go with the rest of my company three or four mile into the country , but find nothing , nor see any thing , save only gripe , raven , and small bird , as lark and linnet . the three of July i man my boat , and go with fifty canoas attend upon i up into another sound where the people by sign will i to go , hope to find their habitation : at length they make sign that i shall go into a warm place to sleep , at which place i go on shore , and ascend the top of a high hill to see into the country , but perceive my labour vain , i return again to my boat , the people still follow i , and my company very diligent to attend we , and to help we up the rock , and likewise down : at length i be desirous to have our . man leap with they , which be do , but our man do overleap they : from leap they go to wrestle , we find they strong and nimble , and to have skill in wrestle , for they cast some of our man that be good wrestler . the four of July we launch out pinnace , and have forty of the people to help we , which they do very willing : at this time our man again wrestle with they , and find they as before , strong and skilful . this four of July the master of the mermaid go to certain hand to store himself with wood , where he find a grave with diverse bury in it , only cover with seal skin , have a cross lay over they . the people be of good stature , well in body proportion , with small slender hand and foot , with broad visage , 396 1586. and small eye , wide mouth , the most part unbearded , Tartar great lip , and close tooth . their custom be as often “ jf^arealso as they go from we , still at their return to make a new jialey saint truce , in this sort , hold his hand up to the sun with a loud voice he cry ylyaoute , and strike his breast with like sign , be promise safety , he give credit . Theise people be much give to bleed , and therefore stop their nose with dear hair , or the hair of a elan . they be idolater and have image great store , which they wear about they , and in their boat , which we suppose they worship . they be witch , and have many kind of enchantment , which they often use , but to small purpose , thanks be to God . be among they at shore the four of July , one of they make a long oration , begin to kindle a fire in this manner : he take a piece of a board wherein be a hole half through : into that hole he put the end of a round stick like unto a bedstaff , wet the end thereof in Trane , and in fashion of a turner with a piece their manner of leather , by his violent motion do very speedy ofkindlingfire produce fire : which do , with turf he make a fire , into which with many word and strange gesture , he a£re make you put diverse thing , which we suppose to be a sacrifice : turf . my self and diverse of my company stand by , they be desirous to have i go into the smoke , i will they likewise to stand in the smoke , which they by no mean will do . i then take one of they , and thrust he into the smoke , and will one of my company to tread out the fire , and to spurn it into the sea , which be do to show they that we do contemn their sorcery . Theise people be very simple in all their conversation , great thief . but marvelous thievish , especial for iron , which they have in great account . they begin through our lenity to show their vile nature : they begin to cut our cable : they cut away the moonelight boat from her stern , they cut our cloth where it lie to air , though we do careful look unto it , they steal our oar , a caliver , a boar spear , a sword , with diverse other thing , whereat 397 their weapon . strange net . Theise islander war with the people of the main . copper oar . their language . the english voyage the company and master be grieve , for our better security , desire i to dissolve this new friendship , and to leave the company of these thievish miscreant : whereupon there be a caliver shoot among they , and immediate upon the same a falcon , which strange noise do sore amaze they , so that with speed they depart : notwithstanding their simplicity be such , that within ten hour after they come again to we to entreat peace ; which be promise , we again fall into a great league . they bring we seal skin , and salmon peal , but see iron , they can in no wise forbear steal : which when i perceive , it do but minister unto i a occasion of laughter , to see their simplicity , and i will that in no case they shall be any more hardly use , but that our own company shall be the more vigilant to keep their thing , suppose it to be very hard in so short time to make they know their evil . they eat all their meat raw , they live most upon fish , they drink salt water , and eat grass and ice with delight : they be never out of the water , but live in the nature of fish , save only when dead sleep take they , and then under a warm rock lay his boat upon the land , he lie down to sleep . their weapon be all dart , but some of they have bow and arrow and sling . they make net to take their fish of the fin of a whale : they do all their thing very artificial : and it shall seem that these simple thievish islander have war with those of the main , for many of they be sore wound , which wound they receive upon the main land , as by sign they give we to understand . we have kesinyoh , eat some . among they copper oar , black copper , and red copper : they pronounce their language very hollow , and deep in the throat : these word follow we learn from they . paaotyck , a oar . madlycoyte , music . Aginyoh , go fetch . Yliaoute , ! meanenoharme . Ponameg , a boat . Asanock , a dart . ► < Sawygmeg , a knife . Uderah , a nose . Aoh , iron . 398 Panygmah , a needle . Aob , the sea Mysacoah , wash it . lethicksaneg , a seal skin . Canyglow , kiss i . Ugnera , my son . Acu , shot . Conah , leap . maatuke , fish . Sambah , below . Maconmeg , will you have this . it Cocah , go to he . Aba , fall down . Icune , come hither . awennye , yonder . Nugo , no tucktodo , a fog . Lechiksah , a skin . , Maccoah , a dart . ’ Sugnacoon , a coat . Gounah , come down . sasobneg , a bracelet . ugnake , a tongue . ataneg , a seal . Macuah , a beard . Pignagogah , a thread . Quoysah , give it to i . the 7. of July be very desirous to search the habitation of this country , i go myself with our new pinnace into the body of the land , think it to be a firm continent , and pass up a very large river , a great flaw of wind take i , whereby we be constrain to seek succour for that night , which be have , i land with the most part of my company , and go to the top of a high mountain , hope from thence to see into the country : but the mountain be so many and so mighty as that my purpose prevail not : whereupon i again return to my pinnace , and will diverse of my company to gather muscle for my supper , whereof in this place there be great store , my self have espy a very strange sight , especial to i that never before see the like , which be a mighty whirlwind take up the water in very great quantity , furious mount it into the air , which whirlwind , be not for a puff or blast , but continual , for the space of three hour , with very little intermission , which sith it be in the course that i shall pass , we be constrain that night to take up our lodging under the rock . the next morning the storm be break up , we A.D. 1586. muscle . a strange whirlwind . 399 [ three . 106. ] the english voyage go forward in our attempt , and sail into a mighty great river direct into the body of the land , and in brief , find it to be no firm land , but huge , waste , and desert isle with mighty sound , and inlet pass between sea and sea whereupon we return towards our ship , and land to stop a flood , we find the burial of these miscreant ; we find of their fish in bag , plaice , and caplin dry , of which we take only one bag and depart . the nine of this month we come to our ship , where we find the people desirous in their fashion , of friendship and barter : our mariner complain heavy against the people , and say that my lenity and friendly use of they give they stomach to mischief : for they have steal a anchor from we , they have cut our cable very dangerous , they have cut our boat from our stern , and now since your departure , with sling they spare we not with stone of half a pound weight : and will you still endure these injury ? it be a shame to bear they . i desire they to be content , and say , i doubt not but all shall be well . the 10. of this month i go to the shore , the people follow i in their canoas : i toll they on shore , and use they with much courtesy , and then depart aboard , they follow i , and my company . i give some of they bracelet , and cause seven or eight of they to come aboard , which they do willing , and some of they go into the top of the ship : and thus courteous use they , i let they depart : the sun be no soon down , but they begin to practise their devilish nature , and with sling throw stone very fierce into the moonlight , and strike one of her man then boatswain , that he overthrow withal : whereat be move , i change my courtesy , and grow to hatred , my self in my own boat well man with shot , and the bark boat likewise pursue they , and give they diverse shot , but to small purpose , by reason of their swift row : so small content we return . 400 the 11. of this month there come five of they to make a new truce : the master of the admiral come to i to show i of their come , and desire to have they take and keep as prisoner until we have his anchor again : but when he see that the chief ringleader and master of mischief be one of the five , he then be vehement to execute his purpose , so it be determine to take he : he come cry iliaout , and strike his breast offer a pair of glove to sell , the master offer he a knife for they : so two of they come to we , the one be not touch , but the other be soon captive among we : than we point to he and his fellow for our anchor , which be have , we make sign that he shall be set at liberty : within one hour after he come aboard the wind come fair , whereupon we weigh and set sail , and so bring the oneofthepeo-fellow with we : one of his fellow still follow our ship close aboard , talk with he and make a kind a ™ r you ' of lamentation , we still use he well with yliaout , which be the common course of courtesy . at length this fellow aboard we speak four or five word unto the other and clap his two hand upon his face , whereupon the other do the like , depart as we suppose with heavy cheer . we judge the cover of his face with his hand and bow of his body down , signify his death . at length he become a pleasant companion among we . i give he a new suit of freeze after the english fashion , because i see he can not endure the cold , of which he be very joyful , he trim up his dart , and all his fish tool , and will make okam , and set his hand to a rope end upon occasion . he live with the dry caplin that i take when i be search in the pinnis , and do eat dry Newland fish . all this while , God be thank , our people be in very good health , only one young man except , who die at sea the fourteenth of this month , and the fifteen , accord to the order of the sea , with praise give to God by service , be cast overboard . vn 401 2 c a huge quantity ofyce in 63. degree of latitude . the nature of fog . the english voyage the 17 of this month be in the latitude of 63. degree 8. minute , we fall upon a most mighty and strange quantity of ice in one entire mass , so big as that we know not the limit thereof , and be withal so very high in form of a land , with bay and cape and like high cliff land , as that we suppose it to be land , and therefore send our pinnace off to discover it : but at her return we be certain inform that it be only ice , which breed great admiration to we all consider the huge quantity thereof , incredible to be report in truth as it be , and therefore i omit to speak any further thereof . This only i think , that the like before be never see : and in this place we have very stickle and strong current . we coast this mighty mass of ice until the 30 of July , find it a mighty bar to our purpose : the air in this time be so contagious and the sea so pester with ice , as that all hope be banish of proceed : for the 24 of July all our shrowd , rope and sail be so freeze , and compass with ice , only by a gross fog , as seem to i more than strange , sith the last year i find this sea free and navigable , without impediment . our man through this extremity begin to grow sick and feeble , and withal hopeless of good success : whereupon very orderly , with good discretion they entreat i to regard the state of this business , and withal advise i , that in conscience i ought to regard the safety of my own life with the preservation of they , and that i shall not through my overboldness leave their widow and fatherless child to give i bitter curse . this matter in conscience do great move i to regard their estate : yet consider the excellency of the business if it may be attain , the great hope of certainty by the last year discovery , and that there be yet a three way not put in practice , i think it will grow to my great 402 disgrace , if this action by my negligence shall grow into discredit : whereupon seek help from God , the fountain of all mercy , it please his divine majesty to move my heart to prosecute that which i hope shall be to his glory , and to the contentation of every christian mind . whereupon fall into consideration that the mermaid , albeit a very strong and sufficient ship , yet by reason of her burden be not so convenient and nimble as a small bark , especial in such desperate hazard : further have in account her great charge to the adventurer be at xoo . li . the month , and that in doubtful service : all the premise consider with diverse other thing , i determine to furnish the moonlight with revictual and sufficient man , and to proceed in this action as God shall direct i . whereupon i alter our course from the ice , and bare eastsoutheast to recover the next shore where this thing may be perform : so with favourable wind it please God that the first of August we discover the land in latitude 66. degree , 33. min. [ Iii . 107. ] and in longitude from the meridian of London 70. degree void of trouble without snow or ice . the second of August we harbour our self in a very excellent good road , where with all speed we grave the moonlight , and revictual she : we search this country with our pinnace while the bark be trim , which William Eston do : he find all this land to be only hand , with a sea on the east , a sea on the west , and a sea on the north . in this place we find it very hot , and we be very much trouble great heat . with a fly which be call muskyto , for they do sting grievous . the people of this place at our first coming in catch a seal , and with bladder fast tie to he send he unto we with the flood , so as he come . right with our ship , which we take as a friendly present from they . the five of August i go with the two master and other to the top of a hill , and by the way William 403 Eston espy three canoas lie under a rock , and go unto they : there be in they skin , dart , with diverse superstitious toy , whereof we diminish nothing , but leave upon every boat a silk point , a bullet of lead , and a pin . the next day be the sixth of August , the people come unto we without fear , and do barter with we for skin , as the other people do : they differ not from the other , neither in their canoas nor apparel , yet be their pronunciation more plain than the other , and nothing hollow in the throat . Oure Savage aboard we keep himself close , and make show that he will fain have another companion . thus be provide , i depart from this land the twelve of August at six of the clock in the morning , where i leave the mermaid at a anchor : the fourteen sail west about fifty league , we discover land , be in latitude 66. degree 66. degree igminut : this land be 70. league from the 19 minute . other from whence we come . this fourteenth day from nine a clock at night till three a clock in the morning , we anchor by a hand of ice , twelve league off the shore , be more to the ice . the fifteen day at three a clock in the morning we depart from this land to the south , and the eighteenth of August we discover land northwest from we in the morning , be a very fair promontory , in latitude 65. degree , have no land on the south . great hope of here we have great hope of a through passage . a passage . this day at three a clock in the afternoon we again discover land Southwest and by south from we , where at night we be becalm . the nineteenth of this month at noon , by observation , we be in 64. . degr . 20. 64. degree 20. minute . from the eighteenth day at mn ' noon unto the nineteenth at noon , by precise ordinary care , we have sail 15. league south and by west , yet by art and more exact observation , we find our . course to be southwest , so that we plain perceive rend to the a great current strike to the west . west . this land be nothing in sight but isle , which in - 404 crease our hope . this nineteenth of August at six a clock in the afternoon , it begin to snow , and so continue all night with foul weather , and much wind , so that we be constrain to lie at hull all night five league off the shore : in the morning be the twenty of August , the fog and storm break up , we bear in with the land , and at nine a clock in the morning we anchor in a very fair and safe road and lock for all weather . at ten of the clock i go on shore to the top of a very high hill , where i perceive that this land be Islands : at four hand , of the clock in the afternoon we weigh anchor , have a fair north north-east wind , with very fair weather ; at six of the clock we be clear without the land , and so shape our course to the south , to discover the coast , whereby the passage may be through god mercy find . we coast this land till the eight and twenty of they runnel . August , find it still to continue towards the south , ^9 " south from the latitude of 67. to 57 degree : we find 7^^ / marvelous great store of bird , gull and mew , incredible upon the coast . to be report , whereupon be calm weather , we lie one glass upon the lee , to prove for fish , in which space we catch 100 of cod , although we be but bad provide for fish , not be our purpose . this eight and twenty have great distrust of the weather , we arrive in a very fair harbour in the latitude of 56. a harbonugh degree , and sail 10. league into the same , be two ™ degree . league broad , with very raire wood on both side : in this place we continue until the first of September , in which time we have two very great storm . i land , and go six mile by guess into the country , and find that the wood be fir , pineapple , alder , yew , withy , fair wood . and birch : here we see a black bear : this place yield great store of bird , as fezant , partridge , Barbary hen or the like , wild goose , duck , black bird , jeye , thrush , with other kind of small bird . of the partridge and fezant we kill great store with bow and 405 a perfect hope of the passage about 54. degree and a half . two of our man slay by the savage . the english voyage arrow : in this place at the harbour mouth we find great store of cod . the first of September at ten a clock we set sail , and coast the shore with very fair weather . the third day be calm , at noon we strike sail , and let fall a cadge anchor , to prove whether we can take any fish , be in latitude 54. degree 30. minute , in which place we find great abundance of cod , so that the hook be no soon overboard , but present a fish be take . it be the large and the best feed fish that ever i see , and diverse fisher man that be with i say that they never see a more suavle or better skull of fish in their life : yet have they see great abundance . the four of September at five a clock in the afternoon we anchor in a very good road among great store of isle , the country low land , pleasant and very full of fair wood . to the north of this place eight league , we have a perfect hope of the passage , find a mighty great sea pass between two land west . the south land to our judgement be nothing but isle : we great desire to go into this sea , but the wind be direct against we . we anchor in four fathom fine sand . in this place be foul and fish mighty store . the sixth of September have a fair northnorthwest wind , have trim our bark we purpose to depart , and send five of our sailor young man a shore to a island , to fetch certain fish which we purpose to weather , and therefore leave it all night cover upon the isle : the brutish people of this country lie secret lurk in the wood , and upon the sudden assault our man : which when we perceive , we present let slip our cable upon the halse , and under our foresail bear into the shore , and with all expedition discharge a double musket upon they twice , at the noise whereof they flee : notwithstanding to our very great grief , two of our man be slay with their arrow , and two grievous wound , of who at this present we stand in very great doubt , only one escape by swim , with a arrow 406 1586. shot through his arm . Theise wicked miscreant never offer parley or speech , but present execute their curse fury . this present evening it please God further to increase our sorrow with a mighty tempestuous storm , the wind be north north-east , which last unto the ten of this month very extreme . we unrig our ship , and purpose to cut down our mast , the cable of our shutanker break , so that we only expect to be drive on shore among these cannibal for their prey . yet in this deep distress the mighty mercy of God , when hope be pass , give we succour , and send we a fair lee , so as we recover our anchor again , and new more our ship : where we see that God manifest deliver we : for the strain of one of our cable be break , and we only road by a old junke . thus be fresh more a new storm arise , the wind be westnorthwest , very forcible , which last unto the ten day at night . the eleven day with a fair westnorthwest wind we depart with trust in god mercy , shape our course for England , and arrive in the west country in the begin of October . the relation of the course which the sunshine a bark of fifty ton , and the northstarre a small pinnace , be two vessel of the fleet of m. John Davis , hold after he have send they from he to discover the passage between Greenland and island , write by Henry Morgan servant to m. William Sanderson of London . he seven day of May 1586. we depart out of Dartmouth haven four sail , to wit , the mermaid , the sunshine , the moonshine , and the northstarre . in the sunshine be sixteen man , who name be these : Richard pope master , mark carter master mate , Henry Morgan Purser , George Draward , John Mandie , Hugh break , Philip Jane , Hugh Hempson , Richard Borden , 408 John philpe , Andrew Madock , William Wolcome , Robert wag carpenter , John bruskome , William Ashe , Simon Ellis . our course be westnorthwest the seven and eight day : and the nine day in the morning we be on head of the tarrose of Silley . thus coast along the south part of Ireland the 11. day , we be on head of the dorse : and our course be southsouthwest until six of the clock the 12. day . the 13. day our course be northwest . we remain in the company of the mermaid and the moonshine until we come to the latitude of 60. degree : and there it seem best to our generali m. Davis to divide his fleet , himself sail to ®avts ™ the northwest , and to direct the sunshine , wherein i be , e and the pinnace call the northstarre , to seek a divide his passage northward between Greenland and island to fleet into 2. the latitude of 80. degree , if land do not let we . so farts-the seven day of June we depart from they : and the-j . ofjsme . the nine of the same we come to a firm land of ice , which we coast along the nine , the ten , and the eleven day of June : and the eleven day at six of the clock at night we see land which be very high , which afterward we know to be island : and the twelve island day we harbour there , and find many people : the descr3e , in land lie east and by north in 66. degree . 66. degree . their commodity be grefcne fish , and island ling , their commo-and stockfish , and a fish which be call scatefish : of all tity . which they have great store . they have also cow , sheep and horse , and hay for their cattle , and for their horse . we see also their dog . their dwell house be their dwell-made on both side with stone , and wood lay across in& ' over they , which be cover over with turf of earth , and they be flat on the top , and many of these stand hard by the shore . their boat be make with wood their boat , and iron all along the keel like our english boat : and they have nail for to nail they withal , and fishhook and other thing for to catch fish as we have here in England . they have also brazen kettle , and girdle 409 and purse make of leather , and knoppe on they of copper , and hatchet , and other small tool as necessary as we have . they dry their fish in the sun , and when they be dry , they pack they up in the top of their house . if we will go thither to fish more than we do , we shall make it a very good voyage : for we get a hundred green fish in one morning . we find here two english man with a ship , which come out of England about Easter day of this present year 1586 , and one of they come aboard of we , and bring we two m. John roy - lamb . the english man name be m. John Roydon don of Ipswich . of IpSWich merchant : he be bind for London with his ship . and this be the sum of that which i they depart observe in island . we depart from island the ^northwe^f sixteenth day of June in the morning , and our course ’ be northwest , and we see on the coast two small bark go to a harbour : we go not to they , but see they a far off . thus we continue our course unto the end of this month . July . the three day of July we be in between two firm land of ice , and pass in between they all that day until it be night : and then the master turn back again , and so away we go towards Greenland . and gronelanddl - the seven day of July we do see Greenland , and it be cover . high , and it look very blue : we can not come to harbour into the land , because we be hinder by a firm land as it be of ice , which be along the shore side : but we be within three league of the land , coast the same diverse day together . the seventeenth day of July we see the place which our captain m. the land of John Davis the year before have name the land of desolation . desolation , where we can not go on shore for ice . the eighteenth day we be likewise trouble with ice , and go in among it at three of the clock in the Greenland morning . after we have clear our self thereof , we range all along the coast of desolation until the end last of July °f the aforesaid month . August . the three day of August we come in sight of gilbert 410 1586. sound in the latitude of 64. deg . 15. min. which be the place where we be appoint to meet our generali and the rest of our fleet . here we come to a harbour at 6. of the clock at night . the 4. day in the morning the master go on shore [ three . no . ] with 10. of his man , and they bring we four of the people row in their boat aboard of the ship . and in the afternoon i go on shore with 6. of our man , and there come to we seven of they when we be on land . we find on shore three dead people , and two of they have their staff lie by they , and their old skin wrap about they and the other have nothing lie by , wherefore we think it be a woman . we also see their house near the sea side , which be make with the house of piece of wood on both side , and cross over with pole gnnland-and then cover over with earth : we find fox run upon the hill : as for the place it be break land all the way that we go , and full of break island . the 21. of August the master send the boat on shore for wood with six of his man , and there be one and thirty of the people of the country which go on shore to they , and they go about to kill they as we think , for they shoot their dart towards they , and we that be aboard the ship , do see they go on shore to our man : whereupon the master send the pinnace after they , and when they see the pinnace come towards they , they turn back , and the master of the pinnace do shoot off a caliver to they the same time , but hurt none of they , for his meaning be only to put they in fear . diverse time they do wave we on shore to play with they oh « r man play at the football , and some of our company go on shore to play with they , and our man do cast they down as gavage . soon as they do come to strike the ball . and thus much of that which we do see and do in that harbour where we arrive first . the 23. day we depart from the merchant isle , where we have be first , and our course from thence 411 a skirmish between the savage and out-man . the english voyage be south and by west , and the wind be Northeast , and we run that day and night about 5. or 6. league , until we come to another harbour . the 24. about eleven of the clock in the fbrenoone we enter into the aforesaid new harbour , and as we come in , we do see dog run upon the island . when we be come in , there come to we four of the people which be with we before in the other harbour , and where we ride , we have sandy ground . we see no wood grow , but find small piece of wood upon the island , and some small piece of sweet wood among the same . we find great heart home , but can see none of the stag where we go , but we find their footing . as for the bone which we receive of the savage i can tell of what beast they be . the stone that we find in the country be black , and some white , as i think they be of no value , nevertheless i have bring example of they to you . the 30. of August we depart from this harbour towards England , and the wind take we contrary , so that we be fain to go to another harbour the same day at 11. of the clock . and there come to we 39 of the people , and bring we 13. seal skin , and after we receive these skin of they , the master send the carpenter to change one of our boat which we have buy of they before , and they will have take the boat from he perforce , and when they see they can not take it from we , they shoot with their dart at we , and strike one of our man with one of their dart , and John filpe shoot one of they into the breast with a arrow . and they come to we again , and four of our man go into the shipboate , and they shoot with their dart at our man : but our man take one of their people in his boat into the shipboate , and he hurt one of they with his knife , but we kill three of they in their boat : two of they be hurt with arrow in the breast , 412 and he that be aboard our boat , be shoot in with a arrow , and hurt with a sword , and beat with staff , who our man cast overboard , but the people catch he and carry he on shore upon their boat , and the other two also , and so depart from we . and three of they go on shore hard by we , where they have their dog , and those three come away from their dog , and present one of their dog come swim towards we hear aboard the ship , whereupon our master cause the gunner to shoot off one of the great piece towards the people , and so the dog turn back to land and within a hour after there come of the people hard aboard the ship , but they will not come to we as they do come before . the 31. of August we depart from gylberts sound for England , and when we come out of the harbour there come after we 17. of the people look which way we go . the 2. of September we lose sight of the land at 12. of September . the clock at noon . the three day at night we lose sight of the northstarre our pinnace in a very great storm , and lie a hull tarry for they the 4. day , but can hear no more of the pinnace they . thus we shape our course the 5. day south - n^^returnei southeast , and sail until the 27. of the say month , ’ we come in sight of cape clear in Ireland . the 30. day we enter into our own channel . the 2. of October we have sight of the isle of wight . the 3. we coast all along the shore , and the 4. and 5. the 6. of the say month of October we come into [ three . in . ] the river of Thames as high as Ratliffe in safety God be thank . the three voyage northwestward , make by m. John Davis gentleman , as chief captain and pilot generail , for the discovery of a passage to the isle of the Moluccas , or the coast of China , in the year 1587. write by m. John Janes . May . he 19 of this present month about midnight we weigh our anchor , set sail , and depart from Dartmouth with two bark and a clincher , the one name the Elizabeth of Dartmouth , the other the sunshine of London , and the clincher call the Helen of London : thus in god name we set forward with the wind at Northeast a good fresh gale . about 3. hour after our departure , the night be somewhat thick with darkness , we have lose the pinnace : the captain imagine that the man have run away with she , will the master of the sunshine to stand to seaward , and see if we can descry they , we bear in with the shore for Plymouth . at length we descry she , bear with she , and demand what the cause be : they answer that the tiller of their helm be burst . So shape our course Westsouthwest , we go forward , hope that a hard beginning will make a good end , yet some of we be doubtful of it , fall in reckon that she be a clincher ; nevertheless we put our trust in God . the 21. we meet with the red lion of London , which come from the coast of Spain , which be afraid that we have be man of war , but we hail they , and after a little conference , we desire the master to carry our letter for London direct to my uncle Sanderson , who promise we a safe delivery . and after we have heave they a lead and a line , whereunto we have make fast our 414 1587-letter , before they can get they into the ship , they fall into the sea , and so all our labour and they also be lose ; notwithstanding they promise to certify our departure at London , and so we depart , and the same day we have sight of Silley . the 22. the wind be at Northeast by east with fair weather , and so the 23. and 24. the like . the 25. we lay our ship on the lee for the sunshine , who be a rummage for a leak , they have 500 stroke at the pump in a watch , the wind at northwest . the 26. and 27. we have fair weather , but this 27. the pinnace foremast be blow overboard . the 28. the Elizabeth tow the pinnace , which be so much brag off by the owner report before we come out of England , but at sea she be like a cart draw with ox . sometime we tow she because she can not sail for scant wind . the 31. day our captai ne ask if the pinnace be staunch , peerson answer that she be as sound and staunch as a cup . This make we something glad , when we see she will brook the sea , and be not leak . June . the first 6. day we have fair weather : after that for 5. day we have fog and rain , the wind be south . the 12. we have clear weather . the mariner in the sunshine and the master can not agree : the mariner will go on their voyage a fish , because the year begin to waste : the master will not depart till he have the company of the Elizabeth , whereupon the master tell our captain that he be afraid his man will shape some contrary course while he be asleep , and so he shall lose we . at length after much talk and many threaten , they be content to bring we to the land which we look for daily . the 14. day we discover land at five of the clock land descry . in the morning , be very great and high mountain , the top of the hill be cover with snow . here the 415 the english voyage wind be variable , sometime Northeast , Eastnortheast , and east by north : but we imagine ourselves to be 16. or 17. league off from the shore . the 16. we come to a anchor about 4. or 5. of the clock after nun , the people come present to we after the old manner , with cry ilyaoute , and show we seal skin . the 17. we begin to set up the pinnace that peerson frame at Dartmouth , with the board which he bring from London . the 18. peerson and the carpenter of the ship begin to set on the plank . the 19 as we go about a island , be find black pumise stone , and salt kern on the rock , very white and glister . this day also the master of the sunshine take of the people a very strong lusty young fellow . the 20. about two of the clock in the morning , the savage come to the island where our pinnace wk build ready to be launch , and tear the two upper strike , and carry they away only for the love of the iron in the board . while they be about this practice , we man the Elizabeth boat to go a shore to they : our man be either afraid or amaze , be so long before they come to shore , that our captain will they to stay , and make the gunner give fire to a saker , and lay the piece level with the boat which the savage have turn on the one side because we shall not hurt they with our arrow , and make the boat their bulwark against the arrow which we shoot at they . our gunner have make all thing ready , give fire to the piece , and fear to hurt any of the people , and regard the owner profit , think belike he will save a saker shoot , doubt we shall have occasion to fight with man of war , and so shoot off the saker without a bullet : our look still when the savage that be hurt shall run away without leg , at length we can perceive never a man hurt , but all have their leg can carry away their body : we have not soon shoot off the piece , but the master of the sun - 416 shine man his boat , and come row towards the island , the very sight of who make each of they take that he have get , and flee away as fast as they can to another island about two mile off , where they take the nail out of the timber , and leave the wood on the isle , when we come on shore , and see how they have spoil the boat , after much debate of the matter , we agree that the Elizabeth shall have she to fish withal : whereupon she be present carry aboard , and stow . now after this trouble , be resolve to depart with the first wind , there fall out another matter worse than all the rest , and that be in this manner . John churchyard one who our captain have appoint as pilot in the pinnace , come to our captain , and master Bruton , and tell they that the good ship which we must all hazard our life in , have three hundred stroke at one time as she ride in the harbour : this disquiet we all great , and many doubt to go in she . at length our captain by who we be all to be govern , determine rather ' to end his life with credit , than to return with infamy and disgrace , and so be all agree , we purpose to live and die together , and commit our self to the ship . now the 21. have bring all our thing aboard , about 11. or 12. of the clock at night , we set sail and depart from those isle , which lie in 64. degree of latitude , our ship be all now at sea , and we shape our course to go , coast the land to the northward upon the eastern shore , which we call the shore of our merchant , because there we meet with people which traffic with we , but here we be not without doubt of our ship . the 24. be in 67. degree , and 40. minute , we have great store of whale , and a kind of sea bird which the mariner call cortinous . this day about six of the clock at night , we espy two of the country people at sea , think at the first they have be two great seal , until we see their oar seven 417 2d A.D. I587 . Isles in 64. degree . store of whale in 67 degree . the great variation of the compass . London coast . between Gronland in the north . of americaabovt 40. league . the english voyage glister with the sun : they come row towards we , as fast as they can , and when they come within hear , they hold up their oar , and cry ilyaoute , make many sign : and at last they come to we , give we bird for bracelet , and of they i have a dart with a bone in it , or a piece of unicorn horn , as i do judge . this dart he make store of , but when he see a knife , he let it go , be more desirous of the knife then of his dart : these people continue row after our ship the space of 3. hour . the 25. in the morning at 7. of the clock we descry 30. Savages row after we , be by judgement 10 , league off from the shore : they bring we salmon peal , bird , and caplin , and we give they pin , needle , bracelet , nail , knife , bell , look glass , and other small trifle , and for a knife , a nail or a bracelet , which they call Ponigmah , they will sell their boat , coat , or any thing they have , although they be far from the shore . we have but few skin of they , about 20. but they make sign to we that if we will go to the shore , we shall have more store of chichsanege : they stay with we till 11. of the clock , at which time we go to prayer , and they depart from we . ' the 28. and 29. be foggy with cloud , the 30. day we take the heighth , and find our self in 72. degree and 12 minute of latitude both at noon and at night , the sun be 5. degree above the horizon . at midnight the compass set to the variation of 28. degree to the westward . now have coast the land , which we call London coast , from the 21. of this present , till the 30. the sea open all to the westwards and northwards , the land on starboard side east from we , the wind shift to the north , whereupon we leave that shore , name the same hope Sanderson , and shape our course west , and run 40. league and better without the sight of any land . 418 the second of July we fall with a mighty bank of a mighty ice west from we , lie north and south , which bank we will glad have double out to the north - an southt ward , but the wind will not suffer we , so that we be fain to coast it to the southward , hope to double it out , that we may have run so far west till we have find land , or else to have be thorough resolve of our pretend purpose . the 3. we fell with the ice again , and put off from it , we seek to the northward , but the wind cross we . the 4. be foggy : so be the 5. also with much wind at the north . the 6. be very clear , we put our bark with oar through a gap in the ice , see the sea free on the west side , as we think , which fall out otherwise , cause we to return after we have stay there between the ice . the 7. and the 8. about midnight , by god help we recover the open sea , the weather be fair and calm , and so be the 9 the 10. we coast the ice . the 11. be foggy , but calm . the 12. we coast again the ice , have the wind at northnorthwest . the 13. bear off from the ice , we determine to go with the shore and come to a anchor , and to stay 5. or 6. day for the dissolve of the ice , hope that the sea continual beat it , and the sun with the extreme force of heat which it have always shin - extreme heat king upon it , will make a quick dispatch , that we may sun . have a further search upon the western shore . now when we be come to the eastern coast , the water something deep , and some of our company fearful withal , we dare not come to a anchor , but bear off into the sea again . the poor people see we go away again , come row after we into the sea , the wave be somewhat lofty . we truck with they for a few skin and dart , and give they bead , nail , pin , 419 they be drive west six point out of their course in 67. degree , 45. minute . mount Raleigh . the earl of cumberland isle . the variation of the compass you . deg . westward . the land trend fi-om this place Southwest and by south . my lord Lumleys inlet . the english voyage needle and card , they point to the shore , as though they will show we some great friendship : but we little regard their courtesy , give they the gentle farewell , and so depart . the 14. we have the wind at south . the r 5. there be some fault either in the bark , or the set of some current , for we be drive six point beyond our course west . the 16. we fell with the bank of ice west from we . the 17. and 18. be foggy . the 19 at one a clock after noon , we have sight of the land which we call mount Raleigh , and at 12. of the clock at night , we be thwart the strait which we discover the first year . the 20. we traverse in the mouth of the strait , the wind be at west , with fair and clear weather . the 21. and 22. we coast the northern coast of the strait . the 23. have sail threescore league northwest into the strait , at two a clock after noon we anchor among many isle in the bottom of the gulf , name the same the earl of cumberland isle , where ride at anchor , a whale pass by our ship and go west in among the isle . here the compass set at thirty degree westward variation . the 23. we depart , shape our course southeast to recover the sea the 25. we be becalm in the bottom of the gulf , the air be extreme hot . master Bruton and some of the mariner go on shore to course dog , where they find many grave and Trane spill on the ground , the dog be so fat that they be scant able to run . the 26. we have a pretty storm , the wind be at southeast . The,27 . and 28. be fair . the 29. we be clear out of the strait , have coast the south shore , and this day at noon we be in 62. degree of latitude . the 30. in the afternoon we coast a bank of ice , which lie on the shore , and pass by a great bank or inlet , which lie between 63. and 62. degree of latitude , which we call lumly inlet . we have oftentimes , as we sail alongst the coast , great rutte , the 420 water as it be whirl and overfal , as if it be the fall of some great water through a bridge . the 31. as we sail by a Headland , which we name Warwick foreland , we fall into one of those overfal Warwick with a fresh gale of wind , and bear all our sail , we for^nd . look upon a island of ice between we and the shore , have think that our bark do make no way , which cause we to take mark on the shore : at length we perceive our self to go very fast , and the island of ice which we see before , be carry very forcible with the set of the current fast than our ship go . a very forcible this day and night we pass by a very great gulf , the c^^twest water whirl and roar as it be the meeting of it tide . August . [ Iii . 114. ] the first of August have coast a bank of ice which be drive out at the mouth of this gulf , we fall with the southermost cape of the gulf , which we name Chidleis cape , which lie in 61 degree and 10 minute of Chldleys cape . latitude . the 2 and 3 be calm and foggy , so be the 4 , 5 , and 6. the 7 be fair and calm : so be the 8 , with a little gale in the morning . the 9 be fair , and we have a little gale at night . the 10 we have a frisk gale at westnorthwest . the 11 fair . the 12 we see five dear on the top of a island , call by we darcy the lord dar-island . and we hoist out our boat , and go ashore to eye they , think to have kill some of they . but when we come on shore , and have course they twice about the island , they take the sea and swim towards island distant from that three league . when we perceive that they have take the sea we give they over because our boat be so small that it can not carry we , and row after they , they swim so fast : but one of they be as big as a good pretty cow , and very fat , their foot as big as ox foot . here upon this island i kill with my piece a grey hare . the 13 in the morning we see three or four white 421 bear , but dare not go on shore to they for lack of a good boat . this day we strike a rock seek for a harbour , and receive a leak : and this day we be in 54 degree of latitude . the 14 we stop our leak in a storm not very outrageous , at noon . the 15 be almost in 52 degree of latitude , and not find our ship , nor ( accord to their promise ) any kind of mark , token , or beacon , which we will they to set up , and they protest to do so upon every head land , island or cape , within twenty league every way off the fish from their fish place , which our captain appoint to place between between 54 and 55 degree : this 15 i say we shape ^ ■ ee of lati - our course homeward for England , have in our ship tude . but little wood , and half a hogshead of fresh water . our man be very willing to depart , and no man more forward than peerson , for he fear to be put out of his office of stewardship : but because every man be so willing to depart , we consent to return for our own country : and so we have the 16 fair weather , with the wind at Southwest . the 17 we meet a ship at sea , and as far as we can judge it be a biskaine : we think she go a fish abundance of for whale ; for in 52 degree or thereabouts we see very whale in m d€et£€s . < # e ’ the 18 be fair , with a good gale at west . the 19 fair also , with much wind at west and by south . they arrive at Dartmouth the 15 of September . and thus after much variable weather and change of wind we arrive the 15 of September in Dartmouth anno 1587 , give thank to God for our safe arrival . [ Iii . 119. ] a report of master John Davis of his three voyage make for the discovery of they northwest passage , take out of a treatise of he , entitle the world hydrographical description . the 1. voyage . owe there only rest the north part of America , upon which coast my self have have most experience of any in our age : for thrice i be that way employ for the discovery of this notable passage , by the honourable care and some charge of sir Francis Walsingham knight , princi pali secretary to her majesty , with who diverse noble man and worshipful merchant of London join in purse and willingness for the furtherance of that attempt , but when his honour die the voyage be friendless , and man mind alienate from adventure therein . in my first voyage not experience of the nature of those climate , and have no direction either by chart , globe , or other certain relation in what altitude that passage be to be search , i shape a northerly course and so seek the same towards the south , and in that my northerly course i fall upon the shore which in ancient time be call Greenland , five hundred league distant from the dursey westnorthwest northerly , the land be very high and full of mighty mountain all cover with snow , no view of wood , grass or earth to be see , and the shore two league off into the sea so full of ice as that not ship can by any mean come near the same . the loathsome view of the shore , and irksome noise of the ice be such , as that it breed strange conceits among we , so that we suppose the place to be waste and void of any sensible or vegetable creature , whereupon i call the same desolation : so coast this shore towards the south in the latitude of sixty degree , i 440 find it to trend towards the west , i still follow the lead thereof in the same height , and after fifty or sixty league it fail and lie direct north , which i still follow , and in thirty league sail upon the west side of this coast by i name desolation , we be past all the ice and find many green and pleasant isle border upon the shore , but the hill of the main be still cover with great quantity of snow , i bring my ship among those isle and there more to refresh our self in our weary travel , in the latitude of sixty four degree or there about . the people of the country have espy our ship come down unto we in their canoas , and hold up their right hand to the sun and cry yliaout , will strike their breast : we do then like the people come aboard our ship , man of good stature , unbearded , small eye and of tractable condition , by who as sign will permit , we understand that towards the north and west there be a great sea , and use the people with kindness in give they nail and knife which of all thing they most desire , we depart , and find the sea free from ice suppose our self to be pass all danger we shape our course westnorthwest think thereby to pass for China , but in the latitude of sixty six degree we fall with another shore , and there find another passage of twenty league broad direct west into the same , which we suppose to be our hope strait , we enter into the same thirty or forty league , find it neither to wyden nor straighten , then consider that the year be spend ( for this be the fine of August ) not know the length of the straight and danger thereof , we take it our best course to return with notice of our good success for this small time of search . and so return in a sharp fret of westerly wind the 29. of September we arrive at Dartmouth . And acquaint master secretary Walsingham with the rest of the honourable and worshipful adventurer of all our proceed , i be appoint again the second year to search the bottom of this straight , 441 A.D. 1587 - because by all likelihood it be the place and passage by the z . voyage , we labour for . in this second attempt the marcnant of Exeter , and other place of the west become adventurer in the action , so that be sufficient furnish for six month , and have direction to search these straight , until we find the same to fall into another sea upon the west side of this part of America , we shall again return : for than it be not to be doubt , but ship with trade may safe be convey to China , and the part of Asia . we depart from Dartmouth , and arrive upon the south part of the coast of desolation coast the same upon his west shore to the latitude of sixetie six degree , and there anchor among the isle border upon the same , where we refresh our self , the people of this place come likewise unto we , by who i understand through their sign that towards the north the sea be large . at this place the chief ship whereupon i trust , call the mermaid of Dartmouth , find many occasion of discontentment , and be unwilling to proceed , she there forsake i . then consider how i have give my faith and most constant promise to my worshipful good friend master William Sanderson , who of all man be the great adventurer in that action , and take such care for the performance [ three . 120. ] thereof , that he have to my knowledge at one time disburse as much money as any five other whatsoever , out of his own purse , when some of the company have be slack in give in their adventure : and also know that i shall loose the favour of m. secretary Walsingham , if i shall shrink from his direction ; in one small bark of 30 ton , whereof m. Sanderson be owner , alone without far company i proceed on my voyage , and arrive at these straight follow the same 80. league , until i come among many island , where the water do ebb and flow six fathom upright , and where there have be great trade of people to make train . but by such thing as there we find , we know that they be not Christians of Europe that have use 442 that trade : in fine by search with our boat , we find small hope to pass any far that way , and therefore recover the sea and coast the shore towards the south , and in so do ( for it be too late to search towards the north ) we find another great inlet near 40 league broad , where the water enter in with violent swiftness , this we also thought may be a passage : for no doubt the north part of America be all island by north aught that i can perceive therein : but because i be ali alone in a small bark of thirty ton , and the year jsian^ ’ spend , i enter not into the same , for it be now the seven of September , but coast the shore towards the south we see a incredible number of bird : have diverse fisherman aboard our bark they all conclude that there be a great skull of fish , we be unprovide of fish furniture with a long spike nail make a hook , and fasten the same to one of our sound line , before the bait be change we take more than forty great cod , the fish swim so abundant thick about our bark as be incredible to be report , of which with a small portion of salt that we have , we preserve some thirty couple , or thereabouts , and so return for England . and have report to m. secretary Walsingham the whole success of this attempt , he command i to present unto the most honourable lord high treasurer of England , some part of that fish : which when his lordship see , and hear at large the relation of this second attempt , i receive favourable countenance from his honour , advise i to prosecute the action , of which his lordship conceive a very good opinion . the next year , although diverse of the adventurer fall from the action , as all the western merchant , and most of those in London : yet some of the adventurer both honourable and worshipful continue their willing favour and charge , so that by this mean the next year two ship be appoint for the fish and one pinnace for the discovery . depart from Dartmouth , through God merciful the ^ . voyage . 443 favour , i arrive at the place of fish , and there accord to my direction i leave the two ship to follow that business , take their faithful promise not to depart until my return unto they , which shall be in the fine of August , and so in the bark i proceed for the discovery : but after my departure , in sixteen day the two ship have finish their voyage , and so present depart for England , without regard of their promise : my self not distrust any such hard measure proceed for the discovery , and follow my course in the free and open sea between north and northwest to the latitude of 67 degree , and there i may see America west from i , and Gronland , which i call desolation , east : then when i see the land of both side i begin to distrust it will prove but a gulf : notwithstanding desirous to know the full certainty i proceed , and in 68 degree the passage enlarge , so that i can not see the western shore : thus i continue to the latitude of 73 degree , in a great sea , free from ice , coast the western shore of desolation : the people come continual row out unto i in their canoas , twenty , forty , and one hundred at a time , and will give i fish dry , salmon , salmon peal , cod , caplin , lump , stone-base and such like , beside diverse kind of bird , as partridge , pheasant , gull , sea bird and other kind of flesh : i still labour by sign to know from they what they know of any sea towards the north , they still make sign of a great sea as we understand they , than i depart from that coast , think to discover the north part of America : and after i have sail towards the west 40 league , i fall upon a great bank of ice : the wind be north and blue much , i be constrain to coast the same towards the south , not see any shore west from i , neither be there any ice towards the north , but a great sea , free , large very salt and blue , and of a unsearchable depth : so coast towards the south i come to the place where i leave the ship to fish , but find they not . then be forsake and leave in this distress refer my self to the merciful providence of God , i shape my course for England , and unhoped for of any , God alone relieve i , i arrive at Dartmouth . by this last discovery it seem most manifest that the passage be free and without impediment towards the north : but by reason of the spanish fleet and unfortunate time of m. secretary death , the voyage be omit and never since attempt . the cause why i use this particular relation of all my proceed for this discovery , be to stay this objection , why have not Davis discover this passage be thrice that way employ ? how far i proceed and in what form this discovery lie , do appear upon the globe which m. Sanderson to his very great charge have publish , for the which he deserve great favour and commendation . the discovery of the isle of Frisland , Iseland , [ in . m . ] Engroneland , Estotiland , Drogeo and Icaria : make by two brethren , namely m. Nicholas Zeno , and m. Antonio his brother : gather out of their letter by m. Francisco Marcolino . n the year of our lord 1200 there be in the city of Venice a famous gentleman , name Messer Marino Zeno , who for his great virtue and singular wisdom , be call and elect governor in certain common wealth of Italy : in the administration whereof he bear he - self so discreet , that he be belove of all man , and his name great reverence of those that never know or see his person . and among sundry his worthy work , this be record of he , that he pacify certain grievous civil dissension that arise among the citizen of Verona : whereas otherwise , if by his grave advise and great diligence they have not be prevent , the matter be likely to break out into hot broil of 445 war . he be the first Podesta , or ruler , that the common wealth of Venice appoint in Constantinople in the year 1205 when our state have rule thereof with the french baron . this gentleman have a son name Messer Pietro , who be the father of the duke Rinieri , which duke die without issue , make his heir m. Andrea , the son of m. Marco his brother . this m. Andrea be captain generali and procurator , a man of great reputation for many rare part , that be in he . he have a son m. Rinieri , a worthy senator and prudent counsellor : of who descend m. Pietro captain generali of the league of the christian against the Turk , who be call dragon , for that in his shield , in stead of a manfrone which be his arm at the first , he bear a dragon . he be father to m. Carlo two grande the famous procurator and captain generail against the genoese in those cruel war , when as almost all the chief prince of Europe do oppugn and seek to overthrow our empire and liberty , wherein by his great valiancy and prowess , as Furius Camillus deliver Rome , so he deliver his country from the present peril it be in , be ready to become a prey and spoil unto the enemy : wherefore he be afterward surname the lion , and for a eternal remembrance of his fortitude and valiant exploit he give the lion in his arm . m. Carlo have two brethren . m. Nicolo , the knight and m. Antonio , the father of m. dragon , of who issue m. Caterino , the father m. Pietro da i Grocecchieri . this m. Pietro have son m. Caterino , that die the last year , be brother unto m. Francisco , m. Carlo , m. Battista , and m. Vincenzo : which m. Caterino be father to m. Nicolo , that be yet live . now m. Nicolo , the knight , be a man of great courage , after this aforesaid Genouan war of Chioggia that trouble so our predecessor , enter into a great desire and fancy to see the fashion of the world and to travel and acquaint himself with the manner of 446 sundry nation and learn their language , whereby afterward upon occasion he may be the better able to do service to his country , and purchase to himself credit and honour . wherefore he cause a ship to be make , and have furnish she at his proper charge ( as he be very wealthy ) he depart out of our sea , and pass the strait of Gibraltar , he sail for certain day upon the ocean , keep his course still to the northward , with intent to see England and Flanders . where be assault in those sea by a terrible tempest , he be so toss for the space of many day with the sea and wind , that he know not where he be , till at length he discover land , and not be able any long to sustain the violence of the tempest the ship be cast away upon the isle of the ship of Friseland . the man be save , and most part of the good that be in the ship . and this be in the year pa^^island 1380. the inhabitant of the island come run in jn anno great multitude with weapon to set upon m. Nicolo 1380. and he man , who be sore weather-beaten and overlabour at sea , and not know in what part of the world they be , be not able to make any resistance at all , much less to defend themselves courageous , as it behoove they in such a dangerous case . and they shall have be doubtless very discourteous entreat and cruel handle , if by good hap there have not be foreign hard by the place a prince with arm people . who understand that there be even at that present a iandwith great ship cast away upon the island , come rune at arm man , the noise and outcry that they make against our when m . Zeno poor mariner , and drive away the inhabitant , sufferetl s , fp-spake in latin and ask they what they be and come unt0 im from whence they come , and perceive that they come and speak from Italy and that they be man of the say country , latin . he be surprise with marvelous great joy . wherefore promise they all , that they shall receive no discourtesy , and that they be come into a place where they shall be well use and very welcome , he take 447 ziehmm prince of Porland or duke of Zorani . [ Iii . 122. ] Frisland the king ofnor-waye . the english voyage they into his protection upon his faith . this be a great lord , and possess certain island call Porland , lie on the south side of Frisland , be the rich and most populous of all those part , his name be Zichmni : and beside the say little island , he be duke of Sorani , lie over against Scotland . of these north part i think good to draw the copy of a sea card , which among other antiquity i have in my house , which although it be rot through many year , yet it fall out indifferent well : and to those that be delight in these thing , it may serve for some light to the understanding of that , which without it can so easy be conceive . Zichmni be lord of those sygnory ( as be say ) be a very warlike and valiant man and above all thing famous in sea cause . and have the year before give the overthrow to the king of Norway , who be lord of the island , be desirous to win fame by feat of arm , he be come on land with his man to give the attempt for the win of Frisland , which be a island much big than Ireland . wherefore see that m. Nicolo be a man of judgement and discretion , and very expert both in sea matter and martial affair , he give he commission to go aboard his navy with all his man , charge the captain to honour he and in all thing to use his counsel . this navy of Zichmni be of thirteen vessel , whereof two only be row with oar , the rest small bark and one ship , with the which they sail to the westwards and with little pain win ledovo and ilofe and diverse other small island : and turn into a bay call sudero , in the haven of the town name Sanestol , they take certain small bark lade with fish . and here they find zichmni , who come by land with his army conquer all the country as he go : they stay here but a while , and lead on their course to the westwards till they come to the other cape of the gulf or bay , then turn again , 448 they find certain island and break land which they reduce all unto the signory and possession of Zichmni . Theise sea , forasmuch as they sail , be in manner nothing but shold and rock , in so much that if m. Nicolo and the venetian mariner have not be their pilot , the whole fleet in judgement of all that be in it , have be cast away , so small be the skill of zichmnis man , in respect of we , who have be train up in the art and practice of navigation all the day of their life . now the fleet have do such thing as be declare , the captain , by the counsel of m. Nicolo , determine to go a land , at a town call Bondendon , to understand what success Zichmni have in his war : where they hear to their great content , that he have fight a great battle and put to flight the army of his enemy : by reason of which victory , they send ambassador from all part of the island to yield the country up into his hand , take down their ensign in every town and castle : they think good to stay in that place for his come , it be report for certain that flee will be there very short . at his come there be great congratulation and many sign of gladness show , as well for the victory by land , as for that by sea : for the which the venetian be honour and extol of all man , in such sort that there be no talk but of they , and of the great valour of m. Nicolo . wherefore the prince , who be a great favourer of valiant man and especial of those that can behave themselves well at sea , cause m. Nicolo to be bring before he , and after have commend he with many honourable speech , and praise his great industry and dexterity of wit , by the which two thing he acknowledge himself to have receive a inestimable benefit , as the save of his fleet and the win of many place without any great trouble , he make he knight , and reward his man N. leno , with many rich and bountiful gift . then depart from make knight thence they go in triumph manner towards Frisland , ^tchmni . vn 449 2 f the chief city of that island , situate on the southeast side of the isle , within a gulf , as there be many in that s^fs lade island . in this gulf or bay there be such great abundance risknd “ for ta^en > at many ship be lade therewith to serve Flanders , Flanders , Britain , England , Scotland , Norway , and den-britam , Eng - mark , and by this trade they gather great wealth . land , Scotland , and thus much be take out of a letter , that m. Nicolo Norway and send to m Antonio his brother , request that he will but not to be seek some mean to come to he . wherefore he who prove that have as great desire to travail as his brother , buy a ever any come ship , and direct his course that way : and after he have lettersentb sa^ed a great while and escape many danger , he arrive m. N. Zeno^ at length in safety with m. Nicolo , who receive he very from Frisland joyful , for that he be his brother not only in flesh and to his brother blood , but also in valour and good quality . m. Antonio remain in Frisland and dwell there for the space of the end of year , 4 year with m. Nicolo , and 10 year alone . the first where they come in such grace and favour with the letter . prince , that he make m. Nicolo captain of his navy , and with great preparation of war they be send forth for the enterprise of Estland , which lie upon the coast between Frisland and Norway , where they do many damage : but hear that the king of Norway be come towards they with a great fleet , they depart with such a terrible flaw of wind , that they be drive upon certain shold : be a great part of their ship be cast away , the rest be save upon Grisland , a great island but dishabit . the king of Norway his fleet be take with the same storm , do utter perish in those sea : whereof Zichmni have notice , by a ship of his enemy that be cast by chance upon Grisland , have repair his fleet , and perceive himself northerly near unto the island , determine to set upon island , [ three . 123. ] which together with the rest , be subject to the king of Norway : but he find the country so well fortify and defend , that his fleet be so small , and very ill appoint both of weapon and man , he be glad to retire . and so he leave that enterprise without perform 45° Nicholas and Antonio Zeno a.d. c . 1380-90 . any thing at all : and in the same channel he assault the other isle call island , which be seven , Talas , Broas , iscant , Trans , Mimant , dambere , and bre : and have spoil they all , he build a fort in bre , where he leave m. Nicolo , with certain small bark and man and munition . and now think he have do well for this voyage , with those few ship which be leave he return safe into Frisland . m. Nicolo remain now in Bres , determine in the spring to go forth and discover land : wherefore arm out three small bark in the month of July , he sail to the northward , and arrive in Engroneland . where he find a monastery of Engnneland . friar , of the order of the predicator , and a church . dedicate to saint Thomas , hard by a hill that cast a ™ forth fire , like Vesuvius and Aetna . there be a fountain of hot burn water with the which they heat the church of the monastery and the friar chamber , it come also into the kitchen so boil hot , that they use no other fire to dress their meat : and put their bread into brass pot without any water , it do bake as it be in a hot oven . they have also small garden cover over in the winter time , which be water with this water , be defend from the force of the snow and cold , which in those part be situate far under the pole , be very extreme , and by this mean they produce flower and fruit and herb of sundry sort , even as in other temperate country in their season , in such sort that the rude and savage people of those part see these supernatural ! effect , do take those friar for god , and bring they many present , as chicken , flesh , and diverse other thing , and have they all in great reverence as lord . when the frost and snow be great , they heat their house in manner beforesaid , and will by let in the water or open the window , at a instant temper the heat and cold at their pleasure . in the building of the monastery they use no other matter but that which be minister unto they by the fire : for they take the burn - 45 * ing stone that be cast out as it be sparkle or cinder at the fiery mouth of the hill , and when they be most inflame , cast water upon they , whereby they be dissolve and become excellent white lime and so tough that be contrive in build it last for ever . and the very sparkle after the fire be out of they do serve in stead of stone to make wall and vault : for be once cold they will never dissolve or break , except they be cut with some iron tool , and the vault that be make of they be so light that they need no sustentaccle or prop to hold they up , and they will endure continual very fair and whole . by reason of these great commodity , the friar have make there so many building and wall that it be a wonder to see . the covert or roof of their house for the most part be make in manner follow : first they raise up the wall up to his full height , than they make it incline or bow in by little and little in form of a vault . but they be not great trouble with rain in those part , because the climate ( as i have say ) be extreme cold : for the first snow be fall , it thaw no more for the space of nine month , for so long dure their winter . they feed of the flesh of wild foul and of fish : for whereas the warm water fall into the sea , there be a large and wide haven , which by reason of the heat of the water , do never freeze all the winter , by mean whereof there be such concourse and flock of sea foul and such abundance of fish , that they take thereof infinite multitude , whereby they maintain a great number of people round about , which they keep in continual work , both in building and take of fowl and fish , and in a thousand other necessary affair and business about the monastery . their house be build about the hill on every side , in form round , and 25 foot broad , and in mount upward they go narrow and narrow , leave at the top a little hole , whereat the air come in to give light to the house , and the floor of the house be so hot , 45 2 that be within they feel no cold at all . hither in the summer time come many bark from the island their about , and from the cape above Norway , and from Trondon , and bring to the friar all manner of thing that may be desire , take in change thereof fish , which they dry in the sun or in the cold , and skin of diverse kind of beast . for the which they have wood to burr ne and timber very artificial carve , and corn , and cloth to make they apparel . for in change of the two aforesaid commodity all the nation border round about they covet to traffic with they , and so they without any travel or expense have that which they desire . to this monastery resort friar of Norway , of Suetia and of other country , but the most part be of island . there be continual in that part many bark , which be keep in there by reason of the sea be freeze , wait for the spring of the year to dissolve the ice . the fisher boat be make like unto a weaver shuttle : take the skin of fish , they fashion they with the bone of the same fish , and sow they together in many double they make they so sure and substantial , that it be miraculous to see , how in tempest they will shut themselves close within and let the sea and wind carry trade in summertime from Trondon to saint Thomas friar in Groneland . resort of friar from Norway and Sueden , to the monastery in Engroneland , call S. Tho. m. frobishet bring these kind of boat from these part into England , they they care not whither , without any fear either [ three . 124. ] of break or drown . and if they chance to be drive upon any rock , they remain sound without the least bruise in the world : and they have as it be a sleeve in the bottom , which be tie fast in the middle , and when there come any water into the boat , they put it into the one half of the sleeve , then fasten the end thereof with two piece of wood and loose the band beneath , they convey the water forth of the boat : and this they do as often as they have occasion , without any peril or impediment at all . Moreover , the water of the monastery , be of sulphurous or brimstony nature , be convey into the lodging of the principali friar by certain vessel of brass , tin , or stone , so hot that it heat the place 453 in the monastery of saint Thomas most of they speak the latin tongue . the end of the 2. letter . N. Zeno die in Frisland . the english voyage as it be a stove , not carry with it any stink or other noisome smell . beside this they have another conveyance to bring hot water with a wall under the ground , to the end it shall not freeze , unto the middle of the court , where it fall into a great vessel of brass that stand in the middle of a boil fountain , and this be to heat their water to drink and to water their garden , and thus they have from the hill the great commodity that may be wish : and so these friar employ all their travail and study for the most part in trim their garden and in make fair and beautiful building , but especial handsome and commodious : neither be they destitute of ingenious and painful artificer for the purpose ; for they give very large payment , and to they that bring they fruit and seed they be very bountiful , and give they care not what . so that there be great resort of workman and master in diverse faculty , by reason of the good gain and large allowance that be there . the most of they speak the latin tongue , and special the superior and principal of the monastery . and this be as much as be know of Engroneland , which be all by the relation of m. Nicolo , who make also particular description of a river that he discover , as be to be see in the card that i draw . and in the end m. Nicolo , not be use and acquaint with these cruel cold , fall sick , and a little while after return into Frisland , where he die . he leave behind he in Venice , two son , m. Giovanni and m. Toma , who have two son , m. Nicolo the father of the famous cardinal Zeno , and m. Pietro of who descend the other Zenos , that be live at this day . now m. Nicolo be dead , m. Antonio succeed he both in his good , and in his dignity and honour : and albeit he attempt diverse way , and make great supplication , he can never obtain licence to return into his country . for Zichmni , be a man of great 454 c . 1380-90 . courage and valour , have determine to make himself lord of the sea . wherefore use always the counsel and service of m. Antonio , he determine to send he with certain bark to the westwards , for that towards those part , some of his fisherman have discover certain island very rich and populous : which discovery m. Antonio , in a letter to his brother m. Carlo , recounteth from point to point in this manner , save that we have change some old word , leave the matter entire as it be . six and twenty year ago there depart four fisher boat , the which , a mighty tempest arise , be toss for the space of many day very desperate upon the sea , when at length , the tempest cease , and the wether wax fair , they discover a island call Estotiland , the discovery lie to the westwards above 1000 mile from Frisland , °f Estotiland upon the which one of the boat be cast away , and six man that be in it be take of the inhabitant and man take . bring into a fair and populous city , where the king of the place send for many interpreter , but there be none can be find that understand the language of the fisherman , except one that speak latin , who be also cast by fisherman of chance upon the same island , who in the behalf of the Ensland king ask they what countryman they be : and so s ? ea e Ratine . understand their case , rehearse it unto the king , who will that they shall tarry in the country : wherefore they obey his commandment , for that they can not otherwise do , dwell five year in the island , and learn six be five the language , and one of they be in diverse part of the island , and reporteth that it be a very rich country , qne abound with all the commodity of the world , and fisher of fris-that it be little less than island , but far more fruitful , land , report have in the middle thereof a very high mountain , from the which there spring four river that pass through rich the whole country . ing with all the inhabitant be very witty people , and have all the commodi-arte and faculty , as we have : and it be credible that in time past they have have traffic with our man , for Kor ’ 455 abundance of glide . trade from Estotiland , to Engoneland : skin , brimstone , and fitch : glde , corn , and beer , or ale . many city and castle . [ Iii . 125. ] a country call Drogo . the 6 fisherman of Frisland only save , by show the manner to take fish . the chief of the 6fisher , specifiedbefore and his companion . the english voyage he say , that he see latin book in the king library , which they at this present do not understand : they have a peculiar language , and letter or character to themselves . they have mine of all manner of metal , but especial they abound with gold . they have their trade in Engroneland , from whence they bring fur , brimstone and pitch : and he say , that to the southward , there be a great populous country very rich of gold . they sow corn , and make beer and ale , which be a kind of drink that north people do use as we do wine . they have mighty great wood , they make their building with wall , and there be many city and castle . they build small bark and have sail , but they have not the load stone , nor know not the use of the compass . wherefore these fisher be have in great estimation , insomuch that the king send they with twelve bark to the southward to a country which they call Drogio : but in their voyage they have such contrary weather , that they think to have perish in the sea : but escape that cruel death , they fall into another more cruel : for they be take in the country and the most part of they eat by the savage people , which feed upon man flesh , as the sweet meat in their judgement that be . but that fisher with his fellow show they the manner of take fish with net , save their life : and will go every day a fish to the sea and in fresh river , and take great abundance of fish and give it to the chief man of the country , whereby he gate himself so great favour , that he be very well belove and honour of every one . the fame of this man be spread abroad in the country , there be a lord there by , that be very desirous to have he with he , and to see how he use his miraculous art of catch fish , in so much that he make war with the other lord with who he be before , and in the end prevail , for that he be more mighty and a better warrior , the fisherman be send unto he with the rest of his company . and for the 456 space of thirteen year that he dwell in those part , he say , that he be send in this order to more than 25 lord , for they have continual war among themselves , this lord with that lord , and he with another , only to have he to dwell with they : so that wander up and down the country without any certain abode in one place , he know almost all those part . he say , that it be a very great country and as it be a new world : the people be very rude and void of all goodness , they go all naked so that they be miserable vex with cold , neither have they the wit to cover their body with beast skin which they take in hunt , they have no kind of metal , they live by hunt , they carry certain lance of wood make sharp at the point , they have bow , you string whereof be make of beast skin : they be very fierce people , they make cruel war one with another , and eat one another , they have governor and certain law very diverse among themselves . but the far to the southwestwards , the more civility there be , the air be somewhat temperate , so that there they have city and temple to idol , wherein they sacrifice man and afterward eat they , they have there some knowledge and use of gold and silver . now this fisherman have dwell so many year in those country purpose , if it be possible , to return home into his country , but his companion despair ever to see it again , let he go in god name , and they keep themselves where they be . wherefore he bid they farewell , flee through the wood towards Drogio , and be very well receive of the lord that dwell next to that place ; who know he and be a great enemy of the other lord ; and so run from one lord to another , be those by who he have pass before , after long time and many travel he come at length to Drogio , where he dwell three year . when as by good fortune he hear by the inhabitant , that there be certain boat arrive upon the coast : wherefore enter into good hope to accomplish his intent , he go 457 A.D. c . 1380-90 . in the space of 13 year he serve 15 lord of Drogio . he return from Estotiland to Frisland . Zichmni mind to send m. Antonio Zeno with a fleet towards those part of Estotiland . the 4. letter . the fisherman die that shall have be interpreter . certain mariner take in his steed , which come with he from Estotiland . isle llofe . the english voyage to the sea side , and ask they of what country they be ; they answer of Estotiland , whereat he be exceed glad , , and request that they will take he in to they , which they do very willing , and for that he have the language of the country , and there be none that can speak it , they use he for their interpreter . and afterward he frequent that trade with they in such sort , that he become very rich , and so furnish out a bark of his own , he return into Frislande , where he make report unto this lord of that wealthy country . and he be thorough credit because of the mariner , who approve many strange thing , that he report to be true . wherefore this lord be resolve to send i forth with a fleet towards those part , and there be so many that desire to go in the voyage , for the novelty and strangeness of the thing , that i think we shall be very strong appoint , without any public expense at all . and this be the tenor of the letter before mention , which i have here set down to give intelligence of another voyage that m. Antonio make , be set out with many bark , and man , notwithstanding he be not captain , as he have think at the first he shall : for Zichmni go in his own person : and concern that matter i have a letter in form follow . one great preparation for the voyage of Estotiland be begin in a unlucky hour : for three day before our departure the fisherman die that shall have be our guide : notwithstanding this lord will not give over the enterprise , but instead of the fisherman take certain mariner that return out of the island with he : and so make our navigation to the westwards , we discover certain island subject to Frisland , and have pass certain shelf we stay at Ledovo for the space of 7 day to refresh our self , and to furnish the fleet with necessary provision . depart from thence we arrive the first of July at the isle of llofe : and for that the wind make for we , we stay not there , but pass 458 forth , and be upon the main sea , there arise immediate a cruel tempest , wherewith for eight day space we be miserable vex , not know where we be : and a great part of the bark be cast away , afterward the weather wax fair , we gather up the break piece of the bark that be lose , and sail with a prosperous wind we discover land at west . wherefore keep our course direct upon it , we arrive in a good and safe harbour , where we see a infinite company of people ready in arm , come run very furious to the water side , as it be for defence of the island . wherefore Zichmni cause his man to make sign of peace unto they , they send io man unto we that can speak ten language , but we can understand none of they , except one that be of island . he be bring before our prince and ask , what be the name of the island , and what people inhabit it , and who govern it , answer , that the island be call Icaria , and that all the king that reign there , be call Icari , after the name of the first king of that place , which as they say be the son of Dedalus king of Scotland , who conquer that island , leave his son there for king , and leave they those law that they retain to this present , and after this , he desire to sail further , in a great tempest that arise , be drown , wherefore for a memoriali of his c . 1380-90 . [ Iii . 126. ] Tdchrnni his discovery of the island Icaria . a island man in Icari . the king of Icaria call Icari after the name of the first king of that place , who as they report , be son to Deda - death , they call those sea yet , the icarian sea , and the lus king of king of the island Icari , and for that they be content with that state , which God have give they , neither Icartan Sea‘ will they alter one jote of their law and custom , they will not receive any stranger : wherefore they request our prince , that he will not seek to violate their law , which they have receive from that king of worthy memory and observe very due to that present : which if he do attempt , it will redound to his manifest destruction , they be all resolute bend rather to leave their life , than to loose in any respect the use of their law . notwithstanding , that we shall not think they do altogether refuse conversation and traffic with other 459 the people of i carta desirous of the italian tongue . ten man of ten sundry nation . infinite multitude of arm man in Icaria . Zichmni depart from Icaria westwards . the english voyage man , they tell we for conclusion that they will willing receive one of our man , and prefer he to be one of the chief among they , only to learn my language the italian tongue , and to be inform of our manner and custom , as they have already receive those other ten of ten sundry nation , that come into their island . to these thing our prince answer nothing at all , but cause his man to seek some good harbour , he make sign as though he will depart , and sail round about the island , he espy at length a harbour on the east side of the island , where he put in with all his fleet : the mariner go on land to take in wood and water , which they do with as great speed as they can , doubt lest they shall be assault by the inhabitant , as it fall out in deed , for those that dwell thereabouts , make sign unto the other with fire and smoke , put themselves present in arm and the other come to they , they come all run down to the sea side upon our man , with bow and arrow , and other weapon , so that many be slay and diverse sore wound . and we make sign of peace unto they , but it be to no purpose , for their rage increase more and more , as though they have fight for land and live . wherefore we be force to depart , and to sail along in a great circuit about the island , be always accompany upon the hill top and the sea coast with a infinite number of arm man : and so double the cape of the island towards the north , we find many great sholde , among the which for the space of ten day we be in continual danger of loose our whole fleet , but that it please God all that while to send we fair weather . wherefore proceed on till we come to the east cape , we see the inhabitant still on the hill top and by the sea coast keep with we , and in make great outcry and shoot at we a far off , they utter their old spiteful affection towards we . wherefore we determine to stay in some safe harbour , and see if we may speak once again with the islander , but our 460 Nicholas and Antonio Zeno a.d. c . 1380-90 . determination be frustrate : for the people more like unto beast than man , stand continual in arm with intent to beat we back , if we shall come on land . wherefore Zichmni see he can not prevail , and think if he shall have persevere and follow obstinate his purpose , their victual will have fail they , he depart with a fair wind and sail six day to the westwards , but the wind change to the southwest , and the sea wax rough , we sail 4 day with the wind the powp , and at length discover land , be afraid to approach near unto it , the sea be grow , and we not know what land it be : but God so provide for we , that the wind cease there come a great calm . wherefore some of our company row to land with oar , return 8c bring we news to our great comfort , that they have find a very good country and a better harbour : upon which news we tow our ship and small bark to land , and be enter into the harbour , we see a far off a great mountain , that cast forth smoke , which give we good hope that we shall find some inhabitant in the island , neither will Zichmni rest , although it be a great way off , but send 100 soldier to search the country and bring report 100 man send what people they be that inhabit it , 8c in the mean t0 discontent ™ time they take in wood and water for the provision of countrey-the fleet , and catch great store of fish and sea foul and find such abundance of bird egg , that our man that be half famish , be fill therewithal ! . while we be ride here , begin the month of June , at which time the air in the island be so temperate and pleasant [ three . 127. ] as be impossible to express : but when we can see no people at all , we suspect great that this pleasant place loo soui be desolate and dishabit . we give name to the diers retw^eii heaven call it trin , and the point that stretch out which have into the sea , we call Capo de Trin. the 100 soldier be through that be send forth , 8 day after return , and bring the lsland , word that they have be through the island and at they and mountain , and that the smoke be a naturali thing pro - find . 461 m. Antonio ' leno , make chief captain of those ship which go back to Frisland . the english voyage cede from a great fire that be in the bottom of the hill , and that there be a spring from which issue a certain water like pitch which run into the sea , and that thereabouts dwell great multitude of people half wild , hide themselves in cave of the ground , of small stature , and very fearful ; for as soon as they see they they flee into their hole , and that there be a great river and a very good and safe harbour . Zichmni be thus inform , and see that it have a wholesome and pure air , and a very fruitful soil and fair river , with sundry commodity , fall into such like of the place , that he determine to inhabit it , and build there a city . but his people be weary and faint with long and tedious travel begin to murmur , say that they will return into their country , for that the winter be at hand , and if they enter into the harbour , they shall not be able to come out again before the next summer . wherefore he retain only the bark with oar and such as be willing to stay with he , send all the rest with the ship back again , and will that i , ( though unwilling ) shall be their captain . i therefore depart , because i can not otherwise choose , sail for the space of twenty day to the eastwards without sight of any land ; then turn my course towards the southeast , in 5. day i discover land , and find my self upon the isle of Neome , and know the country , i perceive i be past island : wherefore take in some fresh victual of the inhabitant be subject to Zichmni , i sail with a fair wind in three day to Frisland , where the people , who think they have lose their prince , because of his long absence , in this our voyage receive we very joyful . what follow after this letter i know not but by conjecture , which i gather out of a piece of another letter , which i will set down here underneath : that Zichmni build a town in the port of the island that he discover , and that he search the country very diligent and discover it all , and also the river on 462 c . 1380-90 . both side of Engroneland , for that i see it particular describe in the sea card , but the discourse or narration be lose . the beginning of the letter be thus . concern those thing that you desire to know of the 5 letter . i , as of the man and their manner and custom , of the beast , and of the country adjoin , i have make thereof a particular book , which by God help i will bring with i : wherein i have describe the country , the monstrous fish , the custom and law of Frisland , island , Estland , the kingdom of Norway , Estotiland , Drogio , and in the end the life of m. Nicolo , the knight our brother , with the discovery which he make , and the state of Groneland . i have also write the life and act of Zichmni , a prince as worthy of immortali memory , as any that ever live , for his great valiancy and singular humanity , wherein i have describe the discovery of Engroneland on both side , and the city that he build . therefore i will speak no further hereof in this letter , hope to be with you very short , and to satisfy you in sundry other thing by word of mouth . all these letter be write by m. Antonio to Messer Carlo his brother : and it grieve i , that the book and diverse other write concern these purpose , be miserable lose : for be but a child when they come to my hand , and not know what they be , ( as the manner of child be ) i tear they , and rend they in piece , which now i can call to remembrance but to my exceed great grief . notwithstanding , that the memory of so many good thing shall not be lose : whatsoever i can get of this matter , i have dispose and put in order in the former discourse , to the end that this age may be partly satisfy , to the which we be more behold for the great discovery make in those part , then to any other of the time past , be most studious of the new relation and discovery of strange country , make by the great mind , and industry of our ancestor . for the more credit and confirmation of the former 463 the second discovery thereof . the english voyage historic of Messer Nicolas and Messer Antonio Zeni ( which for some few respect may perhaps be call in question ) i have here annex the judgement of that famous cosmographer Abraham Ortelius , or rather the yield and submit of his judgement thereunto : who in his theatrum orbis , folio 6. next before the map of Mar deal Zur , borrow proof and authority out of this relation , to show that the north-east part of America call Estotiland , and in the original always affirm to be a island , be about the year 1390 discover by the aforesaid venetian gendeman Messer Antonio Zeno , above 100 year before ever Christopher Columbus set sail for those western region ; and that the northern sea be even then sail by our european pilot through the help of the loadstone : with diverse other particular concern the custom , religion and wealth of the southern Americans , which be most evidendy confirm by all the late and modern spanish history of Nueva Espanna and Peru. a nd here i shall not ( as i suppose ) commit any great inconvenience , or absurdity , in add unto this history of the new world , certain particular as touch the first discovery thereof , not common know . which discovery all the writer of our time ascribe ( and that not unworthy ) unto Christopher Columbus . for by he it be in a manner first discover , make know , and profitable communicate unto the christian world , in the year of our lord 1492. howbeit i find that the north part thereof call Estotiland , ( which most of all extend towards our Europe and the island of the same , namely , Groneland , island , and Frisland , ) be long ago find out by certain fisher of the isle of Frisland , drive by tempest upon the shore thereof : and be afterward about the year 1390 discover a new , by one Antonio Zeno a gentleman of Venice ; which sail thither under the conduct of Zichmni king of the say isle of Frisland , a prince in those part of great 464 Nicholas and Antonio Zeno a.d. c . 1380-90 . valour , and renown for his martial exploit and victory . of which expedition of Zichmni there be extant in italian certain collection or abridgement gather by Francisco Marcolino out of the letter of m. Nicolo and Antonio Zeni two gentleman of Venice which live in those part . out of which collection i do add concern the description of Estotiland aforesaid these particular follow . Estotiland ( say he ) abound with all thing necessary for mankind . in the mid thereof stand a exceed high mountain , from which issue four river that moisten all the country . the inhabitant be witty and most expert in all mechanical art . they have a kind of peculiar language and letter . howbeit in this king library be preserve certain latin book , which they understand not , be perhaps leave there not many year before by some Europeans , which traffic thither . they have all kind of metal ; but especial gold , wherewith they mighty abound . they traffic with the people of Groneland : from whence they fetch skin , pitch and brimstone . the inhabitant report that towards the south , there be region abound with gold , and very populous : they have many and huge wood , from whence they take timber for the build of ship and city , whereof and of castle there be great store . the use of the loadstone for navigation be unknown unto they . they make relation also of a certain region towards the south , call Drogio , which Drogio . be inhabit by cannibal , unto who man flesh be delicate meat : whereof be destitute they live by fish , which they use very much . beyond this be large region , and as it be a new world : but the people be barbarous and go naked : howbeit against the cold they cloth themselves in beast skin . Theise have no kind of metal : and they live by hunt . their weapon be certain long staff with sharp point , and bow . they wage war one against another . they have governor , and obey certain law . but from hence seven 465 2 g more towards the south the climate be much more temperate : and there be city , and temple of idol , unto who they sacrifice live man , who flesh they afterward devour . Theise nation have the use of silver and gold . thus much of this tract of land out of the aforesaid collection or abridgement . wherein this also be worthy the observation , that even then our european pilot sail those sea by the help of the loadstone . for concern the use thereof in navigation , i suppose there be not to be find a more ancient testimony . and these thing i have annex the rather unto this table of Mar deal Zur ; consider that none of those author which have write the history of the new world , have in any part of their write , mention one word thereof . hitherto Ortelius . the voyage of m. hoar and diverse other gentleman , to Newfoundland , and cape Briton , in the year 1536 and in the 28 year of king Henry the 8. ne master hoar of London , a man of goodly stature and of great courage , and give to the study of cosmography , in the 28 year of king Henry the 8 and in the year of our lord 1536 encourage diverse gentleman and other , be assist by the king favour and countenance , to accompany he in a voyage of discovery upon the northwest part of America : wherein his persuasion take such effect , that within short space many gentleman of the inn of court , and of the chancery , and diverse other of good worship , desirous to see the strange thing of the world , very willing enter into the action with he , some of who name be as follow : m. week a gentleman of the west country of five hundred mark by the year live . m. Tuck a gentleman of Kent . m. Tuckfield . m. Thomas butt the son of sir William butt knight , of Norfolk , which be late live , and from who mouth i write most of this relation . m. hardy , m. Byron , m. carter , m. Wright , m. rastall sergeant rastal brother , m. Ridley , and diverse other , which all be in the admiral call the Trinity , a ship of seven score ton , wherein m. Hore himself be embark . in the other ship who name be the minion , go a very learned and virtuous gentleman [ three . 130. ] one m. Armigil wade , afterwards clerk of the m. jrmi^l counsel of king Henry the 8 and king Edward the Wadesixth , father to the worshipful m. William wade now clerk of the privy counsel , m. Oliver Dawbeney merchant of London , m. joy afterward gentleman of the king chapel , with diverse other of good account . the island of penguinstand-eth about the latitude of 30. degree . m. Dawbenys report to m. Richard Hakluyt of the temple . they behold the savage of Newfoundland . the english voyage the whole number that go in the two tall ship aforesaid , to wit , the Trinity and the minion , be about six score person , whereof thirty be gentleman , which all we muster in warlike manner at gravesend , and after the receive of the sacrament , they embark themselves in the end of April . 1536. from the time of their set out from Gravesend , they be very long at sea , to wit , above two month , and never touch any land until they come to part of the west Indies about Cape briton , shape their course thence northeastwardes , until they come to the island of Penguin , which be very full of rock and stone , whereon they go and find it full of great fowl white and grey , as big as goose , and they see infinite number of their egg . they drive a great number of the fowl into their boat upon their sail , and take up many of their egg , the fowl they flay and their skin be very like honey comb full of hole be flay off : they dress and eat they and find they to be very good and nourish meat . they see also store of bear both black and white , of who they kill some , and take they for no bad food . m. Oliver Dawbeny , which ( as it be before mention ) be in this voyage , and in the minion , tell m. Richard Hakluyt of the middle temple these thing follow : to wit , that after their arrival ! in Newfoundland , and have be there certain day at anchor , and not have yet see any of the naturali people of the country , the same Dawbeney walk one day on the hatch , spy a boat with savage of those part , row down the bay towards they , to gaze upon the ship and our people , and take view of their come aloof , he call to such as be under the hatch , and will they to come up if they will see the natural people of the country , that they have so long and so much desire to see : whereupon they come up , and take view of the savage row towards they and their ship , and upon the view they man out a ship-boat to meet they and to take they . but they spy our ship-boat make towards they , return with main force and flee into a island that lie up in the bay or river there , and our man pursue they into the island , and the savage flee and escape : but our man find a fire , and the side of a bear on A.D. 1536. a wooden spit leave at the same by the savage that be flee . there in the same place they find a boot of leather garnish on the outward side of the calf with certain brave trade , as it be of raw silk , and also find a certain great warm mitten : and these carry with they , they return to their ship , not find the savage , nor see any thing else beside the soil , and the thing grow in the same , which chief be store of fir and pine tree . and further , the say m. Dawbeny tell he , that lie there they grow into great want of victual , and that there they find small relief , more than that they have from the nest of a osprey , that bring hourly to her young great plenty of diverse sort of fish . but such be the famine that increase among they from extreme day to day , that they be force to seek to relieve famine-themselves of raw herb and root that they seek on the main : but the famine increase , and the relief of herb be to little purpose to satisfy their insatiable hunger , in the field and desert here and there , the fellow kill his mate while he stoop to take up a root for his relief , and cut out piece of his body who he have murder , broil the same on the coal and greedy devour they . by this mean the company decrease , and the officer know not what be become of they ; and it fortune that one of the company drive with hunger to seek abroad for relief find out in the field the savour of oh « r man eat broil flesh , and fall out with one for that he will suffer he and his fellow to starve , enjoy plenty as jor a tn ’ he think : and this matter grow to cruel speech , he that have the broil meat , burst out into these word : if thou will needs know , the broil meat that i have be a piece of such a man buttock . the report of this bring to the ship , the captai ne find what become of those that be miss , and be persuaded that some of they be neither devour with wild beast , nor yet destroy with savage : and thecaptaine hereupon he stand up and make a notable oration , qrati < m . contain , how much these deal offend the almighty , and vouch the scripture from first to last , what God have in case of distress do for they that call upon he , and tell they that the power of the almighty be then no less , than in all former time it have be . And add , that if it have not please God to have help they in that distress , that it have be better to have perish in body , and to have live everlasting , than to have relieve for a poor time their mortal body , and to be condemn everlasting both body and soul to the unquenchable fire of hell . and thus [ three . 131. ] have end to that effect , he begin to exhort to repentance , and beseech all the company to pray , that it may please God to look upon their miserable present state , and for his own mercy to relieve the same . the famine increase , and the inconvenience of the man that be miss be find , they agree among themselves rather then all shall perish , to cast lot who the english shall be kill : and such be the mercy of God , that ’french shit t^e same arrive a french ship in that port , wherein they we^ furnish with victual , and such be the policy of retumedhome . the english , that they become master of the same , and change ship and vittail they , they set sail to come into England . in their journey they be so far northwards , that they see mighty island of ice in the summer season , on hawk and which be hawk and other fowl to rest themselves otherfoule . be ; hang weary of fly over far from the main . they see also certain great white fowl with red bill and red 6 leg , somewhat big than herons , which they suppose fowl sup-to be stork . they arrive at saint Ives in Cornwall be about the end of October . from thence they depart sores‘ unto a certain castle belong to sir John Luttrell , where m. Thomas butt , and m. rastall and other gentleman of the voyage be very friendly entertain : after that they come to the earl of bath at bath , and thence to Bristol , so to London . m. butt be so change in the voyage with hunger and misery , that sir William his father and my lady his mother know he not to be their son , until they find a secret mark which be a wart upon one of his knee , as he tell i Richard Hakluyt of Oxford himself , to who i ride 200. mile only to learn the whole truth of this voyage from his own mouth , as be the only man now alive that be in this discovery . certain month after , those Frenchmen come into England , and make complaint to king Henry the 8 : the king cause the matter to be examine , and find the great distress of his subject , and the cause of the deal so with the french , be so move with pity , that he punish not his subject , but of his own purse make full and royal recompense unto the french . in this distress of famine , the english do somewhat relieve their vital spirit , by drink at the spring the fresh water out of certain wooden cup , out of which they have drink their aqua composita before . the french royal recommence by king Henry the 8. the second chapter show , that it be lawful and necessary to trade and traffic with the savage : and to plant in their country : and divide plant into two sort . a nd first for traffic , i say that the Christians may lawful travel into those country and abide there : who the savage may not just impugn and forbid in respect of the mutual society and fellowship between man and man prescribe by the law of nation . for from the first beginning of the creation of the world , and from the renew of the same after Noes flood , all man have agree , that no violence shall be offer to ambassador : that the sea with his haven shall be common : that such as shall fortune to be take in war , shall be servant or slave : and that stranger shall not be drive away from the place or country whereunto they do come . if it be so then , i demand in what age , and by what law be the same forbid or deny since ? for who doubt but that it be lawful for christian to use trade and traffic with infidel or savage , carry thither such commodity as they want , and bring from thence some part of their plenty ? a thing so common and general practise , both in these our day , and in time past , beyond the memory of man , both by Christians and infidel , that it need no further proof . vni 97 g the principali cause why this voyage be undertake . [ Iii . 169. ] the english voyage and forasmuch as the use of trade and traffic ( be it never so profitable ) ought not to be prefer before the plant of Christian faith : i will therefore somewhat entreat of plant , ( without which , Christian religion can take no root , be the preacher never so careful and diligent ) which i mean to divide into two sort . the first , when Christians by the good like and will assent of the savage , be admit by they to quiet possession . the second , when Christians be unjust repulse , do seek to attain and maintain the right for which they do come . and though in regard of the establishment of christian religion , either of both may be lawful and just exercise : ( whereof many example may be find , as well in the time of Moses and Josua , and other ruler before the birth of Christ , as of many virtuous emperor and king sithence his incarnation : ) yet do i wish , that before the second be put in practice , a proof may be make of the first , save that for their safety as well against the savage , as all other foreign enemy , they shall first well and strong fortify themselves : which be do , then by all fair speech , and every other good mean of persuasion to seek to take away all occasion of offence . as let they to understand , how they come not to their hurt , but for their good , and to no other end , but to dwell peaceable among they , and to trade and traffic with they for their own commodity , without molest or grieve they any way : which must not be do by word only but also by deed . for albeit , to maintain right and repel injury , be a just cause of war : yet must there hereof be heedful care have , that whereas the savage be fearful by nature , and fond otherwise , the Christians shall do their best endeavour to take away such fear as may grow unto they by reason of their strange apparel , armour , and weapon , or such like , by quiet and peaceable conversation , 98 and let they live in security , and keep a measure of blameless defence , with as little discommodity to the savage as may be : for this kind of war will be only defensive and not offensive . and questionless there be great hope and likelihood , that by this kind of mean we shall bring to pass all effect to our desire purpose : consider that all creature , by constitution of nature , be render more tractable and easy win for all assay , by courtesy and mildness , then by cruelty or roughness : and therefore be a principle teach we by naturali reason , it be first to be put in ure . for albeit as yet the Christians be not so thorough furnish with the perfectness of their language , either to express their mind to they , or again to conceive the savage intent : yet for the present opportunity , such policy may be use by friendly sign , and courteous token towards they , as the savage may easy perceive ( be their sense never so gross ) a assure friendship to be offer they , and that they be encounter with such a nation , as bring they benefit , commodity , peace , tranquillity and safety . to further this , and to accomplish it in deed , there must be present unto they gratis , some kind of our petty merchandize and trifle : as look glass , bell , bead , bracelet , chain , or collar of bugle , crystal , amber , jet , or glass etc for such be the thing , though to we of small value , yet account by they of high price and estimation : and soon will induce their barbarous nature to a like and a mutual society with we . Moreover , it shall be requisite either by speech , if it be possible , either by some other certain mean , to signify unto they , that once league of friendship with all love conversation be admit between the Christians and they : that than the christian from thenceforth will always be ready with force of arm to assist and defend they in their just quarrel , from all invasion , spoil and oppression offer they by any tyrant , [ in . 170. ] the second kind of plant mg. the english voyage adversary , or their next borderer : and a benefit be so much the more to be esteem , by how much the person upon who it be bestow stand in need thereof . for it appear by the relation of a countryman of we , namely David Ingram , ( who travel in those country xi . month and more ) that the savage general for the most part , be at continual war with their next adjoin neighbour , and especial the cannibal , be a cruel kind of people , who food be man flesh , and have tooth like dog , and do pursue they with ravenous mind to eat their flesh , and devour they . and it be not to be doubt , but that the Christians may in this case just and lawful aid the savage against the cannibal . so that it be very likely , that by this mean we shall not only mighty stir and inflame their rude mind glad to embrace the love company of the christian , proffer unto they both commodity , succour , and kindness : but also by their frank consent shall easy enjoy such competent quantity of land , as every way shall be correspondent to the christian expectation and contentation , consider the great abundance that they have of land , and how small account they make thereof , take no other fruit thereby then such as the ground of it self do natural yield . and thus much concern the first sort of plant , which as i assure hope , so i most hearty pray may take effect and place . but if after these good and fair mean use , the savage nevertheless will not be herewithal satisfy , but barbarous will go about to practise violence either in repel the christian from their port and safelanding , or in withstand they afterward to enjoy the right for which both painful and lawful they have adventure themselves thither : then in such a case i hold it no breach of equity for the Christians to defend themselves , to pursue revenge with force , and to do whatsoever be necessary for the attain of their safety : for it be allowable by all law in such distress , to resist violence with violence : and 100 for their moor security to increase their strength by building of fort for avoid the extremity of injurious deal . wherein if also they shall not be suffer in reasonable quietness to continue , there be no bar ( as i judge ) but that in stout assembly the Christians may issue out , and by strong hand pursue their enemy , subdue they , take possession of their town , city , or village , and ( in avoid murderous tyrannic ) to use the law of arm , as in like case among all nation at this day be use : and most especial to the end they may with security hold their lawful possession , lest happy after the departure of the christian , such savage as have be convert , shall afterward through compulsion and enforcement of their wicked ruler , return to their horrible idolatry ( as do the child of Israel , after the decease of Joshua ) and continue their wicked custom of most unnatural sacrifice of humane creature . and in so do , doubtless the Christians shall no whit at all transgress the bond of equity or civility , forasmuch as in former age , ( yea , before the incarnation of Christ ) the like have be do by sundry king and prince , governor of the child of Israel : chief in respect to begin their plant , for the establishment of God word : as also since the nativity of Christ , mighty and puissant emperor and king have perform the like , i say to plant , possess , and subdue . for proof whereof , i will allege you example of both kind . we read in the old testament , how that after Noes flood be cease , restauration of mankind begin only of those few of Noes child and family as be by God preelect to be save in the ark with he , who seed in process of time , be multiply to infinite number of nation , which in diverse sort divide themselves to sundry quarter of the earth . and forasmuch as all their posterity be mighty increase , follow not the perfect life of Noe their predecessor , God choose out of the multitude a peculiar people to himself , to who after - ioi ward be under the government of Moses in mount Sinai , he make a grant to inherit the land of Canaan , call the land of promise , with all the other rich and fertile country next adjoin thereunto . nevertheless , before they come to possession thereof , have be afflict with many grievous punishment and plague for their sin , they fall in despair to enjoy the same . but be encourage and comfort by their ruler , ( man of God ) they proceed , arm themselves with all patience , to suffer whatsoever it shall please God to send : and at last attain to the land , they be encounter with great number of strong people , and mighty king . Josua 4. notwithstanding , Josua their leader replenish with the spirit of God , be assure of the justness of his quarrel , gather the chief strength of the child of Israel together , to the number of 40000. with who he safe pass the huge river Jordan , and have before Josua 6. scent privy spy for the discovery of the famous city Jerico , to understand the certainty of the citizen estate , he forthwith come thither , and environ it round about with his whole power the space of seven day . in which respite , perceive none of the gentile dispose to yield or call for mercy , he then command ( as God before have appoint ) that both the city Jerico shall be burn , yea , and all the inhabitant , as well old as young , with all their cattle shall be destroy , only except Rahab , her kindred and family , because she before have hide secret the messenger of Josua , that be send thither as spy . as for all their gold , silver , precious stone , or vessel of brass , they be reserve and consecrate to the lord treasury . Josua 8. in like manner he burn the city hay , slay the inhabitant thereof , and hang up their king . but for so much as the gebionite ( fear the like event ) send Josua 9 ambassador unto Josua to entreat for grace , favour , and peace : he command that all their life shall be save , and that they shall be admit to the come - 102 pany of the child of Israel . yet understand afterward they wrought this by a policy , he use they as drudge to hew wood and to carry water , and other necessary for his people . thus begin this valiant captain his conquest , which he pursue and never leave [ three . 171. ] till he have subdue all the Hethites , Amorites , Cananite , Judg. 11.13 . Peresites , h evite , and Jebusites , with all their prince and king , be thirty and one in number , and diverse other strange nation , beside who land and dominion he whole divide among God people . after that Josua be decease , Juda be constitute lord over the army , who receive like charge from God , pursue the proceed of the holy captain Josua , and utter vanquish many gentile , idolater , and adversary to the child of Israel , with all such ruler or king as withstand he , and namely Adonibezek the Judg. 1. most cruel tyrant : who thumb and great toe he cause to be cut off , for so much as he have do the like before unto seventie king , who be his prisoner , he force to gather up their victual underneath his table . in this God show his justice to revenge tyrannic . we read likewise , that Gideon a most puissant and noble warrior so behave himself in follow the worthy act of Josua and Juda , that in short time he not only deliver the child of Israel from the hand of the multitude of the fierce madianite , but also subdue they and their tyrant , who land he cause God people to possess and inherit . i can recite diverse other place out of the scripture , which apt may be apply hereunto , be it not i do endeavour my self by all mean to be brief . now in like manner will i allege some few induction out of the authentical write of the ecclesiastical historiographer , all tend to the like argument . and first to begin withal , we do read : that after our saviour Jesus Christ have suffer his passion , the apostle be inspire with the holy ghost , and the knowledge of all strange language , do immediate disperse themselves to 103 a gpodnotefinal conqueror to be mercifiull . Judg. 6. 7. ad . the english voyage 1583 - sundry part of the world , to the preach of the gospel . yet not in so generali a manner , but that there remain some far remote country unvisited by they , among the which it be report that India the great , call the uttermost India , as yet have receive no light of the word . ruffinuslib . i . but it come to pass , that one Metrodorus a very learned ca ? ' 9 - and wise philosopher in that age , be desirous to search out unknown land , do first discover the same , find it wonderful populous and rich , which upon his return be publish , and for certain understand , there be another grave philosopher of Tyrus call Meropius , be a christian , who do resolve himself ( follow the example of Metrodorus ) to travail thither , and in a short time assist but with a few , in a small vessel arrive there , have in his company two young youth , Edesius and Frumentius , who ( be his scholar ) he have thorough instruct both in liberali science , and christian religion . now after that Meropius somewhile stay there , have ( as he think ) sufficient understanding of the Indians whole estate : he determine to depart , and to bring notice thereof unto the emperor , who he mean to exhort to the conquest of the same . but by misfortune he be prevent , for be in the midst of his course on the sea homeward , a sore tempest arise , and perforce drive he back again , to a unknown port of the say land : where he by the Meropius most cruel barbarous Indians on the sudden be slay slay . with all his company , except the two young scholar aforesay , who the barbarous Indians , by reason they be of comely stature and beautiful personage , take , Edesius and and forthwith present they to their king and queen : frumentius which both be very well like of , the king courteous entreat , and ordain Edesius to be his butler , and the Indians . „ : , . „ ... r ’ - Frumentius his becretarie , and in rue year by reason or their learning and civil government , they be have in great favour , honour , and estimation with the prince . but the king depart this life , leave the queen his 104 wife with her young son to govern , and give free scope and liberty to the two Christians , at their best pleasure to pass to their native soil , allow they all necessary for the same . yet the queen who high favour they be very sorrowful they shall depart , and therefore most earnest entreat they to tarry and assist she in the government of her people , till such time as her young son grow to ripe year , which request they fulfil . and Frumentius excel Edesius far in all wisdom , rule both the queen and her subject at his discretion , whereby he take occasion to put in practise privy , that the foundation of christian religion may be plant in the heart of such as with who he think his persuasion may best prevail , and that soon will give ear unto he : which be bring to pass accord , he then with his fellow Edesius take leave of the queen to return to his native country . and so soon as he be arrive there , he reveal to the emperor Constantine , the effect of all those event : who both commend his deed and whole allow thereof , by the advice and good like of Athanasius then bishop of Alexandria , do arm and set forth a convenient power for the aid of Frumentius , in this his so godly a purpose . and by this mean come the emperor afterward by fair promise , and by force of histone , testi-arme together , unto the possession of all the Indians fi how that country . the author of this story Ruffinus receive c°nstantl ™ the truth hereof from the very mouth of Edesius come - eniarge his panion to Frumentius . dominion by moreover Eusebius in his historic ecclesiastical ! in subdue of infidel and idolatrous nation . Eusebius deavour by all mean to subject all such remote hib . i . de vita barbarous and heathen nation , as then inhabit the C^‘ four quarter of the world . for ( as it be write ) the eod . emperor thorough aid with a puissant army of lib . cap . 39 Frumentius in great favour with you queen of the Indians . a other great work of God begin by a man ofmeane birth . Ruffinus the author of this story . [ Iii . 172. ] Euseb. in his ecclesiastical precise term , and in diverse place make mention how Constantine the great not only enlarge his empire bv the subdue of his next neighbour , but also en - 105 valiant soldier who he have before persuade to christian religion , in proper person himself come even unto this our country of England , then call the island of Britain , bend from he full west , which he whole conquer , make tributary , and settle therein Christian faith , and leave behind he such ruler thereof , as to his wisdom seem best . from thence he turn his force towards the north coast of the world , and there utter subdue the rude and cruel nation of the scythian , whereof part by friendly persuasion , part by main strength , he reduce the whole to Christian faith . afterwards he determine with himself to search out what strange people inhabit in the uttermost part of the south . and with great hazard and labour , make his journey thither , at last become victor over they all , even to the country of the blemmyans , and the remote . / ethiopian , that now be the people of presbyter John , who yet till this day continue and bear the name of Christians . in the east likewise , what nation soever at that time he can have notice of , he easy win and bring in subjection to the empire . so that to conclude , there be no region in any part of the world , the inhabitant whereof be Gentiles , though unknown unto he , but in time he overcome and vanquish . this worthy beginning of Constantine , both his son succeed his room , and also diverse other emperors afterward to their uttermost endeavour follow and continue , which all the book of Eusebius moor Theodoret in at large set forth . Theodoretus likewise in his eccle-eccle . lib . 5. siasticall history make mention how Theodosius the caf . 20. virtuous emperor employ earnest all his time , as well in conquer the gentile to the knowledge of the holy gospel , utter subvert their profane temple and abominable idolatry , as also in extinguish of such Theodoretus usurp^ns tyrant as with paganism withstand the plant-cap°^e . eodern king of christian religion . after ’ who decease his lib . son Honorius and Arcadius be create emperor , 106 1583. the one of the east , the other of the west , who with all stout godliness most careful imitate the forestep of their father , either in enlarge their territory , or increase the christian flock . Moreover , it be report by the say author , that Theodosius junior the emperor , no whit inferior in virtuous life to any of the above name prince , with great study and zeal pursue and prosecute the gentile , subdue their tyrant and country , and utter destroy all their idolatry , convert their soul to acknowledge their only Messiah and creator , and their country to the enlargement of the empire . to be brief , who so list to read Eusebius Pamphilus , Socrates Scholasticus , Theodoritus , Hermia , sozoman , and Euagrius Scholasticus , which all be most sage ecclesiastical ! writer , shall find great store of example of the worthy life of sundry emperor , tend all to the confirmation of my former speech . and for like example of late time , ( yea even in the memory of man ) i shall not need to recite any other than the conquest make of the west and east Indies by the king of Spain and Portugal ! , whereof there be particular mention make in the last chapter of this book . herein have i use more copy of example then otherwise i will have do , save that i have be in pl^ce , where this manner of plant the christian faith have be think of some to be scarce lawful , yea , such as do take upon they to be more than mean learn . to these example can encage join many more , but whosoever be not satisfy with these few , may satisfy himself in read at large the author last above recite . thus have i ( as i trust ) prove that we may just trade and traffic with the savage , and lawful plant and inhabit their country . the sixth chapter show that the traffic and plant in those country , shall be unto the savage themselves very beneficial and gainful . now to the end it may appear that this voyage be not undertake altogether for the peculiar commodity of our self and our country ( as general other trade and journey be ) it shall fall out in proof , that the savage shall hereby have just cause to bless the hour when this enterprise be undertake . First and chief , in respect of the most happy and gladsome tiding of the most glorious gospel of our saviour Jesus Christ , whereby they may be bring from falsehood to truth , from darkness to light , from the high way of death to the path of life , from superstitious idolatry to sincere Christianity , from the devil to Christ , from hell to heaven . and if in respect of all the commodity they can yield we ( be they many more ) that they shall but receive this only benefit of Christianity , they be more than full recompense . but hereunto it may be object , that the gospel must be free preach , for such be the example of the apostle : unto who although the authority and example before allege of emperor , king and prince , aswell before Christ time as since , may sufficient satisfy : yet for further answer , we may say with saint Paul , if we have sow unto you heavenly thing , do you think it much that we shall reap your carnali thing ? and withal , the workman be worthy of his hire . Theise heavenly tiding which those labourer our countryman ( as messenger of god great goodness and mercy ) will voluntary present unto they , do far exceed their earthly riches . Moreover , if the other inferiout worldly and temporali thing which they shall receive from we , be weigh in equal balance , i assure my self , that by equal judgement of any indiff - ” 9 Corinth . 9 This barge can be unjust , where both party be gainer . the english voyage ent person , the benefit which they then receive , shall tarre surmount those which they shall depart withal unto we . and admit that they have ( as they have not ) the knowledge to put their land to some use : yet be bring from brutish ignorance to civility and knowledge , and make then to understand how the ten part of their land may be so manure and employ , as it may yield more commodity to the necessary use of man life , than the whole now do : what just cause of complaint may they have ? and in my private opinion , i do very think that God do create land , to the end that it shall by culture and husbandry yield thing necessary for man life . but this be not all the benefit which they shall receive by the Christians : for , over and beside the knowledge how to till and dress their ground , they ' shall be reduce from unseemly custom to honest manner , from disorder riotous rout and company to a well govern common wealth , and withal , shall teach mechanical occupation , art , and liberali science : and which stand they most upon , they shall|be defend from the cruelty of their tyrannical ! and blood suck neighbour the cannibal , whereby infinite number of their life shall|be preserve . and last , by this mean many of their poor innocent child shall be preserve from the bloody knife of the sacrificer , a most horrible and detestable custom in the sight of God and man , now and ever heretofore use among they . many other thing can i here allege to this purpose , be it not that i do fear lest i have already more than half tire the reader . the seven chapter show that the plant there , be not a matter of such charge or difficulty , as many will make it seem to be . now therefore for proof , that the plant in these part be a thing that may be do without the aid of the prince power and purse , contrary to the allega-120 cion of many malicious person , who will neither be actor in any good action themselves , nor so much as afford a good word to the set forward thereof : and that worse be , they will take upon they to make molehill seem mountain , and fly elephant , to the end they may discourage other , that be very well or indifferent affect to the matter , be like unto Esop dog , which neither will eat hay himself , nor suffer the poor hungry ass to feed thereon : i say and affirm that God have provide such mean for the furtherance of this enterprise , as do stand we in stead of great treasure : for first by reason that it have please God of his great goodness , of long time to hold his merciful hand over this realm , in preserve the people of the same , both from slaughter by the sword , and great death by plague , pestilence , or otherwise , there be at this day great number ( god he know ) which live in such penury and want , as they can be content to hazard their life , and to serve one year for meat , drink and apparel only , without wage , in hope thereby to amend their estate : which be a matter in such like journey , of no small charge to the prince . Moreover , thing in the like journey of great price and cost as victuali ( whereof there be great plenty to be have in that country without money ) and powder , great artillery , or corselet be not needful in so plentiful and chargeable manner , as the show of such a journey may present : for a small quantity of all these , to furnish the fort only , will suffice until such time as diverse commodity may be find out in those part , which may be think well worthy a great charge . also the peculiar benefit of archer which God have bless this land withal before all other nation , will stand we in great stead among those naked people . another help we have also , which in such like case be a matter of marvellous cost , and will be in this journey procure very easy ( that be to say ) to transport yearly 121 [ three . i78 . i aswell our people , as all other necessary needful for they into those part by the fleet of merchant , that yearly venture for fish in newfoundland , be not far distant from the country mean to be inhabit , who common go with empty vessel in effect , save some little fraught with salt . and thus it appear that the soldier wage , and the transportation may be defray for far less sum of money than the detractor of this enterprise have give out . again , this intend voyage for conquest , have in like manner many other singular privilege wherewith God have , as it be , with his holy hand bless the same before all other . for after once we be depart the coast of England , we may pass straightway thither , without danger of be drive into any the country of our enemy , or doubtful friend : for common one wind serve to bring we thither , which seidome fail from the middle of Januarie to the middle of may , a benefit which the mariner make great account of , for it be a pleasure that they have in a few or none of other journey . also the passage be short , for we may go thither in thirty or forty day at the most , have but a indifferent wind , and return continual in twenty or four and twenty day at the most . and in the same our journey , by reason it be in the ocean , and quite out of the way from the intercourse of other countries , we may safe trade and traffic without peril of piracy : neither shall our ship , people , or good there , be subject to arrest or molestation of any pagan potentate , turkish tyrant , yea , or christian prince , which heretofore sometime upon slender occasion in other part have stay our ship and merchandize , whereby great number of our countryman have be utter undo , diverse put to ransom , yea , and some lose their life : a thing so fresh in memory as it need no proof , and be well worthy of consideration . beside , in this voyage we do not cross the burn line , whereby common both beverage and victuali be 122 corrupt , and man health very much impair , neither do we pass the freeze sea , which yield sundry extreme danger : but have a temperate climate at all time of the year , to serve our turn . and last , there need no delay by the way for take in of fresh water and fuel , ( a thing usual do in long journey ) because , as i say above , the voyage be not long , and the fresh water take in there , our man here in England at their return home have find so wholesome and sweet , that they have make choice to drink it before our beer and ale . behold here , good countryman , the manifold benefit , commodity and pleasure heretofore unknown , by God especial blessing not only reveal unto we , but also as it be infuse into our bosom , who though hitherto like dormouse have slumber in ignorance thereof , be like the cat that be loath for their prey to wet their foot : yet if now therefore at the last we will awake , and with willing mind ( set frivolous imagination aside ) become industrious instrument to our self , questio nlesse we shall not only hereby set forth the glory of our heavenly father , but also easy attain to the end of all good purpose that may be wish or desire . and may it not much encourage we to hope for good success in the country of these savage , be a naked kind of people , void of the knowledge of the discipline of war , see that a noble man , be but a subject in this realm ( in the time of our king Henry the second ) by name Strangbow , than earl of Chepstow in south wale , by himself and his ally and assistant , at their own proper charge pass over into Ireland , and there make conquest of the now country , and then kingdom of Lynester , at which time it be very populous and strong , which history our own chronicle do witness ? and why shall we be dismay more than be the Spaniard , who have be able within these few year to conquer , possess and enjoy so large a 123 2. Decad. lib . ^ . fol . 77. of the west Indies , in english . Cano a be a kind of boat . 3. Decad. lib . 1. folio 97. about the year of our lord 1511. conquest of the west Indies , folio 43. and 45. English . the english voyage tract of the earth , in the west Indies , as be between the two tropics of cancer and Capricorn , not only in the main firm land of America , which be 47. degree in latitude from south to north , and do contain 2820. English mile at the least , that the king of Spain have there in actuali possession , beside many goodly and rich island , as Hispaniola , now call saint Domingo , Cuba , Jamaica , and diverse other , which be both beautiful and full of treasure , not speak any whit at all , how large the say land be from east to west , which in some place be account to be 1500. English mile at the least from east to west , between the one sea and the other . or why shall our noble nation be dismay , more than be Vasques nun de Valboa , a private gentleman of Spain , who with the number of 70. Spaniards at Tichiri , give a overthrow unto that mighty king Chemaccus , have a army of a hundred canoas and 5000. man , and the say Vasques nun not long after , with his small number , do put to flight king chiape his whole army . likewise Hernando Cortes , be also but a private gentleman of Spain , after his departure from the island of Cuba and Acuzamil , and enter into the firm of America , have many most victorious and triumphant conquest , as that at Cyntla , where be accompany with less than 500 Spanish footman , thirteen horseman and six piece of ordinance only , he overthrow 40000. Indians . the same Cortes with his say number of Spaniard , take prisoner that mighty emperor Mutezuma in his most chief and famous city of Mexico , which at that instant have in it above the number of 50000. Indians at the least , and in short time after obtain not only the quiet possession of the say city , but also of his whole empire . and in like manner in the country of Peru , which the king of Spain have now in actuali possession , Francisco Pysarro , with the only aid of Diego de Almagro , 124 and Hernando Luche , be all three but private gentleman , be the principali person that first attempt discovery and conquest of the large and rich country of Peru , which through the aid of the almighty , he bring to pass and achieve in the tambo of caxa-malca , ( which be a large place of ground , enclose with wall ) in which place he take the great and mighty prince Atabalipa prisoner , amid the number of 60000. Indians his subject , which be ever before that day account to be a warlike kind of people , which his great victory it please God to grant unto he in the marvellous year of our lord God 1533. he not have in his victorie-company above the number of 210. Spaniard , whereof there be not pass threescore horseman in all : after the take of which prince Atabalipa , he offer unto Pyzarro for his ransom , to fill a great large hall full of gold and silver , and such gold and silver vessel as they then use , even as high as a man may reach with his arm . and the say prince cause the same hall to be mark round about at the say height , which ransom Pyzarro grant to accept . and after , when as this mighty prince have send to his vassal and subject to bring in gold and silver for the fill of the hall , as aforesaid , as namely to the city or town of Quito , Paciacama and Cusco , as also to the Calao of Lima , in which town , as their own writer do affirm , they find a large and fair house , all slate and cover with gold : and when as the say hall be not yet a quarter full , a mutiny arise among the Spaniard , in which it be common give out , that the say prince have politic offer this great ransom under pretence to raise a much more mighty power , whereby the Spaniard shall be take , slay and overthrow : whereupon they grow to this resolution , to put the say prince to death , and to make partition of the gold and silver already bring in , which they present put in execution . And come to make perfect inventory of the same , as well for the emperor than king of 125 Spain , his five part , as otherwise , there be find to be already bring in into the say hall , the number of 132425. pound weight of silver , and in gold the number of 1828125. pezo , which be a riches never before that nor since see of any man together , of which there do appertain to the emperor for his five part of gold 365625. pezo , and for his five part of silver 26485. pound weight , and to every horseman eight thousand pezo of gold , and 67. pound weight of silver . Every soldier have 4550. pezo of gold and 280. pound weight of silver . Every captain have some 30000. some 20000 pezo of gold and silver , proportional answerable to their degree and call , accord to the rate agree upon among they . Francis Pizarro as their generali , accord to his decree and call proportional , have more than any of the rest , over and beside the massy table of gold which Atabalipa have in his litter , which weigh 25000. pezo of gold : never be there before that day soldier so rich in so small a time , and with so little danger . and in this journey for want of iron , they do shoe their horse , some with gold , and some with silver . this be to be see in the generali history of the west Indies , where as the do of Pizarro , and the conquest of Peru be more at large set forth . to this may i add the great discovery and conquest which the prince of Portugal have make round about the west , the south , and the east part of Africa , and also at calicut , and in the east Indies , and in America , at Brasile and elsewhere in sundry island , in fortify , people and plant all along the say coast and island , ever as they discover : which be right weigh and consider , do minister just cause of encouragement to our countryman , not to account it so hard and difficult a thing for the subject of this noble realm of England , to discover , people , plant and possess the like goodly land and rich country not far from we , but near adjoin 8c offer themselves unto we 126 ( as be aforesaid ) which have never yet heretofore be in the actuali possession of any other christian prince , than the prince of this realm . all which ( as i think ) shall not a little animate and encourage we to look out and adventure abroad , understand what large country and island the Portugal with their small number have within these few year discover , people and plant , some part whereof i have think it not amiss , brief in particular to name both the town , country and island , so near as i can upon the sudden call they to remembrance : for the rest i do refer the reader to the history , where more at large the same be to be see . first , they do win and conquer from the prince of Barbary the island of Geisera and town of Arzila , not past a 140. mile distant from their metropolitan and chief city of Fesse : and after that they win also from the say prince the town of Tanger , Ceuta , Mazigam , Azamor , and azaffi , all alongst the sea coast . and in the year of our lord , 1455. Alouis de Cadomosta a gentleman venetian , be he that first discover for their use cape Verd , with the island adjoin , of which he then people and plant those of Bonavista and Sant Iago discover also the river Senega , otherwise call Niger , and cape Roxo and Sierra Leone , and in a few year after they do discover the coast of Guinea , and there people and build the castle of Mina : then discover they further to the country of melegette , Benin , and Congo , with the hand of Principe , da Nobon , saint Matthew , and saint Thomas under the equinoctial line , which they people , and build in the say island of S. Thomas the haven town or port of Pavosan . after that , about the year of our lord , 1494. one Bartholomew Dias be send forth , who be the first man that discover and double that great and large cape call de bon Esperanze , 8c pass the current that run upon the say coast , on the southeast part of Africa , between the say main land 8c the island of S. Laurence , otherwise call of the ancient , madam - 127 Ceffala accomt to be the place where the noble and wise king Salomon do fetch his gold . the english voyage gascar , he discover to you harbour name the river of the infant . after that since the year of our lord God , 1497. and before the full accomplishment of the year of Christ , 1510. through the travail and discovery of Vasques de Gama , Peter Alvares , Thomas Lopes , Andrew Corsale , John de Empoli , Peter Sintra , Sancho de Toar , and that noble and worthy gentleman Alonzo de Albuquerque , they do discover , people , and plant at Ceffala , be upon the east side of Africa , in the twenty degree of latitude of the south pole , and direct west from the hand of S. Laurence ( at which port of Ceffala , diverse do affirm that king Salomon do fetch his gold ) as also upon the say east side of Africa , they do afterward discover , people , and plant at Mozambique , Quiola , Monbaza , and melinde , two degree of southerly latitude , and so up to the strait of Babel-Mandell at the enter of the red sea , all upon the east coast of Africa , from whence they put off - at the cape of guarda fu , and past the great gulf of Arabia , and the indian sea east to Sinus Persicus , and the island of ormus , and so pass the large and great river Indus , where he have his fall into the main ocean , in 23. degree and a half , under the tropic of cancer , of septentrionali latitude , they make their course again direct towards the south , and begin to discover , people , and plant upon the west side of the hither India at goa , mangalor , Cananor , Calecut and Cochin , and the island of Zeilarn . and here i think good to remember to you , that after their plant upon this coast , their force grow so great that they be able to compel all the moor , the subject of the mighty emperor of the Turk to pay tribute unto they , ever as they pass the gulf of Arabia , from the port of Mecca in Arabia fcelix , where Mahomet lie bury , or any of the other port of the say land , ever as they pass to and from the haven of Cochin , Calecut and Cananor , and by their martial manner of discipline practise in those part , the great 128 and mighty prince the sophy emperor of the persian , and profess enemy to the Turk , come to the knowledge and use of the caliver shoot , and to interlace and join footman with his horseman , si thence which time the persian have grow to that strength and force , that they have give many mighty and great overthrow to the Turk , to the great quiet of all Christendom . and from the island of Zeilarn aforesaid , they also discover more east in pass the gulf of Bengala , and so pass the notable and famous river of Ganges , where he have his fall into the main ocean , under the tropic of cancer , and to the cape of Malaca , and unto the great and large island of Sumatra , Java major , Java minor , Mindanao , Palobane , celebe , Gilolo , Tidore , Mathin , Borneo , Machian , terenate , and all other [ three . 181. ] the island of Molucques and spicery , and so east alongst the coast of Cathaia , to the port of China , these be the Zaiton and Quinsay , and to the island of Zipango and Japan , situate in the east , in 37. degree of septentrionali from England . latitude and in 195. of longitude . these be their at these noble and worthy discovery . here also be not to be island have forget , that in the year of our lord , 1501. that famous and worthy gentleman Americus Vespucius do the ’ discover , people , and plant to their use the hold and fame of the fort which they have in Brasill , of who ( he be queen most but a private gentleman ) the whole country or firm efce^ent Maland of the west Indies , be common call and know ™ by the name of America . i do great doubt lest i seem over tedious in the recital of the particular discovery and conquest of the east and west Indies , wherein i be the more bold to urge the patience of the reader , to the end it may most manifest and at large appear , to all such as be not acquaint with the history , how the king of Portugal , who country for popularity and number of people , be scarce comparable to some three shire of England , and the king of Spain likewise , who natural country do not great abound with people , both vin 129 i which prince by mean of their discovery within less than 90. year past , have as it appear both mighty and marvellous enlarge their territory and dominion through their own industry by the assistance of the omnipotent , who aid we shall not need to doubt , see the cause and quarrel which we take in hand tend to his honour and glory , by the enlargement of the christian faith . to conclude , since by christian duty we stand bind chief to further all such act as do tend to the increase the true flock of Christ by reduce into the right way those lose sheep which be yet astray : and that we shall therein follow the example of our right virtuous predecessor of renown memory , and leave unto our posterity a divine memoriali of so godly a enterprise : let we i say for the consideration allege , enter into judgement with our self , whether this action may belong to we or not , the rather for that this voyage through the mighty assistance of the omnipotent God , shall take our desire effect ( whereof there be no just cause of doubt . ) then shall her majesty dominion be enlarge , her highness ancient title just confirm , all odious idleness from this our realm utter banish , diverse decay town repair , and many poor and needy person relieve , and estate of such as now live in want shall be embetter , the ignorant and barbarous idolater teach to know Christ , the innocent defend from their bloody tyrannical neighbour , the diabolical custom of sacrifice humane creature abolish . all which ( no man doubt ) be thing grateful in the sight of our saviour Christ , and tend to the honour and glory of the Trinity . bee of good cheer therefore , for he that can err have say : that before the end of the world , his word shall be preach to all nation , which good work i trust be reserve for our nation to accomplish in these part : wherefore my dear countryman , be not dismay : 13° for the power of God be nothing diminish , nor the love that he have to the preach and plant of the gospel any whit abate . shall we then doubt he will be less ready most mighty and miraculous to assist our nation in this quarrel , which be chief and principal undertake for the enlargement of the christian faith abroad , and the banishment of idleness at home , than he be to Columbus , Vasques , nun , Hernando Cortes , and Francis Pizarro in the west : and Vasques de Gama , Peter Alvares , and Alonso de Albuquerque in the east ? let we therefore with cheerful mind and courageous heart , give the attempt , and leave the sequel to almighty God : for if he be on our part , what force it who bee against we ? thus leave the correction and reformation unto the gentle reader , whatsoever be in this treatise too much or too little , otherwise unperfect , i take leave , and so end . [ Iii . 194. ] the voyage of the grace of Bristol of m. rice Jones , a bark of thirty five ton , up into the bay of saint Laurence to the northwest of Newefoundland , as far as the isle of Assumption or Natiscotec , for the barb or fynne of whale and train oil , make by Silvester Wyet , shipmaster of Bristol . i depart with the aforesaid bark man with twelve man for the place aforesaid from ----- Bristol the 4 of April 1594. and fall with cape d’espere on the coast of Newefoundland the nineten of may in the height of 47. we go thence for cape Raz , be distant from thence 18 or 19 league , the very same day . 162 * 594-the 20. day we be thwart of cape Raz . cape Raz . than we set our course northwest for cape S. marie , cape S. which be distant from cape Raz 19 league , and be on the Marie-Eastside of the great bay of Placentia almost at the entry thereof . from thence we shape our course for the island of S. Pedro pass by the break island of the martyer : the island of and when we be thwart of the say isle of the martyer the martym-our course to the isle of S. Pedro be west and by the isle of north . in these isle of S. Pedro there be a fair harbour , s - Peter ' which we go into with our bark , and find there 2 ship of Sibiburo fish for cod : where we stay 2 day , and take in bale for our ship . there be as fair and tall fir tree grow therein , as in any other part of Newfoundland . than we depart thence , and as we come out of the harbour mouth we lay the ship upon the lee , and in 2 hour space we take with our hook 3 or 4 hundred great cod for our provision of our ship . than we depart from the isle of S. Pedro to enter into the gulf of saint Laurence between cape Briton and the say isle , and set our course west north west , and fall with cape de Rey which we find to be distant from cape de Rey. the isle of S. Pedro 42 league . from cape de Rey to cape de Angullie we set our course northnorthwest be cape the an-distant thence 12 or 13 league . from the cape de Angullie into the bay of S. George we run Northeast the bay of and by east some 18 or 19 league . 5amt georse - in this bay of saint George , we find the wrack of 2 great biskaine ship , which have be cast away three year before : where we have some seven or eight hundred whale fin , and some iron bolt and chain of their main shroud and before shroud : all their train be beat out with the weather but the cask remain still . some part of the commodity be spoil by tumble down of the cliff of the hill , which cover part of the cask , and the great part of those whale fin , which we understand to be there by four Spaniard which escape , and be bring to saint John de Luz . here we 163 they land on the isle of Natiscotec . the english voyage find the house of the savage , make of fir tree bind together in the top and set round like a dovehouse , and cover with the bark of fir tree , we find also some part of their victual , which be dear flesh roast upon wooden spit at the fire , and a dish make of a ryne of a tree , sow together with the sinew of the deer , wherein be oil of the deer . there be also fowl call cormorant , which they have pluck and make ready to have dress , and there we find a wooden spoon of their make . and we discern the track of the foot of some forty or fifty man , woman and child . when we have dispatch our business in this bay of saint George and stay there ten day , we depart for the northern point of the say bay , which be nine or ten league broad . then be inform , that the whale which be deadly wound in the grand bay , and yet escape the fisher for a time , be wont usual to shoot themselves on shore on the isle of Assumption , or natiscotec , which lie in the very mouth of the great river that run up to Canada , we shape our course over to that long isle of Natiscotec , and we find the distance of the way to the estermost end thereof to be about forty four league : and it stand in the latitude of 49. here we arrive about the midst of June at the east end , and ride in eighteen fathom water in fair white sand and very good ankerage , and for trial heave a line overboorde and find wonderful fair and great cod fish : we go also seven of we on shore and find there exceed fair great wood of tall fir tree , and hear and see store of land and sea fowl , and see the foot of diverse beast in the sand when we be on shore . from the easter end we go to the norther side of the island , which we perceive to be but narrow in respect of the length thereof . and after we have search two day and a night for the whale which be wound which we hope to have find there , and miss of our purpose , we return back to the south - 164 ward , and be within one league of the island of Penguin , which lie south from the eastermost part of Natiscotec some twelve league . from the isle of Penguin we shape our course for cape de Rey and have sight of the island of Cape briton : then return we by the isle of saint Pedro , and so come into the bay of Placentia , and arrive in the easterside thereof some ten league up within the bay among the fisherman of saint [ three . 195. ] John de Luz and of Sibiburo and of Biskay , which be to the number of threescore and odd sail , whereof eight ship only be Spaniard , of who we be very well use and they wish hearty for peace between they and we . there the man of saint John and Sibiburo man bestow two pinnace on we to make up our voyage with fish . than we depart over to the other side of the bay , where we arrive in a harbour which be call Pesmarck , and there make our stage and fish so long , that in the end the savage come , and in the night , when our man be at rest , cut both our pinnace and our ship boat away to our great hindrance of our voyage , yet it be our good fortune to find out our pinnace and get they again . then for fear of a shrewd turn of the savage , we depart for cape saint marie , and have pass cape Raz , we pass northward fourteen league and arrive in Farrillon , and find there two and twenty sail of Englishman , we make up our fish voyage to the full in that harbour the twenty four of August to our good content : and depart thence we arrive first in comb and stay there a seven night , and afterward in Hungrod in the river of Bristol by the grace of God the 24 of September . 1594. the voyage of m. Charles Leigh , and diverse other to cape Briton and the isle of Ramea . he Hopewell of London of the burden of 120 ton , whereof be m. William Crafton , and the chancewel of London of the burden of 70 ton , whereof be m. Steven Bennet , bind unto the river of Canada , set to sea at the sole and proper charge of Charles Leigh and Abraham Van Herwick of London merchant ( the say Charles Leigh himself , and Steven Van Herwick brother to the say Abraham , go themselves in the say ship as chief commander of the voyage ) depart from gravesend on Friday morning the 8 of April 1597^ and after some hindrance , arrive at Falmouth in Cornewal the 28 of the say month put to sea again . and with prosperous wind the 18 of may we be upon the bank of Newfoundland . the 19 we lose the chancewel . the 20 we have sight of land and enter within the bay of Assumption , where our man contrary to my knowledge fight with a french ship : and afterward in the same bay we meet with our consort . whereupon we present put to sea again : and the next day we arrive at caplen bay , where we remain by extremity of foul weather , and to mend a pin of 7 or 8 ton ( which be give we at Farrillon by m. Wil. sayer of Dartmouth the admiral of that place ) until the last of may . on which day depart from thence in the afternoon we put in to Rogneuse to seek shallop but can find none . the first of June we set sail from Rogneuse , and the second we put room to a bay under the northside of cape Raz be enforce in by a extreme storm . the 4 we set sail , and this day we see a great island of ice . the 5 at night we lose the Chancewell in a fog at the mouth of the bay of Placentia . the 11 at sun set we have sight of cape Briton . and the 12 by 166 reason of contrary wind we cast anchor under the north-east end of the isle of Menego to the north of cape isle of Briton in 16 fathom reasonable ground . in that place we catch great store of cod , which be large and better fish than any in Newfoundland . the 13 we weigh anchor again , and be becalm about a league from the shore we fall to fish where the cod do bite at least 20 fathom above ground , and almost as fast as we can hale they into the ship . the 14 we come to the 2 island of bird , some 23 league from Menego : 2 island where there be such abundance of bird , as be almost °fstrdes-incredible to report . and upon the less of these island of bird , we see great store of morss or sea ox , store of which be a sleep upon the rock : but when we approach near unto they with our boat they cast themselves into the sea and pursue we with such fury as that we be glad to flee from they . the 16 we arrive at Brian island , which lie 5 league west from the island of bird . about this island there be as great abundance of cod as in any place can be find . in little more than a hour we catch with 4 hook 250 of they . here we catch also a great Turbut which be a ell long and a yard broad : which be so great that the hook can not hold she into the ship : but when she be above water she bend the hook and escape . in this i ” Bryans Island we find exceed good ground both for corn and meadow , and great store of wood , but of small grow . for forne and spring of fresh water we find none in all the island , meadow . but some stand pool of rain water . the same day at night we weigh anchor again . the 17 we have stormy weather . the 18 we come to the isle of Ramea , where then be ! e of we appoint to meet with ' our consort . and approach - ramea-ing near unto the harbour of Halabolina we cast anchor in 3 fathom water and send our great boat into the harbour , with the master mate and some dozen more of the company : who when they come in , find 4 ship . namely 2 of saint Malo in Britaigne , and two of Sibiburo adjoin to saint John de luz be the french 167 [ three . 196. ] king subject , who they suppose to have be of Spain , and so affirm unto we . whereupon we go present into harbour , find but eleven foot and a half of water upon the bar and a mighty great current in , when we have cast anchor we send present to speak with the master of all the ship : but those only of saint Malo come aboard , who we entertain very friendly , and demand of whence the other two ship be . they say as they think of saint John de Luz or Sibiburo . than we present send our boat for the master of both the say ship , to request they to come aboard , and to bring with they their charter party and other evidence , to the end we may know of whence they be . at which message one of the say master come aboard , with the pilot and master mate of the other ship : who when we have examine , they say that they be of Sibiburo , and the french king subject . we request they for our better security in the harbour peaceable to deliver up their powder and munition : promise they that if we find they to be the french king subject it shall be keep in safety for they without diminish . but they will not consent thereunto : whereunto we reply , that unless they will consent thereunto we will hold they to be our enemy . they not consent , we send the boat well man to fetch their powder and munition from aboard their ship : but straight command our man not to touch any thing else in the ship upon their further peril : which they promise to perform . when they come aboard the say ship which be more together , they be resist by force of arm , but quick they get the victory : which do , they fall present to pillage of the bask , contrary to their promise : whereupon we send another to forbid they ; but when he come to they , none be more ready of pillage than he . whereupon i go my self , and take away from our man whatsoever they have pillage , and give it again to the owner : only i send aboard our own ship their powder 168 and munition to be keep in safety until we know far what they be . when i have do , i give the bask possession of their ship again and tell they they shall not loose the value of one penny if they be the french king subject . than i carry away all our man , and also take with i two or three of the chief of they , and when i come aboard go to examine of they , and by circumstance find one of the ship to belong to France : whereupon i tell the master of the say ship , that i be thorough satisfy that he be of France and so dismiss he in peace . of the other ship we have great presumption that she be of Spain , but have no certain proof thereof , wherefore we dismiss they likewise in peace . after i have thus dismiss they , our ship company fall into a mutiny , and more than half of they resolve to carry one of those ship away . but they be prevent of their evil purpose by aid which the say ship receive from their countryman in the other another har-harborough : for the next morning , which be then in twenty of June , very early there be gather it together out of all the ship in both harborough , at the least 200 Frenchman and Briton , who have plant upon the shore three piece of ordinance against we , and have prepare they self in all readiness to fight with we , which so soon as we have descry they give the onset upon we with at least a hundred small shot out of the wood . there be also in a readiness to assault we about three hundred savage . but after we have skirmish a skirmish while with they , we procure a parley by one of the man between the of saint Malo , who ship row hard by we : in which andus . parley they require some of our man to come on shore unto they : whereupon we request m. Ralph hill and the boatswain mate to go on shore to they : who when they have they detain as prisoner ; and then require the powder and munition , which we have of the bask in possession ; which we surrender unto they in safety as our intent always be , which do , there a new treason come aboard unto we one captain Charles , who be of the briton . 169 captain of the great ship of saint Malo , which ride in the other harbour : who challenge our great boat which we have at Farrillon to be he . and while we be in talk with he about the two bask which at first we think to be Spaniards , we have almost be betray . for the say captain Charles with half a dozen more of his company keep themselves aboard of our ship and hold we in a talk , while thirty or forty other shall have enter our ship unaware from one of the ship of saint Malo , which profess to be our friend , and unto who we show all courtesy . but our perceive their treacherous intent , threaten to set fire on the say ship , which be then thwart our hawse , from which they will have enter . by which resolution of we god do discourage they from effect their mischievous purpose . now the say captain Charles when he see himself prevent of his wicked intent , take his boat present to go on shore , and promise that all thing shall be end in peace between we , and that he will send we our two man again . but when he be on shore he present send for our great boat which he claim to be he , and withal command we out of the harbour ; but he send not our man as he promise , we be now the weak side do not only deliver his boat but also deter - [ three . 197. ] mine to be go and then request they to help we with our anchor which be on shore ; but they will not . than we desire they to cut the bent of the cable upon the anchor on shore ( for we dare not send our boat lest they shall have keep from we both our boat and man ) which they promise to do for we , as also to send our man ; but when they be on shore , they will do neither . we therefore see their falsehood in every thing , dare no long tarry for fear of far treachery ; wherefore we conclude to cut our cable in the hawse ; which we do , and so depart the harbour about 9 of the clock , leave two of our man with our cable and anchor , and 20 fathom of a new hawser behind we . and as we be go away , they make great show of friendship , 170 * 597-and drink unto we from the shore ; but more for fear then love , and request we to come on shore for our man , who than they deliver . the same morning in pass over the bar before the harborowe mouth , and ar °f by that time that we have all our man aboard , our ship come on ground upon the sand ; where we lay some 8 ' hour : during which time , at low water we trim our ship without board , and by the great providence of God find our leak which then we stop . about six of the clock at night we get our ship on float again , and that night anchor within part of the bar , which then because of the wind we can not pass . but it please God to send we fair weather all that night , and the next fnm day by noon we have get our ship clean over the bar . the 21 day after we get over the bar the wind arise at east and eastsoutheast , we blow right into the bay : which if it have come before we be clear of the bar , we have both ship and man perish in the sand . the same day , because the wind keep we within the bay , we go to the isle Blanch , where the ship of the other harbour isle Bland or have their stage : but it be at least two league from thewjllielse-their ship : where we hope by friendship to procure a shallope and assurance of our cable and anchor again . but when we have approach near the shore with our ship , and weave they with a white flag , they in stead of come unto we , send their message by a bullet out of a piece of great ordinance , which they have place on shore of purpose against we ; so that they will neither speak with we , nor permit we to come near they . thus we depart , and will have put to sea that night : but there be much wind at east , which keep we within the bay , and enforce we to come to a anchor under isle blanch . the next morning be the 22 , we put to sea , and about 12 of the clock the same day , the wind be at north-east and foul weather , the master say he can not ply up to Grande cost , because of the leeshore , and the wind . against we , and therefore ask what we shall do . i qa ? e Briton . ask then how far we have to the river of cape 171 Briton : he say a little way . then say i , if it be not far , we be best to go thither to trade with the savage while the wind be contrary , and to take in water and balist , which we want . to which the master say , that if i will he will carry we thither . i think it to be the best course , say i be content , so far forth as that from thence we take the first fair wind for grande cost . hereupon the master will he at the helm to keep his course southeast and southeast and by south . present after i ask he how many league we have to the say river , and from the say river to grande cost . he then say that we have 40 league to the river , and from the river to Grande cost 120 league . hereupon i say i will not consent to go so far out of our way , but will he to keep his direct course for Grande cost ; which he do . within one half hour afterward the 23 day the gunner and company of the ship present i and the master with a request in write to return for England or to go for the island of azore for a man of war , for they will not proceed on their voyage to Grande cost ; and therefore do what i can they turn the helm homeward . the their arrival 14 of June we send our boat on shore in a great bay in the hie of upon the jsje of cape Briton for water . the 25 we ape nton . arrjvej on west side of the isle of Menego , where we leave some cask on shore in a sandy bay , but can not tarry for foul weather . the 26 we cast anchor in another bay upon the main of cape Briton . the 27 about ten of the clock in the morning we meet with the chance - eight man of the Chancewell our consort in a shallope ; who tell we that their ship be cast away upon the within cape main of cape Briton , within a great bay eighteen Briton . league within the cape , and upon a rock within a mile of the shore , upon the 23 of this month about one of the clock in the afternoon : and that they have clear their ship from the rock : but be bilge and full of water , they present do run she up into a 172 sandy bay , where she be no soon come on ground , but present after there come aboard many shallop with store of french man , who rob and spoil all they can lay hand on , pillage the poor man even to their very shirt , and use they in savage manner : whereas they shall rather as Christians have aid they in that distress . which news when we hear , we bless God , who by his divine providence and unspeakable mercy have not only preserve all the man , but bring we thither so miraculous to aid and comfort they . so present we put into the road where the Chancewell lie ; where be also one ship of Sibiburo , who man that help to pillage the Chancewell be run away into the wood . but the master thereof which on they have deal very honest with our man stay in his ship , and come aboard of we : who we use well , not take j any thing from he that be he , but only such thing l as we can find of our own . and when we have dispatch our business , we give he one good cable , one old cable and a anchor , one shallop with mast , sail , and other furniture , and other thing which belong to the ship . in recompense whereof he give we two hogshead of sider , one barrel of pease , and 25 score of fish . the 29 betimes in the morning we depart from that road towards a great biskaine some 7 league off of 300 tun , who man deal most dogged with the chancewels company . the same night we anchor at the mouth of the harbour , where the biskain be . the 30 betimes in the morning we put into the harbour ; and approach near their stage , we see it uncover , and so suspect the ship to be go : whereupon we send our pinnace on shore with a dozen man , who when they come , find great store of fish on shore , but all the man be flee : neither can they perceive whether the ship shall be go , but as they think to sea . this day about twelve of the clock we take a savage boat which our man pursue : but all the savage run away into the 173 the savage of Cape briton come aboard of our ship . Cibo a harbour in the isle of Cape briton . new port. port ingle . the english voyage wood , and our man bring their boat on board . the same day in the afternoon we bring our ship to a anchor in the harbour : and the same day we take three hogshead and a half of train , and some 300 of green fish . also in the evening three of the savage , who boat we have , come unto we for their boat ; to who we give coat and knife , and restore they their boat again . the next day be the first of July , the rest of the savage come unto we , among who be their king , who name be Itarey , and their queen , to who also we give coat and knife , and other trifle . Theise Savages call the harbour Cibo . in this place be the great multitude of lobster that ever we hear of : for we catch at one hawle with a little draw net above 140. the four of July in the morning we depart from Cibo . and the five we cast anchor in a reasonable good harbour call new port under a island some eight league from Cibo , and within three league from the english port . at this place in pursue certain shallop of a ship of rochel , one of they come aboard , who tell we , that the biskainer who we seek , be in the english port with two biskainer more , and two ship of rochel . thereupon we send one of our man in the rocheller shallop to parley with the admiral and other our friend in the english port , request they aid for the recovery of our thing , which the other ship call the Santa maria of S. Vincent ( whereof be master Johannes de heart , and pilot Adam de lauandote ) have rob from the Chancewell . to which they answer , that if we will come in unto they in peace , they will assist we what they may . this answer we have the sixth day : and the seven in the fornoone we arrive in the english port , and cast anchor aloof from the other ship : which do , i go aboard the admiral , to desire the performance of his promise : who send for Johannes de heart , who be content to restore most of our thing again : whereupon i go aboard his ship to have 174 they restore . this day and the eight i spend in procure such thing as they have rob ; but yet in the end we want a great part thereof . than we be brief with they , and will they either to restore we the rest of our thing which they have , or else we will both enforce they to do it , and also have satisfaction for our victual and merchandise which by their mean be lose in the Chancewell . the nine in the morning we prepare our ship to go near unto they . whereupon their admiral send his boat aboard , and desire to speak with i : than i go aboard unto he , and desire to have our thing with peace and quietness , proffer to make he and the master of the two ship of rochel our umpire , and what they shall advise i will stand unto . hereupon he go aboard the other ship to make peace ; but they will hear no reason , neither yet condescend to restore any thing else which they have of we . than i desire that as i come in peace unto they , they will so set i aboard my ship again : which they deny to do , but most unjust detain i and Stephen van Herwicke who be with i . a while after our shallop come with four man to know how i do , and to fetch i aboard : but so soon as she come to the admiral ship side , his man enter , and take she away , detain our man also as prisoner with we . then present all the three biskainer make towards our ship , which be not careless to get the wind of they all : and have by the mercy of God obtain the same , she then stay for they : but when they see they have lose their advantage , they present turn their course , make as great haste in again as they do out before . afterwards i attempt twice to go aboard , but be still enforce back by the two other biskainer , who seek our life : so that in the end the master of the admiral be enforce to man his great boat to waft we : and yet notwithstanding they bend a piece of great ordinance at we : for we be to pass by they unto our ship : but 175 we rescue our shallop under our master great boat ; and by that mean pass in safety . the next morning be the ten of the month , we purpose if the wind have serve our turn , to have make they to [ three . 199. ] repent their evil deal , and to restore we our own again , or else to have sink their ship if we can . but the wind serve not our turn for that purpose ; they depart but carry we to sea : so that the same morning we to°ke our course towards the bay of saint Laurence in ‘ Newfoundland : where we hope to find a spanish ship , which as we have intelligence , do fish at that place . S. Peter the thirteenth day we have sight of saint Peter island . Islands . and the fourteen day be foggy and misty weather , while we make towards the land , we send our shallop before the ship to discover danger : but in the fog , through the man negligence which be in she , she lose we : yet we keep on our course , think that although we can not see they , yet they may see our ship : and coming into sixteen fathom water we cast anchor , suppose our self to be near the shore : and in the evening it please God to give we for the space of one quarter of a hour clear weather , by which we find our self to be imbay , and also have sight of our shallop , which be at the point of a land about one league from we . the same night we go further into the same bay , where we have very good ride . the fifteen we go on shore , and in that place find foot of dear , and before we return we kill one . the eighteenth we depart towards saint Laurence : the same evening we have sight of saint Laurence , and send off our boat in the night with our master and sixteen man to surprise the a spanish . Spaniard , which lie in little saint Laurence ; who pre - shlp take . sent upon the entrance of our man surrender up their ship and good . the nineteenth in the morning before day , the master of our ship with two more , and three Spaniard , take a boat and come forth to meet our ship , but be foggy , he cast anchor by the mouth of the harbour ( think in fair weather to put out to our ship , which through the current and foggy weather be put five or six league to leeward : and while they be at anchor in the boat they be surprise again by certain bask of saint John de Luz who be in great saint Laurence hard by . Theise bask with their force ( have receive intelligence by one of the Spaniard , who sleep on shore , escape unto they overland ) on the sudden surprise the say boat with our master and other : and then present make unto the ship ; but our man aboard defend they off . in the end they threaten that unless they will yield , they will kill m. Crafton and our other man before m. Crafton . their eye . so at last upon m. craftons entreaty and our man , to save their life , they yield up the ship again , upon condition , that they shall not injury any of our man , but shall let they all with their weapon peaceable depart : yet when our man have yield , they break their covenant , proffer they great violence , threaten to kill they , disarm they , strip their clothes from their back , and use they more like dog than man . after they have thus rob our man of their prize and weapon , they present tow the ship with their boat out of that harbour into great saint Laurence , where their own ship do ride , and within less than a hour after they have carry our prize away , our ship arrive in the bay : where after we have be a while at anchor , our shallop come aboard unto we , with most part of our sixteen man , who tell we the whole story before recite , as also that captain Laurence have carry away our master , and Stephen van Herwicke prisoner , and turn the rest of our man on shore in the wood , without either meat , drink , or almost any apparel . the 20 all our man come aboard , except the two prisoner : and the same day we take with our boat three of the Spaniard shallop , with five hogshead of train oil in each of they , and in one boat four Spaniard ; but the man of the other two shall lop flee on shore . the same day also we take vni 177 m the master of one of the ship which be in the harbour with three other of his man , who we detain prisoner to ransom m. Crafton and Stephen van Herwick . the 22 captain Laurence send they aboard , and we also release all our prisoner , except one Spaniard , who be boatswain of the spanish ship , who we keep with we : and the same day we set sail from thence . the 24 we have advice of our Spaniard of certain the harbour leaguer which be in the harbour of cape S. mary . °Marie § whereupon the same night , be within five or six ' league of the harbour , i send off our two shallop with thirty man to discover the harbour , and to surprise the enemy . the 25 in the morning we approach the harbour with our ship , and in the mouth thereof we espy three shallop , two whereof be we , and the three of a ship of rochel , which they have surprise with four man in she : who tell they that there be but two ship in the harbour , whereof one be of rochel , and the other of bell isle . and as we be discourse with the rocheller , we have sight of the ship : whereupon we send our boat aboard the rocheller to certify he that we be his friend , and to request he not to hinder our fight with the enemy . this message be send , we make all the haste we can unto the ship of bell isle , which first begin with we with three great shot , one whereof hit our maintopsaile , but both the other miss we . and we also send one unto they : then be approach near unto they ten or twelve of we go in a shallop to enter they , and we carry also a warp with we to make fast unto their ship , whereby our ship may the better come up to aid we . and when we board they in our boat , they [ three . 200. ] betake themselves to their close fight , play chief upon we with shot and pike out at two port , between which we enter very dangerous , escape near danger both by shot and pike . some of our man be wound , but no great harm be do . and i own piece in enter , be shoot out of my hand into 178 the sea ; which shoot also burst one side of the ladder , by which i enter . we have not long be aboard , but through the help of God we cause they to yield unto our mercy . there be of they in the ship above forty A briton ship man , most whereof we send aboard of our ship , there ial°°tunnes ’ to be keep in hold , with order to our chirurgeon to dress the wound man , one of which be wound unto death . that do , we have then time to view our prize , which we find of great defence , and a notable strong ship , almost two hundred tun in burden , very well appoint , and in all thing fit for a man of war . they have also fourteen or fifteen man more , which be then absent from the ship ; otherwise we shall have have the hot fight . the same day we get our sail to the yard , and our top mast on end , and rig the ship what we can . the 26 day we get some oil aboard , and there we tarry until the second of August , fit our self for the sea , and get fish aboard as weather serve we . during our abode there we divide our man , and appoint to each ship their company , my self and my friend be resolve to take our passage in the prize ; wherein when we be ship , and the company , there arise great enmity against we by the other ship , which afterward be quiet . the second day of August , have take in water and wood , we put to sea from that harbour in company of the Hopewell , with purpose to go direct to parlican , which be a harbour in the north part of Newfoundland , where we expect another prize . but when we come to sea we find our sail so old , our rope so rot , and our provision of bread and drink so short , as that we be constrain to make our resolution direct for England : whereupon we draw out our reason the four day of August , and send they aboard the Hopewell , to certify they the cause of our resolution for England : whereat they be general offend , think and say , that we in the prize go about to cousin and deceive they . to conclude , they send we 179 word that they will keep we company for England . but i have give William Crafton commission before to go for the island of the azore , and there to spend his victual for a man of war . the next day be the five of August , have a fair wind , we put off from the coast of Newfoundland , and keep our course direct for England , the Hopewell keep we company until midday , whenas have lose we in a fog , she shoot off two piece of ordinance , and we answer she with three : afterward we speak not with she , suppose that she go for the island . the 27 of August , draw near the coast of England , we sound and find ground at seventy fathom . some of the mariner think we be in Bristol channel , and other in silly channel : so that through variety of judgement , and evil marinership we be fain to dance the hay four day together , sometime run to the north-east , sometime to the southeast , then again to the east , and eastnortheast . thus do we spend fair wind , and lose our time until the last of August . and then it please God that we fall with the island of Lundy within the channel of Bristol ; from whence we shape our course : and after diverse danger , the three of September we meet with the Tramontane of the queen off of Dartmouth ; to the captain whereof we give certain thing that he have need of . the five of September i land on the outside of the isle of wight , and within few day after it please God to bring the ship in safety to London , where she be make prize as belong to the enemy of this land . the first relation of Jaques Carthier of S. Malo , of the new land call new France , new discover in the year of our lord 1534. how m. Jaques carthy depart from the port of saint Malo , with two ship , and come to Newfoundland , and how he enter into the port of Buona vista . Fter that sir Charles of Mouy knight lord of Meylleraye , and vice-admiral of France have cause the captain , master , and mariner of the ship to be swear to behave themselves true and faithful in the service of the most christian king of France , under the charge of the say Carthier , upon the twenty day of April 1534 , we depart from the port of saint Malo with two ship of threescore tun apiece burden , and 61 well appoint man in each one : and with such prosperous weather we sail onward , that upon the ten day of may we come to Newfoundland , where we enter into the cape of Buona vista , which be in latitude 48 degree and a half , and in longitude * . but because of the great store of the ice that be alongst the say land , we be constrain to enter into a haven call S. katherins haven , distant from the other port about five league towards southsoutheast : there do we stay ten day look for fair weather ; and in the mean while we mend and dress our boat . 183 a great white bear . how we come to the island of bird , and of the great quantity of bird that there be . upon the 2i of may the wind be in the west , we hoist sail , and sail towards north and by east from the cape of Buona vista until we come to the island of bird , which be environ about with a bank of ice , but break and crack : notwithstanding the say bank , our two boat go thither to take in some bird , whereof there be such plenty , that unless a man do see they , he will think it a incredible thing : for albeit the island ( which contain about a league in circuit ) be so full of they , that they seem to have be bring thither , and sow for the nonce , yet be there a hundred fold as many hover about it as within ; some of the which be as big as jay , black and white , with beak like unto crow : they lie always upon the sea ; they can fly very high , because their wing be so little , and no big than half one hand , yet do they fly as swift as any bird of the air level to the water ; they be also exceed fat ; we name they Aporath . in less than half a hour we fill two boat full of they , as if they have be with stone : so that beside they which we do eat fresh , every ship do powder and salt five or six barrel full of they . of two sort of bird , the one call Godetz , the other Margaulx ; and how we come to Carpunt . beside these , there be another kind of bird which hover in the air , and over the sea , lesser than the other ; and these do all gather themselves together in the island , and put themselves under the wing of other bird that be great : these we name Godetz . there be also of another sort , but big , and white , which bite even as dog : those we name Margaulx . and albeit the say island be 14 league from the main land , notwithstanding bear come swim thither to eat of the say bird : and our man find one there as great 184 as any cow , and as white as any swan , who in their presence leap into the sea ; and upon Whitsunmunday ( follow our voyage towards the land ) we meet she by the way , swim towards land as swift as we can sail . so soon as we see she , we pursue she with our boat , and by main strength take she , who flesh be as good to be eat as the flesh of a calf of two year old . the le Chas-Wednesday follow , be the 27 of the month , we ieaux ' come to the entrance of the bay of the castle ; but because the weather be ill , and the great store of ice we find , we be constrain to enter into a harbour about the say entrance call Carpunt , where , because we can not come out of it , we stay till the nine of June , what time we depart , hope with the help of God to sail further than the say Carpunt , which be in Carpunt . latitude 51 degree . the description of Newfoundland , from cape Razo to cape degrade . the land from cape Razo to cape degrade , which be the point of the entrance of the bay that trend from head to head towards Northnortheast , and southsouthwest . all this part of land be part into island one so near the other , that there be but small river between they ; through the which you may pass with little boat , and therefore there be certain good har-borows , among which be those of Carpunt and degrade . in one of these island that be the high of they all , be the top of it you may plain see the two low island that be near to cape Razo , from whence to the port of Carpunt they count it five and twenty league ; and there be two entrance thereat , one on the east , the other on the south side of the island . but you must take heed of the side and point of the east , because that every where there be nothing else but shelf , and the water be very shallow : you must go about the island towards the west the length of half a cable or thereabouts , and then to go towards the south to the say Carpunt . 185 also you be to take heed of three shelf that be in the channel under the water : and towards the island on the east side in the channel , the water be of three or four fathom deep , and clear ground . the other trend towards Eastnortheast , and on the west you may go on shore . of the island which now be call S. katherins island . go from the point degrade , and enter into the say bay towards the west and by north : there be some doubt of two island that be on the right side , one of the which be distant from the say point three league , and the other seven , either more or less than the first , be a low and plain land , and it seem to be part of the main land . i name it saint Katherine island ; in which , towards the north-east there be very dry soil ; but about a quarter of a league from it , very ill ground , so that you must go a little about . the say island 8c [ three . 203. ] the port of castle trend towards north north-east , and south southwest , and they be about 15. league asunder . from the say port of castle to the port of gut , which be in the northern part of the say bay , that trend towards east north-east , and west southwest , there be 12. league and a half : and about two league from the port of balance , that be to say , the three part athwart the say bay the depth be sound it be about 38. fathom : and from the say port of balance to the Blanc 8ablon , white sand towards west southwest there be 15. league , arwhite8and . you must ( - take heed of a shelf that lie about 3. league outward from the say white sand on the southwest side above water like a boat . of the place call Blanc Sablon , or the white sand : of the hand of breast , and of the hand of bird , of the sort and quantity of bird that there be find : and of the port call the islette . white sand be a road in the which there be no place guard from the south , nor southeast . but towards south southwest from the say road there be two 186 hand , one of the which be call breast hand , and the other the hand of bird , in which there be great store of Godetz , and crow with red beak and red foot : they make their nest in hole under the ground even as cony . a point of land be pass about a league from white sand , there be a port and passage find call the islette , a better place than white sand : and there be great fish . from the say port of the islette unto another call breast , the circuit be about ten league . breast a place this port be in latitude 51. degree and 55. minute , and * north . in longitude * . from the islette to that place there be i ” and . m many other hand : and the say port of breast be also among those hand . Moreover the hand do compass more than 3. league from the say breast , be low , and over they be then other land above mention see . how we with our ship enter into the port of breast , and sail onward towards the west we pass amid the islette , which be so many in number , that it be not possible to tell they : and how we name they the islette . upon the 10. of June we with our ship enter into the port of breast , to furnish our self with water and wood , and to make we ready to pass the say bay upon saint Barnabas day service be hear , we with our boat go beyond the say port towards the west , to see what harboroughe be there : we pass through the midst of the islette , which be so many in number that it be not possible they may be tell , for they continue about 10. league beyond the say port. we to rest our self stay in one of they a night , and there we find great store of duck egg , and other bird that there do make their nest , we name they all the islette . 187 [ of they of the port call saint Antony port , saint Servans port , James Cartiers port : of the river call S. James : of the custom and apparel of the inhabitant in the hand of white Sand. the next day we pass the say hand , and beyond they all we find a good haven , which we name saint Antony haven , and one or two league beyond we find a little river toward the southwest coast , that be between two other hand , and be a good harbour . there we set up a cross , and name it saint Servans port : and on the southwest side of the say port and river , about one league there be a small hand as round as a oven , environ about with many other little hand that give notice to the say port . further about two league there be another great river , in which we take good store of salmon , that we name saint James his river . be in the say river , we see a ship of rochel that the night before have pass the port of breast , where they think to have go a fish : but the mariner know not where they be . we with our boat approach near unto it , and do direct it to another port one league more towards the west then the say river of saint James , which i take to be one of the best in all the world , and therefore we name it James carthiers sound . if the soil be as good as the harboroughe be , it be a great commodity : but it be not to be call the new land , but rather stone and wild crag , and a place fit for wild beast , for in all the north hand i do not see a cartload of good earth : yet go i on shore in many place , and in the hand of white sand , there be nothing else but moss and small thorn scatter here and there , wither and dry . to be short , i believe that this be the land that God allot to Cain . there be man of a indifferent good stature and bigness , but wild and unruly : they wear their hair tie on the top like a wreath of hay , and put a wooden pin within it , or any other such thing in stead of a nail , and with they 188 they bind certain bird feather . they be clothe with beast skin as well the man as woman , but that the woman go somewhat strait and close in their garment then the man do , with their waste gird : they paint themselves with certain roan colour : their boat be make of the bark of birch tree , with the which they fish and take great store of seal , and as far as we can understand since our come thither , that be not their habitation , but they come from the main land out of hot country , to catch the say seal and other necessary for their live . of certain cape , that be to say , the double cape , the point cape , cape royal , and the cape of milk : of the mountain of grange : of the hand of dove house : and of the great fish of cod . upon the 13. of that month we come to our ship again with our boat on purpose to sail forward because the weather be fair , and upon Sunday we cause service to be say : then on Monday be the 15. of the month we depart from breast , and sail towards the south to take a view of the land that there we have see , that seem unto we to be two hand : but when we be amid the bay , we know it to be firm land , where be a great double cape one above the other , and therefore we name it the double cape . in the entrance of the bay we sound , and find it to be a hundred fathom round about we . from breast to the double cape there be about 20. league , and about five or six league beyond we sound again and find 40 fathom water . the say land lie north-east and Southwest . the next day be the 16 of the month we sail along the say coast towards the southwest , and by south about 35 league from the double cape , where we find very steep and wild hill , among the which be see certain small cabban , which we in the country call grange , and therefore we name they the hill of the grange . 189 A.D. 1534 - [ in . 204. ] Boats make of the bark of birch tree . the other land and mountain be all craggy , cleave and cut , and betwixt they and the sea , there be other hand , but low . the day before through the dark mist and fog of the weather , we can not have sight of any land , but in the evening we spy a entrance into the land , by a river among the say hill of grange , and a cape lie towards the southwest about 3 league from we . the say cape be on the top of it blunt-pointed , and also towards the sea it end in a point , wherefore we name it the point cape , on the north side of which there be a plain hand . and because we will have notice of the say entrance , to see if there be any good haven , we strike sail for that night . the next day be the 17 of the month we have stormy weather from Northeast , wherefore we take our way towards the southwest until Thursday morning , and we go about 37 league , till we come athwart a bay full of round hand like dove house , and therefore we name they the dove house . and from the bay of S. Julian , from the which to . a cape that lie south and by west , which we call cape royal , there be 7. league , and towards the west southwest side of the say cape , there be another that beneath be all craggy , and above round . on the north side of which about half a league there lie a low hand : that cape we name the cape of milk . between these two cape there be certain low hand , above which there be also certain other that show that there be some river . about two league from cape royal we sound and find 20 fathom water , and there be the great fish of cod that possible may be : for stay for our company , in less than a hour we take above a hundred of they . 190 of certain hand that lie between cape royal , and the cape of milk . the next day be the 18 of the month , the wind with such rage turn against we , that we be constrain to go back towards cape royal , think there to find some harbour , and with our boat go to discover between the cape royal , and the cape of milk , and find that above the low hand there be a great and very deep gulf , within which be certain hand . the say gulf on the southside be shut up . the foresay low ground be on one of the side of the entrance , and cape royal be on the other . the say low ground do stretch themselves more than half a league within the sea it be a plain country , but a ill soil : and in the midst of the entrance thereof , there be a hand . the say gulf in latitude be fourty eight degree and a half , and in longitude * . that night we find no harbour , and therefore we launch out into the sea , leave the cape towards the west . of the hand call S. John. from the say day until the 24 of the month be saint John day we have both stormy weather and wind against we , with such darkness and mist , that until saint Johns day , we can have no sight of any land , and then have we sigh of a cape of land , that from cape royal lie Southwest about 35 league , but that day be so foggy and misty , that we can not come near land , and because it be S. Johns day , we name it cape S. John. of certain hand call the hand of Margaulx , and [ three . 205. ] of the kind of beast and bird that there be find . of the hand of Brion , and cape dolphin . the next day be the 25. of the month , the weather be also stormy , dark , and windy , but yet we sail a part of the day towards west north west , 191 and in the evening we put our self athwart until the second quarter ; when as we depart , then do we by our compass know that we be northwest and by west about seven league and a half from the cape of S. John , and as we be about to hoist sail , the wind turn into the northwest , wherefore we go three hand , southeast , about 15. league , and come to three hand , two of which be as steep and upright as any wall , so that it be not possible to climb they : and between they there be a little rock . Theise hand be as full of bird , as any field or meadow be of grass , which there do make their nest : and in the great of they , there be a great and infinite number of those that we call Margaulx , that be white , and big than any goose , which be sever in one part . in the other be only Godetz , but towards the shore there be of those Godetz , and great Apponatz , like to those of that hand that we above have mention : we go down to the low part of the least hand , where we kill above a thousand of those Godetz , and Apponatz . we put into our boat so many of they as we please , for in less than one hour we may have fill thirty such boat of the island they : we name they the hand of Margaulx . about of Margaulx . gve ] eague from the say hand on the west , there be another hand that be about two league in length , and so much in breadth : there do we stay all night to take in water and wood . that island be environ round about with sand , and have a very good road about it three or four fathom deep . those hand have the best soil that ever we see , for that one of their field be more worth than all the new land . we find it all full of goodly tree , meadow , field full of wild corn and peason bloom , as thick , as rank , and as fair as any can be see in Britain , so that they seem to have be plow and sow . there be also a great store of gooseberry , strawberry , damask rose , parsley , morse or sea other very sweet and pleasant herb . about the ox . say island be very great beast as great as ox , which 192 have two great tooth in their mouth like unto elephant tooth , and live also in the sea we see one of they sleep upon the bank of the water : we think to take it , go to it with our boat , but so soon as he hear we , he cast himself into the sea we also see bear 8c wolf : we name it brion hand . about brion hand . it towards southeast , and northwest , there be great lake . as far as i can gather and comprehend , i think that there be some passage between new find land , and brion land . if so it be , it will be a great shorten , aswell of the time as of the way , if any perfection can be find in it . about four league from that hand towards west-southwest be the firm land , which seem to be as a hand compass about with little hand of sand . there be a goodly cape which we name cape dolphin , for there be the beginning of good ground . on the 27. of June we compass the say land about that lie west Southwest : and a far off they seem to be little hill of sand , for they be but low land : we can neither go to they , nor land on they , because the wind be against we . that day we go 15 league . of the hand call Alezai , and of the cape of saint Peter . the next day we go along the say land about 10. league , till we come to a cape of red land , that be all craggy , within the which there be a brack look towards the north . it be a very low country . there be also between the sea and a certain pool , a plain field : and from that cape of land and the pool unto another cape , there be about 14 league . the land be fashion as it be half a circle , all compass about with sand like a ditch , over which as far as one eye can stretch , there be nothing but marsh ground and stand pool . and before you come to the first cape , very near the main land there be two little hand . about five league from the second cape towards the southwest , viii 193 n there be another island very high and point , which we name Alezai . the first cape we name saint Peter cape , because upon that day we come thither . of the cape call cape Orleans : of the river of boat : of wild man cape : and of the quality and temperature of the country . from brion island to this place there be good anchorage of sand , and have sound towards Southwest even to the shore about five league , we find twenty and five fathom water , and within one league twelve fathom , and very near the shore six fathom , rather more then less , and also good anchorage . but because we will be the better acquaint with this stony and rochie ground , we stroohe our sail low and athwart . the next day be the last of the month save one , the wind blow south and by east . we sail westward until Tuesday morning at sun rise , be the last of the month , without [ he . 206. ] any sight or knowledge of any land except in the evening towards sun set , that we discover a land which seem to be two hand , that be beyond we west southwest , about nine or ten league . all the next day till the next morning at sun rise we sail westward about fourty league , and by the way we perceive that the land we have see like hand , be firm land , lie south southeast , and north northwest , to a very good cape of land call cape Orleans . a exceed all the say land be low and plain , ’ and the fair goodly land . may possible be see , full of goodly meadow and tree . true it be that we can find no harbour there , because it be all full of shelf and sand . we with our boat go on shore in many place , and among the rest we enter into a goodly river , but very shallow , which we name the river of boat , because that there we see boat full of wild man that be cross the river . we have no other notice of the say wild man : for the wind come from 194 the sea , and so beat we against the shore , that we be constrain to retire our self with our boat towards our ship . till the next day morning at sun rise , be the first of July , we sail Northeast , in which time there rise great mist and storm , and therefore we strike our sail till two of the clock in the afternoon , that the weather become clear , and there we have sight of cape Orleans , and of another about seven league from we , lie north and by east , and that we call wild man cape . on the northside of this cape about half a league , there be a very dangerous shelf , and bank of stone . while we be at this cape , we see a man run after our boat that be go along the coast , who make sign unto we that we shall return towards the say cape again . we see such sign , begin to turn towards he , but he see we come , begin to flee : so soon as we be come on shore , we set a knife before he and a woollen girdle on a little staff , and then come to our ship again . that day we trend the say land about 9 or 10. league , hope to find some good harbour , but it be not possible : for as i have say already , it be a very low land , and environ round about with great shelf . nevertheless we go that day on shore in four place to see the goodly and sweet smell tree that be there : we varie^ of find they to be cedar , ewetree , pine , white elm , trees‘ ash , willow , with many other sort of tree to we unknown , but without any fruit . the ground where no wood be , be very fair , and all full of peason , white and red gooseberry , strawberry , blackebery , and wild corn , even like unto rye , which seem to have be sow and plow . this country be of better temperature than any other that can be see , and very hot . there be many thrush , stockdove , and other bird : to be short , there want nothing but good harborough . [ of the 195 of the bay call saint Lunario , and other notable bay and cape of land , and of the quality , and goodness of those ground . the next day be the second of July we discover and have sight of land on the northern side towards we , that do join unto the land abovesaid , all compass about , and we know that it have about * inn depth , and as much athwart , we name it saint lunarios bay , and with our boat we go to the cape towards the north , and find the shore so shallow , that for the space of a league from land there be but a fathom water . on the north-east side from the say cape about 7. or 8. league there be another cape of land , in the midst whereof there be a bay fashion trianglewise , very deep , and as far off as we can ken from it the same lie Northeast . the say bay be compass about with sand and shelf about 10. league from land , and there be but two fathom water : from the say cape to the bank of the other , there be about 15. league . we be a cross the say cape , discover another land and cape , and as far as we can ken , it lie north and by east . all that night the weather be very ill , and great wind , so that we be constrain to bear a small sail until the next morning , be the third of July when the wind come from the west : and we sail northward to have a sight of the land that we have leave on the north-east side , above the low land , among which high and low land there be a gulf or breach in some place about 55. fathom deep , and 15. league in breadth . by reason of the great depth and breadth of the gulf , and change of the land , we conceive hope that we shall find a passage , like unto the passage of the castle . the say gulf lie east Northeast , and west southwest . the ground that lie on the southside of the say gulf , be as good and easy to be manure , and full of as goodly field and meadow , as any that ever we have see , as 196 plain and smooth as any die : and that which lie on the north be a country altogether hilly , full of wood , and very high and great tree of sundry sort : among the rest there be as goodly ceder , and fir tree , as possible can be see , able to make mast for ship of three hundred tun : neither do we see any place that be not full of the say tree , except two only that be full of goodly meadow , with two very fair lake . the midst of the say bay be 47. degree and half in latitude . Trees able to mast ship of 300. ton . of the cape d’esperance , or the cape of hope , and [ hl 207. ] of s. martins creek , and how 7. boat full of wild man come to our boat , will not retire themselves , but be terrify with our culverin which we shoot at they , and our lance , they flee with great haste . the cape of the say south land be call the cape of hope , through the hope that there we have to find some passage . the four of July we go along the coast of the say land on the northerly side to find some harbour , where we enter into a creek altogether open towards the south , where there be no succour against the wind : we think good to name it saint Martin creek . there we stay from the four of July until the twelve : while we be there , on Monday be the six of the month , service be do , we with one of our boat go to discoyer a cape and point of land that on the western side be about seven or eight league from we , to see which way it do bend , and be within half a league of it , we see two company of boat of wild man forty or 5° go from one land to the other : their boat be in a number about fourty or fifty . one part of the which come to the say point , and a great number of the man go on shore make a great noise , beckon unto we that we shall come on land , show we certain skin upon piece of wood , but because we 197 have but one only boat , we will not go to they , but go to the other side lie in the sea : they see we flee , prepare two of their boat to follow we , with which come also five more of they that be come from the sea side , all which approach near unto our boat , dance , and make many sign of joy and mirth , as it be desire our friendship , say in their tongue napeu tondamen assurtah , with many other word that we understand not . but because ( as we have say ) we have but one boat , we will not stand to their courtesy , but make sign unto they that they shall turn back , which they will not do , but with great fury come towards we : and sudden with their boat compass we about : and because they will not away from we by any sign that we can make , we shoot off two piece among they , which do so terrify they , that they put themselves to flight towards the say point , make a great noise : and have stay a while , they begin anew , even as at the first to come to we again , and be come near our boat we strike at they with two lance , which thing be so great a terror unto they , that with great haste they begin to flee , and will no more follow we . how the say wild man come to our ship , and our man go towards they , both party go on land , and how the say wild man with great joy begin to traffic with our man . the next day part of the say wild man with nine of their boat come to the point and entrance of the creek , where we with our ship be at road . we be advertise of their come , go to the point where they be with our boat : but so soon as they see we , they begin to flee , make sign that they come to traffic with we , show we , such skin as they cloth themselves withal , which be of small value . we likewise make sign unto they , that we wish they no evil : and in sign thereof two of our man 198 venture to go on land to they , and carry they knife with other iron ware , and a red hat to give unto their captain . which when they see , they also come on land , and bring some of their skin , and so begin to deal with we , seem to be very glad to have our iron ware and other thing , still dance with many other ceremony , as with their hand to cast sea water on their head . they give we whatsoever they have , not keep any thing , so that they be constrain to go back again naked , and make we sign that the next day they will come again , and bring more skin with they . How that we have send two of our man on land with ware , there come about 300. wild man with great gladness . of the quality of the country , what it bring forth , and of the bay call bay du chaleur , or the bay of heat . upon Thursday be the eight of the month , because the wind be not good to go out with our ship , we set our boat in a readiness to go to discover the say bay , and that day we go 25. league within it . the next day the wind and weather be fair , we sail until noon , in which time we have notice of a great part of the say bay , and how that over the low land , there be other land with high mountain : but see that there be no passage at all , we begin to turn back again , take our way along the coast : 8c sailing , we see certain wild man that stand upon the shore of a lake , that be among the low ground , who be make fire and smoke : we go thither , 8c find that there be a chanel of the sea that do enter into the lake , and set our boat at one of the bank of the channel , the wild man with one of their boat come unto we , and bring up piece of seal ready sodden , [ three . 208. ] put they upon piece of wood : then retire themselves , they will make sign unto we , that they do give they we . we send two man unto they with 199 hatchet , knife , bead , and other such like ware , whereat they be very glad , and by and by in cluster they come to the shore where we be , with their boat , bring with they skin and other such thing as they have , to have of our ware . they be more than 300. man , woman and child : some of the woman which come not over , we may see stand up to the knee in water , sing and dance : the other that have pass the river where we be , come very friendly to we , rub our arm with their own hand , then will they lift they up towards heaven , show many sign of gladness : and in such wise be we assure one of another , that we very familiar begin to traffic for whatsoever they have , till they have nothing but their naked body ; for they give we all whatsoever they have , and that be but of small value . we perceive that this people may very easy be convert to our religion . they go from place to place . they live only with fish . they have a ordinary time to fish for . their provision . the country be hot than the country of Spain , and the fair that can possible be find , altogether smooth , and level . there be no place be it never so little , but it have some tree ( yea albeit it be sandy ) or else be full of wild corn , that have a ear like unto rye : the corn be like oat , and small peason as thick as if they have be sow and plow , white and red gooseberry , strawberry , blackbery , white and red rose , with many other flower of very sweet and pleasant smell . there be also many goodly meadow full of grass , and lake wherein great plenty of salmon be . they call a hatchet in their tongue Cochi , and a knife bacon : we name it ray du cha - the bay of heat . leur , or the bay of heat . of another nation of wild man : of their manner , live and clothe . be certify that there be no passage through the say bay , we hoist sail , and go from saint Martin creek upon Sunday be the 12. of July , to go and dis-200 cover further beyond the say bay , and go along the sea coast eastward about eighteen league , till we come to the cape of Prato , where we find the tide very great , but shallow ground , and the sea stormy , so that we be constrain to draw towards shore , between the say cape and a hand lie eastward , about a league from the say cape , where we cast anchor for that night . the next morning we hoist sail to trend the say coast about , which lie north Northeast . but there rise such a stormy and rage wind against we , that we be constrain to come to the place again , from whence we be come : there do we stay all that day till the next that we hoist up sail , and come to the midst of a river five or six league from the cape of Prato northward , and be overthwart the say river , there arise again a contrary wind , with great fog and storm . so that we be constrain upon Tuesday be the fourteenth of the month to enter into the river , and there do we stay till the sixteenth of the month look for fair weather to come out of it : on which day be Thursday , the wind become so rage that one of our ship lose a anchor , and we be constrain to go up high into the river seven or eight league , into a good harbour and ground that we with our boat find out , and through the evil weather , tempest , and darkness that be , we stay in the say harbour till the five and twenty of the month , not be able to put out : in the mean time we see a great multitude of wild man that be fish for mackerel , whereof there be great store . their boat be about 40 , and the person what with man , woman and child two hundred , which after they have haunt our company a while , they come very familiar with their boat to the side of our ship . we give they knife , comb , bead of glass , and other trifle of small value , for which they make many sign of gladness , lift their hand up to heaven dance and sing in their boat . Theise man may very well and true be call wild , because there be no poor people 201 in the world . for i think all that they have together , beside their boat and net be not’worth five souse . they go altogether naked save their privity , which be cover with a little skin , and certain old skin that they cast upon they . neither in nature nor in language , do they any whit agree with they which we find first : their head be altogether shave , except one bush of hair which they suffer to grow upon the top of their crown as long as a horse tail , and then with certain leather string bind it in a knot upon their head . they have no other dwelling but their boat , which they turn upside down , and under they they lie themselves all along upon the bare ground . they eat their flesh almost raw , save only that they heat it a little upon embers of coal , so do they their fish . upon Magdalen day we with our boat go to the bank of the river , and free go on shore among they , whereat they make many sign , and all their man in two or three company begin to sing and dance , seem to be very glad of our come . they have cause all the young woman to flee into the wood , two or three except , that [ three . 209. ] stay with they , to each of which we give a comb , and a little bell make of tin , for which they be very glad , thank our captain , rub his arm and breast with their hand . when the man see we give something unto those that have stay , it cause all the rest to come out of the wood , to the end they shall have as much as the other : these woman be about twenty , who altogether in a knot fall upon our captain , touch and rub he with their hand , accord to their manner of cherish and make much of one , who give to each of they a little tin bell : then sudden they begin to dance , and sing many song . there we find great store of mackrel , that they have take upon the shore , with certain net that they make to fish , of a kind of hemfe . hemp that grow in that place where ordinary they abide , for they never come to the sea , but only in fish time . as far as i understand , there grow likewise a 202 kind of millet as big as peason , like unto that which Maiz. grow in Bresil , which they eat in stead of bread . they have great store of it . they call it in their tongue Kapaige . they have also prune ( that be to say dam - tamsin , fig , sin ) which they dry for winter as we do , they call they a^es-honesta . they have also fig , nut , apple , and other fruit , and bean , that they call Sahu , their nut Cahehya . if we show they any thing that they have not , nor know not what it be , shake their head , they will say Nohda , which be as much to say , they have it not , nor they know it not . of those thing they have , they will with sign show we how to dress they , and how they grow . they eat nothing that have any taste of salt . they be very great thief , for they will filch and steal whatsoever they can lay hold of , and all be fish that come to net . fl how our man set up a great cross upon the point of the say porte , and the captain of those wild man , after a long oration , be by our captain appease , and content that two of his child shall go with he . upon the 24 of the month , we cause a fair high cross to be make of the height of thirty foot , which be make in the presence of many of they , upon the point of the entrance of the say haven , in the midst whereof we hang up a shield with three flower de Luce inn it , and in the top be carve in the wood with antic letter this posy , vive le kaven roy de France . then before they all we set it upon t0 be the say point . they with great heed behold both they ? y ’ make and set of it up . so soon as it be up , we altogether kneel down before they , with our hand towards heaven , yield God thank : and we make sign unto they , show they the heaven , and that all our salvation depend only on he which in they dwell : whereat they show a great admiration , look first one at another , and then upon 203 the cross . and after we be return to our ship , their captain clad with a old bear skin , with three of his son , and a brother of he with he , come unto we in one of their boat , but they come not so near we as they be wont to do : there he make a long oration unto we , show we the cross we have set up , and make a cross with two finger , then do he show we all the country about we , as if he will say that all be he , and that we shall not set up any cross without his leave . his talk be end , we show he a axe , feign that we will give it he for his skin , to which he listen , for by little and little he come near our ship . one of our fellow that be in our boat , take hold on they , and sudden leap into it , with two or three more , who enforce they to enter into our ship , whereat they be great astonish . but our captain do straightway assure they , that they shall have no harm , nor any injury offer they at all , and entertain they very friendly , make they eat and drink . then do we show they with sign , that the cross be but only set up to be as a light and leader which way to enter into the port , and that we will short come again , and bring good store of iron ware and other thing , but that we will take two of his child with we , and afterward bring they to the say port again : and so we clothe two of they in shirt , and colour coat , with red cap , and put about every one neck a copper chain , whereat they be great content : then give they their old clothes to their fellow that go back again , and we give to each one of those three that go back , a hatchet , and some knife , which make they very glad . after these be go , and have tell the news unto their fellow , in the after noon there come to our ship six boat of they , with five or six man in every one , to take their farewell of those two we have detain to take with we , and bring they some fish , utter many word which we do not understand , 204 i53+-making sign that they will not remove the cross we have set up . ^ [ how after we be depart from the say port , follow our voyage along the say coast , we go to discover the land lie southeast , and northwest . the next day , be the 25 of the month , we have fair weather , and go from the say port : and be out of the river , we sail Eastnortheast , for after the entrance into the say river , the land be [ three . 210. ] environ about , and make a bay in manner of half a circle , where be in our ship , we may see all the coast sail behind , which we come to seek , the land lie southeast and northwest , the course of which be distant from the river about twenty league . of the cape S. alvise , and cape Memorancie , and certain other land , and how one of our boat touch a rock and sudden go over it . on Monday be the 27 of the month , about sunset we go along the say land , as we have say , lie southeast and northwest , till Wednesday that we see another cape where the land begin to bend towards the east : we go along about 15 league , then do the land begin to turn northward . about three league from the say cape we sound , and find 24 fathom water . the say land be plain , and the fair and most without wood that we have see , with goodly green field and meadow : we name the say cape S. alvise cape , because that be his day : it be 49 degree and a half in latitude , and in longitude* . on Wednesday morning we be on the east side of the cape , and be almost night we go northwestward for to approach near to the say land , which trend north and south . from saint alvise cape to another call cape Memorancie , about fifteen league , the land begin to bend northwest . about three league from the say cape we will needs sound , 205 but we can find no ground at 150 fathom , yet go we along the say land , about ten league , to the latitude of 50 degree . the Saturday follow , degree be the first of August , by sun rise , we have of latitude , certain other land , lie north and Northeast , that be very high and craggy , and seem to be mountains : between which be other low land with wood and river : we go about the say land , as well on the one side as on the other , still bend northwest , to see if it be either a gulf , or a passage , until the five of the month . the distance from one land to the other be about fifteen league . the middle between they both be 50 degree and a terce in latitude . we have much ado to go five mile far , the wind be so great , and the tide against we . and at five mile end , we may plain see and perceive land on both side , which there begin to spread it self , but because we rather fall , then get way against the wind , we go towards land , purpose to go to another cape of land , lie southward , which be the farthermost out into the sea that we can see , about five league from we , but so soon as we come thither , we find it to be nought else but rock , stone , 8c craggy cliff , such as we have not find any where since we have sail southward from s Johns cape : and then be the tide with we , which carry we against the wind westward , so that as we be sail along the say coast , one of our boat touch a rock , and sudden go over , but we be constrain to leap out for to direct it on accord to the tide . how after we have agree and consult what be best to be do , we purpose to return : and of saint Peter strait , and of cape tiennot . after we have sail along the say coast , for the space of two hour , behold , the tide begin to turn against we , with so swift and rage a course , that it be not possible for we with 13 oar to row 206 or get one stone cast far , so that we be constrain to leave our boat with some of our man to guard they , and io or 12 man go ashore to the say cape , where we find that the land begin to bend Southwest , which have see , we come to our boat again , and so to our ship , which be still ready under sail , hope to go forward : but for all that , they be fall more than four league to leeward from the place where we have leave they , where so soon as we come , we assemble together all our captain , master , and mariner , to have their advice and opinion what be best to be do : and after that every one have say , consider that the easterly wind begin to bear sway , and blow , and that the flood be so great , that we do but fall , and that there be nothing to be get , and that storm and tempest begin to reign in newfound land , and that we be so far from home , not know the peril and danger that be behind , for either we must agree to return home again , or else to stay there all the year . Moreover , we do consider , that if the northern wind do take we , it be not possible for we to depart thence . all which opinion be hear and consider , we altogether determine to address our self homeward . now because upon saint Peter day we enter into the say streite , we name it saint Peter streite . the strait of we sound it in many place , in some we find s-peter-150 fathom water , in some 100 , and near the shore sixty , and clear ground . from that day till Wednesday follow , we have a good and prosperous gale of wind , so that we trended the say north shore east , southeast , west northwest : for such be the situation of it , except one cape of low land that bend more towards the southeast , about twenty five league from the strait . in this place we see certain smoke , [ three . 211. ] that the people of the country make upon the say cape : but because the wind blow we towards the coast , we go not to they , which when they see , they come 207 with two boat and twelve man unto we , and as free come unto our ship , as if they have be French man , and give we to understand , that they come from the great gulf , and that Tiennot be their captain , who then be upon that cape , make sign unto we , that they be go home to their country whence we be come with our ship , and that they be lade with fish . we cape Tiennot . name the say cape , cape tiennot . from the say cape all the land trend eastsoutheast , and westnorthwest . all these land lie low , very pleasant , environ with sand , where the sea be intermingle with marsh and shallows , the space of twenty league : then do the land begin to trend from west to Eastnortheast altogether environ with island two or three league from land , in which as far as we can see , be many dangerous shelf more than four or five league from land . how that upon the nine of August we enter within white sand , and upon the five of September we come to the port of s. malo . from the say Wednesday until Saturday follow , we have a great wind from the southwest , which cause we to run Eastnortheast , on which day we come to the easterly part of Newfoundland , between the grange and the double cape . there begin great stormy wind come from the east with great rage : wherefore we coast the cape northnorthwest , to search the northern part , which be ( as we have say ) all environ with island , and be near the say island and land , the wind turn into the south , which bring we within the say gulf , so that the next day be the 9 of August , we by the grace of God enter within the white sand . and this be so much as we have discover . after that , upon the 15 of August , be the feast of the assumption of our lady , after that we have hear service , we altogether depart from the port of white sand , and with a happy and prosperous weather we come into 208 the middle of the sea , that be between Newfoundland and Britain , in which place we be toss and turmoil three day long with great storm and windy tempest come from the east , which with the aid and assistance of God we suffer : then have we fair weather , and upon the five of September , in the say year , we come to the port of saint Malo whence we depart . A.D. 1534 - a short and brief narration of the navigation make by the commandment of the king of France , to the island of Canada , Hochelaga , Saguenay , and diverse other which now be call new France , with the particular custom , and manner of the inhabitant therein . Chap. i . n the year of our lord 1535 , upon Whitsunday , be the 16. of may , by the commandment of our captain James Cartier , and with a common accord , in the cathedral church of S. Malo we devout each one confess our self , and receive the sacrament : and all enter into the quire of the say church , we present our self before the reverend father in Christ , the lord bishop of S. Malo , who bless we all , be in his bishop robe . the Wednesday follow , be the 19 of may , there arise a good gale of wind , and therefore we hoist sail with three ship , that be to say , the great Hermina , be in burden about a hundredth , or a hundred and twenty ton , wherein the foresay captain James Cartier be generali , and master Thomas Frosmont chief master , accompany with master Claudius de Pont Briand , son to the lord of Montcevell , and cupbearer to the dolphin of France , Charles of pomeray , John Powlet , and other gentleman . in the second ship call the little Hermina , be of 210 threescore ton burden , be captain under the say Cartier , mace Salobert , and master William marry . in the three ship call the Hermerillon , be of forty ton in burden , be captain m. William Britton , and m. James Maingare . so we sail with a good and prosperous wind , until the 20 of the say month , at which time the weather turn into storm and tempest , the which with contrary wind , and darkness , endure so long that our ship be without any rest , suffer as much as any ship that ever go on sea : so that the 25 of June , by reason of that foul and foggy weather , all our ship lose sight one of another again till we come to newfound land where we have appoint to meet . after we have lose one another , we in the general ship be with contrary wind toss to and fro on the sea , until the seven of July , upon which day we arrive in new find land , and come to the island call the island of bird , which lie from the main land 14 league . this island be so full of bird , that all our ship may easy have be freight with they , and yet for the great number that there be , it will not seem that any be take away . we to victuali our self fill two boat of they . this island have the pole elevate 49 degree , and 40 minute . upon the eight of the say month we sail further , and with a prosperous weather come to the port call the port of white sand , that be in the bay call the bay of castle , where we have purpose to meet and stay together the 15 of the say month . in this place therefore we look for our fellow , that be to say , the other two ship , till the 26 of the month , on which day both come together . so soon as our fellow be come , we set our ship in a readiness , take in both water , wood , and other necessary . and then on the 29 of the say month , early in the morning we hoist sail to pass on further , and sail along the northern coast that run north-east and Southwest , till two hour after sunset or thereabouts , than we cross along two island , which 211 the isle oj bird in 49 degree 40 minute . the bay des chaste aux ere the grand bay the english voyage do stretch further forth than the other , which we call saint William island , be distant about 20 league or more from the port of breast . all the coast from the castle to that place lie east and west , Northeast and Southwest , have between it sundry little island , altogether barren and full of stone , without either earth or tree , except certain valley only . the next day be the 30 of July , we sail on westward to find out other island which as yet we have not find 12 league and a half , among which there be a great bay towards the north all full of island and great creek where many good harborough seem to be : they we name saint Martha island , from which about a league and a half further into the sea there be a dangerous shallow , wherein be five rock , which lie from saint Martha island about seven league as you pass into the say island , on the east and on the west side , to which we come the say day a hour after noon , and from that hour until midnight we sail about fifteen league athwart a cape of the low island , which we name saint germane island southeastward , from which place about three league , there be a very dangerous shallow . likewise between saint germane cape and saint Martha , about two league from the say island , there lie a bank of sand , upon which bank the water be but four fathom deep , and therefore see the danger of the coast , we strike sail and go no further that night : the next day be the last of July , we go all along the coast that run east and west , and somewhat southeasterly which be all environ about with island and dry sand , and in truth be very dangerous . the length from saint germane cape to the say island be about 17 league and a half , at the end of which there be a goodly plot of ground full of huge and high tree , albeit the rest of the coast be compass about with sand without any sign or show of harborough , till we come to cape thiennot , which trend northwest about seven league from the foresay island , which cape thiennot we note in 212 our former voyage , and therefore we sail on all that night west and westnorthwest , till it be day , and then the wind turn against we , wherefore we go to seek a haven wherein we may harbour our ship , and by good hap , find one fit for our purpose , about seven league and a half beyond cape thiennot , and that we name saint Nicholas haven , it lie amid 4 island that stretch into the sea : upon the near we for a token Nicholas . set up a wooden cross . but note by the way , that this cross must be bring Northeast , and then bend towards it , leave it on the left hand and you shall find six fathom water , and within the haven four . also you be to take heed of two shelf that lean outward half a league . all this coast be full of should and very dangerous , albeit in sight many good haven seem to be there , yet be there nought else but shelf and sand . we stale and rest our self in the say haven , until the seven of August be Sunday : on which day we hoist sail , and come towards land on the south side towards cape Rabast , distant from the cape Rabast . say haven about twenty league northnortheast , and southsouthwest : but the next day there rise a stormy and a contrary wind , and because we can find no haven there towards the south , thence we go coast along towards the north , beyond the abovesaid haven about ten league , where we find a goodly great gulf , full of island , passage , and entrance towards what wind soever you please to bend : for the knowledge of this gulf there be a great island that be like to a cape of land , stretch somewhat further forth than the other , and about two league within the land , there be a hill fashion as it be a heap of corn . we name the say gulf saint Laurence his bay . the twelve of they the gulf of say month we go from the say saint Laurence s - laurence-his bay , or gulf , sail westward , and discover a cape of land towards the south , that run west and cape of by south , distant from the say saint Laurence his we of bay , about five and twenty league . and of the two tm " 213 wild man which we take in our former voyage , it be tell we , that this be part of the southern coast , and that there be a island , on the southerly part of which be the way to go from honguedo ( where the year before we have take they ) to Canada , and that two day journey from the say cape , and island begin the kingdom of Saguenay , on the north shore extend towards Canada , and about three league athwart the say a mighty cape , there be above a hundred fathom water . Moreover shale i believe that there be never so many whale see ‘ as we see that day about the say cape . the next day after be our lady day of August the fifteen of the month , have pass the straight , we have notice of certain land that we leave towards the south , which land be full of very great and high hill , and this the isle of cape we name the island of the assumption , and Assumption . one qape of the sajj high country lie Eastnortheast , and westsouthwest , the distance between which be about five and twenty league . the country lie north may plain be perceive to be high than the southerly , more than thirty league in length . we trended the say land about towards the south : from the say day until Tewesday noon follow , the wind come west , and therefore we bend towards the north , purpose to go and see the land that we before have spy . be arrive there , we find the say land , as it be join together , and low towards the sea and the northerly mountain that be upon the say low land stretch east , and west , and a quarter of the south . our wild man tell we that there be the begin of Saguenay , and that it be land inhabit , and that thence come the red copper , of they name caignetdaze . there be between the southerly land , and the northerly about thirty league distance , the mouth of and more than two hundred fathom depth . the say ocheu f man moreover certify unto we , that there be then about thirty and begin of the great river of Hochelaga league broad , and ready way to Canada , which river the further it 214 go the narrow it come , even into Canada , and that then there be fresh water , which go so far upward , that they have never hear of any man who have go to the head of it , and that there be no other passage but with small boat . our captain hear their talk , and how they do affirm no other passage to be there , will not at that time proceed any further , till he have see and note the other land , and coast towards the north , which he have omit to see from saint Laurence his gulf , because he will know , if between the land towards the north any passage may be discover . how our captain cause the ship to return back [ three . 214. ] again , only to know if in saint Laurence gulf there be any passage towards the north . Chap. 2. upon the 18 of August be Wednesday , our captain cause his ship to wind back , and bend towards the other shore , so that we trended the say northerly cost , which run Northeast and Southwest , be fashion like unto half a bow , and be a very high land , but yet not so high as that on the south part . the Thursday follow we come to seven very the seven high island , which we name the round island . Theise islesislands be distant from the south shore about 40 league , and stretch out into the sea about 3 or 4 league . against these there be goodly low ground to be see full of goodly tree , which we then Friday follow , with our boat compass about . overthwart these land there be diverse sandy shelf more than two league into the sea , very dangerous , which at a low water remain almost dry . at the further bound of these low land , that contain about ten league , there be a river of fresh water , that with such swiftness run a swift river . into the sea , that for the space of one league within it the water be as fresh as any fountain water . we with our boat enter into the say river , at the entrance of which we find about one fathom and a half of water . 215 sea-horse . there be in this river many fish shape like horse , which as our wild man tell we , all the day long lie in the water , and the night on land : of which we see therein a great number . the next day be the 21 of the month , by break of day we hoist sail , and sail so long along the say coast , that we have sight of the rest of the say northern coast , which as yet we have the isle of not see , and of the island of the assumption which Assumption , we go to discover , depart from the say land : ' which thing so soon as we have do , and that we be certify not other passage to be there , we come to our ship again , which we have leave at the say island , where be a good harbour , the water be about nine or ten fathom . in the same place by occasion of contrary wind and foggy mist , we be constrain to stay , not be either able to come out of it , or hoist sail , till the 24 of the month : on which day we depart and come to a haven on the southerly coast about 80 league from a haven on the say island . this haven be over against three flat the southern isiand that lie amid the river , because on the midway ’ between those island , and the say haven towards the great north , there be a very great river that run between rwer ' the high and low land , and more than three league into the sea it have many shelf , and there be not altogether two fathom water , so that the place be very dangerous : and near unto the say shelf , there be either fifteen or 20 fathom from shore to shore . all the northerly coast run north-east and by north , and Southwest 8c by south . the say haven wherein we stay on the south side , be as it be but a sluice of the water that rise by the flood , 8c but of small saint Johns islet , account : we name they saint Johns islet , because we find they , 8c enter into they the day of the behead of that saint . and before you come to the say haven , there be a island lie eastward about 5 league distant from the same : between which and the land there be no passage save only for small boat . the haven of saint Johns islet dry up all the water that rise 216 by flow , although they flow two fathom at the least . the best place to harbour ship therein be on the south part of a little island that be over against the say haven , whereby the bank or shore of the island rise . upon the first of September we depart out of the say haven , purpose to go towards Canada ; and about 15 league from it towards the west , and westsouthwest , amid the river , there be three island , over against the which there be a river which run swift , and be of a great depth , and it be that which lead , and run into the country and kingdom of Saguenay , as by the two wild man of Canada it be tell we . this river pass and run along very high and steep hill of bare stone , where very little earth be , and notwithstanding there be great quantity of sundry sort of tree that grow in the say bare stone , even as upon good and fertile ground , in such sort that we have see some so great as well will suffice to make a mast for a ship of 30 ton burden , and as green as possible can be , grow in a stony rock without any earth at all . at the entrance of the say river we meet with 4 boat full of wild man , which as far as we can perceive , very fearful come towards we , so that some of they go back again , and the other come as near we as easy they may hear and understand one of our wild man , who tell they his name , and then take acquaintance of they , upon who word they come to we . the next day be the 2 of September , we come out of the say river to go to Canada , and by reason of the sea flow , the tide be very swift and dangerous , for that on the south part of it there lie two island , about which , more than three league compass , lie many rock and great stone , and but two fathom water : and the flow amid those island be very unconstant and doubtful , so that if it have not be for our boat , we have be in great dailger to lose our pinnace : and coast along the say dry sand , there be more than 30 fathom water . 217 this be the river of Tadascu or of Saguenay . [ Iii . 215. ] about five league beyond the river of Saguenay Southwest , there be another hand on the northside , aguenay . wherein be certain high land , and thereabouts we think to have cast anchor , on purpose to stay the next tide , but we can sound no ground in a 120 fathom , within a flight shoot from shore , so that we be constrain to wind back to the say hand , where we sound again and find 3 5 fathom . the next morning we hoist sail and go thence , sail further on , where we have notice of a certain kind of fish never before of any man see or know . they be about the bigness of a porpose , yet nothing like they , of body very well proportion , head like grayhound , altogeth as white as snow without any spot , within which river there be great quantity of they : they do live altogether between the sea and the fresh water . Theise people of the country call they Adhothuys , they tell we that they be very savoury and good to be eat . Moreover they affirm none to be find elsewhere but in the mouth of that river . the six of the month , the weather be calm and fair , we go about 15 league more upward into the river , and there light on a hand that look northward , and it make a little innumerable haven or creek wherein be many and innumerable great tortoise . tortoyze , continual lie about that hand . there be likewise great quantity of the say Adhothuys take by the inhabitor of the country , and there be as great a current in that place as be at Bourdeaux in France at every tide . this hand be in length about three league , and in breadth two , and be a goodly and fertile plot of ground , replenish with many goodly and great tree of many sort . among the rest there be many filbert-tree , which we find hang full of they , somewhat big and better in savour than we , but somewhat than we of hard , and therefore we call it the hand of filbert . iaerds^ sevent^ month be our lady even , after ‘ service we go from that hand to go up high into the river , and come to 14 hand seven or eight league 218 from the hand of filbert , where the country of Canada begin , one of which land be ten league in length , and five in breadth , great inhabit of such man as only live by fish of such sort of fish as the river afford , accord to the season of they . after we have cast anchor between the say great hand , and the this great northerly coast , we go on land and take our two wild man with we , meet with many or those country qriean 0 people , who will not at all approach unto we , but rather flee from we , until our two man begin to speak unto they , tell they that they be Taignoagny and Domagaia , who so soon as they have take acquaintance of they , begin great to rejoice , dance and show many sort of ceremony : and many of the chief of they come to our boat and bring many eel and other sort of fish , with two or three burden of great millet Matz . wherewith they make their bread , and many great musk million . the same day come also many other boat full of those countryman and woman , to see and take acquaintance of our two man , all which be as courteous receive and friendly entertain of our captain , as possible can be . and to have they the better acquaint with he , and make they his friend , he give they many small gift , but of small value : nevertheless they be great content with they . the next day follow , the lord of Canada ( who proper name be Donnacona , but by the name of lord they call he Agouhanna ) with twelve boat come to our ship , accompany with many people , who cause ten of his boat to go back with the other two , approach unto we with sixteen man . then begin the say Agouhanna over against the small of our ship , accord to their manner and fashion , to frame a long oration , move all his body and member after a strange fashion , which thing be a ceremony and sign of gladness and security among they , and then come to the general ship , where Taignoagny and Domagaia be , he speak with they and they with he , where they begin 219 to tell and show unto he what they have see in France , and what good entertainment they have have : hear which thing the say lord seem to be very glad thereof , and pray our captain to reach he his arm , that he may kiss it , which thing he do : their lord take it , lay it about his neck , for so they use to do when they will make much of one . than our captain enter into agouhannas boat , cause bread and wine to be bring to make the say lord and his company to eat and drink , which thing they do , and be great thereby content and satisfy . our captain for that time give they nothing , because he look for a fit opportunity . Theise thing be do , each one take leave of other , and the say lord go with his boat again to his place of abode . our captain then cause our boat to be set in order , that with the next tide he may go up high into the river , to find some safe harbour for our ship : and we pass up the river against the stream about ten league , coast the say hand , at the end whereof , we find a goodly and pleasant sound , where be a little river and haven , where by reason of the flood there be about three fathom water . this place seem to we very fit and commodious to harbour our ship therein , and so we do very safe , Santa Croix , we name it the holy cross , for on that day we come [ three . 216. ] thither . near unto it , there be a village , whereof donna-cona be lord , and there he keep his abode : it be call Stadacona . Stadacona , as goodly a plot of ground as possible may be see , and therewithal ! very fruitful , full of goodly tree even as in France , as Okes , elm , ash , walnut tree , maple tres , cydron , vine , and white thorn , that bring forth fruit as big as any damson , and many other sort of tree , under which grow as fair tall goodly hemp , hemp , as any in France , without any seed or any man work or labour at all . have consider the place , and find it fit for our purpose , our captain withdraw himself on purpose to return to our ship : but behold , as we be come out of the river we meet come 220 against we one of the lord of the say village of stada-cona , accompany with many other , as man , woman , and child , who after the fashion of their country , in sign of mirth and joy , begin to make a long oration , the woman still sing and dance up to the knee in water . our captain know their good will and kindness towards we , cause the boat wherein they be , to come unto he , and give they certain trifle , as knife , and bead of glass , whereat they be marvellous glad , for be go about three league from they , for the pleasure they conceive of our come , we may hear they sing , and see they dance for all they be so far . how our captain go to see and note the bigness of the hand , and the nature of it , and then return to the ship , cause they to be bring to the river of the holy cross . Chap. 3. after we be come with our boat unto our ship again , our captain cause our bark to be make ready to go on land in the say hand , to note the tree that in show seem so fair , and to consider the nature and quality of it : which thing we do , and find it full of goodly tree like to we . also we see many goodly vine , a thing not before of we see in those country , and therefore we name it Bacchus hand . it be in length about twelve league , in sight very pleasant , but full of wood , no part of it manure , unless it be in certain place , where a few cottage be for fisher dwelling as before we have say . the next day we depart with our ship to bring they to the place of the holy cross , and on the 14 of that month we come thither , and the lord Donnacona , Taignoagny , and Domagaia , with 25 boat full of those people , come to meet we , come from the place whence we be come , and go towards Stadacona , where their abide be , and all come to our ship , show sundry and diverse gesture of gladness 221 A.D. I535 - the lie of Bacchus , or the ik of Orleans . and mirth , except those two that we have bring , to wit , Taignoagny , and Domagaia , who seem to have alter and change their mind and purpose , for by no mean they will come unto our ship , albeit sundry time they be earnest desire to do it , whereupon we begin to mistrust somewhat . our captain ask they if according to promise they will go with he to Hochelaga ? they answer yea , for so they have purpose , and then each one withdraw himself . the next day be the fifteen of the month , our captain go on shore , to cause certain pole and pile to be drive into the water , and set up , that the better and safe we may harbour our ship there : and many of those country people come to meet we there , among who be Donnacona and our two man , with the rest of their company , who keep themselves aside under a point or nook of land that be upon the shore of a certain river , and no one of they come unto we as the other do that be not on their side . our captain understanding that they be there , command part of our man to follow he , and he go to the say point where he find the say Donnacona , Taignoagny , Domagaia , and diverse other : and after salutation give on each side , Taignoagny settle himself foremost to speak to our captain , say that the lord Donnacona do great grieve and sorrow that our captain and his man do wear warlike weapon , and they not . our captain answer , that albeit it do grieve they , yet will not he leave they off , and that ( as he know ) it be the manner of France . but for all these word our captain and Donnacona leave not off to speak one to another , and friendly to entertain one another . then do we perceive , that whatsoever Taignoagny speak , be only long of himself and of his fellow , for that before they depart thence our captain and Donnacona enter into a marvellous steadfast league of friendship , whereupon all his people at once with a loud voice , cast out three great cry , ( a horrible thing to hear ) and each one have take leave of the 222 other for that day , we go aboard again . the day follow we bring our two great ship within the river and harbour , where the water be at the high , be three fathom deep , and at the low , but half a fathom . we leave our pinnace without the road to the end we may bring it to Hochelaga . so soon as we have safe place our ship , behold we see Donnacona , Taignoagny and Domagaia , with more than five hundred person , man , woman and child , and the say lord with ten or twelve of the chief of the country come aboard of our ship , who be all courteous receive , [ three . 217. ] and friendly entertain both of our captain and of we all : and diverse gift of small value be give they . then do Taignoagny tell our captain , that his lord do great sorrow that he will go to Hochelaga , and that he will not by any mean permit that any of they shall go with he , because the river be of no importance . our captain answer he , that for all his say , he will not leave off his go thither , if by any mean it be possible , for that that he be command by his king to go as far as possible he can : and that if he ( that be to say Taignoagny ) will go with he , as he have promise , he shall be very well entertain , beside that , he shall have such a gift give he , as he shall well content himself : for he shall do nothing else but go with he to Hochelaga and come again . to who Taignoagny answer , that he will not by any mean go , and thereupon they sudden return to their house . the next day be the 17 of September , Donnacona and his company return even as at the first , and bring with he many eel , with sundry sort of other fish , whereof they take great store in the say river , as more large hereafter shall be show . and as soon as they be come to our ship , accord to their wont use they begin to sing and dance . this do , Donnacona cause all his people to be set on the one side : then make a round circle upon the sand he cause our captain with all his people to enter thereinto , 223 then he begin to make a long oration , hold in one of his hand a maiden child of ten or twelve year old , which he present unto our captain : then sudden begin all his people to make three great shriek , or howl , in sign of joy and league of friendship : present upon that he do present unto he two other young male child one after another , but young than the other , at the give of which even as before they give out shriek and howl very loud , with other ceremony : for which present , our captain give the say lord great and hearty thanks . then Taignoagny tell our captain , that one of the child be his own brother , and that the maiden child be daughter unto the say lord own sister , and the present be only give he to the end he shall not go to Hochelaga at all : to who our captain answer , that if they be only give he to that intent , if so he will , he shall take they again , for that by no mean he will leave his go off , for as much as he be so command of his king . but concern this , Domagaia tell our captain that their lord have give he those child as a sign and token of goodwill and security , and that he be content to go with he to Hochelaga , upon which talk great word arise between Taignoagny and Domagaia , by which we plain perceive that Taignoagny be but a crafty knave , and that he intend but mischief and treason , as well by this deed as other that we by he have see . after that our captain cause the say child to be put in our ship , and cause two sword and two copper basin , the one wrought , the other plain , to be bring unto he , and they he give to Donnacona , who be therewith great content , yield most hearty thanks unto our captain for they , and present upon that he command all his people to sing and dance , and desire our captain to cause a piece of artillery to be shoot off , because Taignoagny and Domagaia make great brag of it , and have tell they marvellous thing , and also , because they have never hear nor see 224. any before : to who our captain answer , that he be content : and by and by he command his man to shoot off twelve cannon charge with bullet into the wood that be hard by those people and ship , at who noise they be great astonish and amaze , for they think that heaven have fall upon they , and put themselves to flight , howl , cry , and shriek , so that it seem hell be break loose . but before we go thence , Taignoagny cause other man to tell we , that those man which we have leave in our pinnace in the road , have slay two man of their company , with a piece of ordinance that they have shoot off , whereupon the rest have put themselves all to flight , as though they shall all have be slay : which afterward we find untrue , because our man have not shoot off any piece at all that day . how Donnacona and Taignoagny with other , devise a pretty sleight or policy : for they cause three of their man to be attire like devil , feign themselves to be send from their god Cudruaigny , only to hinder our voyage to Hochelaga . Chap. 4. the next day be the eighteenth of September , these man still endeavour themselves to seek all mean possible to hinder and let our go to Hochelaga , and devise a pretty guile , as hereafter shall show . they go and dress three man like devil , be wrap in dog skin white and black , their face besmear as black as any coal , with home on their head more than a yard long , and cause they secret to be put in one of their boat , but come not near our ship as they be wont to do , for they lie hide within the wood for the space of two hour , [ three . 218. ] look for the tide , to the end the boat wherein the devil be , may approach and come near we , which when time be , come , and all the rest issue out of the wood come to we , but yet not so near as they be wont to do . there begin Taignoagny to salute viii 225 p our captain , who ask he if he will have the boat to come for he ; he answer , not for that time , but after a while he will come unto our ship : then present come that boat rush out , wherein the three counterfeit devil be with such long home on their head , and the middlemost come make a long oration and pass along our ship without turn or look towards we , but with the boat go towards the land . then do Donnacona with all his people pursue they , and lie hold on the boat and devil , who so soon as the man be come to they , fall prostrate in the boat even as if they have be dead : then be they take up and carry into the wood , be but a stone cast off , than every one withdraw himself into the wood , not one stay behind with we , where be , they begin to make a long discourse , so loud that we may hear they in our ship , which last above half a hour , and be end we begin to espy Taignoagny and Domagaia come towards we , hold their hand upward together , carry their hat under their upper garment , show a great admiration , and Taignoagny look up to heaven , cry three time Jesus , Jesus , Jesus , and Domagaia do as his fellow have do before , cry , Jesus Maria , James Cartier . our captain hear they , and see their gesture and ceremony , ask of they what they ail , and what be happen or chance anew ; they answer , that there be very ill tiding befall , say in french , Nenni est il bon , that be to say , it be not good : our captain ask they again what it be , then answer they , that their god cudruaigny have speak in Hochelaga : and that he have send those three man to show unto they that there be so much ice and snow in that country , that whosoever go thither shall die , which word when we hear , we laugh and mock they say , that their god Cudruaigny be but a fool and a noddy , for he know not what he do or say : then bid we they show his messenger from we , that Christ will defend they all 226 from cold , if they will believe in he . then do they ask of our captain if he have speak with Jesus : he answer no , but that his priest have , and that he tell they they shall have fair weather : which word when they have hear , they thank our captain , and depart towards the wood to tell those news unto their fellow , who sudden come all rush out of the wood , seem to be very glad for those word that our captain have speak , and to show that thereby they have have , and feel great joy , so soon as they be before our ship , they altogether give out three great shriek , and thereupon begin to sing and dance , as they be wont to do . but for a resolution of the matter Taignoagny and Domagaia tell our captain , that their lord Donnacona will by no mean permit that any of they shall go with he to Hochelaga , unless he will leave he some hostage to stay with he : our captain answer they , that if they will not go with he with a good will , they shall stay , and that for all they he will not leave off his journey thither . how our captain with all his gentleman and fifty mariner depart with our pinnace , and the two boat from Canada to go to Hochelaga : and also there be describe , what be see by the way upon the say river . Chap. 5. the next day be the 19 of September we hoist sail , and with our pinnace and two boat depart to go up the river with the flood , where on both shore of it we begin to see as goodly a country as possible can with eye be see , all replenish with very goodly tree , and vine lade as full of grape as can be all lade along the river , which rather seem to have be plant 8wes-by man hand than otherwise . true it be , that because they be not dress and wrought as they shall be , their bunch of grape be not so great nor sweet as we : also we see all along the river many house 227 inhabit of fisher , which take all kind of fish , and they come with as great familiarity and kindness unto we , as if we have be their countryman , and bring we great store of fish , with other such thing as they have , which we exchange with they for other ware , who lift up their hand towards heaven , give many sign of hochelay . joy : we stay at a place call Hochelai , about five and twenty league from Canada , where the river waxes very narrow , and run very swift , wherefore it be very dangerous , not only for that , but also for certain great stone that be therein : many boat and bark come unto we , in one of which come one of the chief lord of the country , make a long discourse , who be come near we , do by evident sign and gesture show we , that the high the river go , the more dangerous it be , and bid we take heed of our self . the say lord present and give unto our captain two of his own child , of which our captain take one be [ three . 219. ] a wench 7 or 8 year old , the man child he give he again , because it be too young , for it be but two or three year old . our captain as friendly and as courteous as he can do entertain and receive the say lord and his company , give they certain small trifle , and so they depart towards the shore again . afterwards the say lord and his wife come unto Canada to visit his daughter , bring unto our captain certain small present . from the nineteenth until the eight and twenty of September , we sail up along the say river , never lose one hour of time , all which time we see as goodly and pleasant a country as possible can be wish for , full ( as we have say before ) of all sort of goodly tree , that be to say , oak , elm , walnut-tree , cedar , firre , ash , box , willow , and great store of vine , all as full of grape as can be , so that if any of our fellow go on shore , they come home lade with they : there be likewise many crane , swan , goose , duck , feasant , partridge , thrush , blackbird , turtle , finche , redbreast , nightingale , 228 sparrow of diverse kind , with many other sort of bird , even as in France , and great plenty and store . upon the 28 of September , we come to a great wide lake in the middle of the river five or six league broad , the la^e of and twelve long , all that day we go against the tide , have but two fathom water , still keep the say scantling : be come to one of the head of the lake , we can espy no passage or go out , nay , rather it seem to have be close and shut up round about , and there be but a fathom and a half of water , little more or less . and therefore we be constrain to cast anchor , and to stay with our pinnace , and go with our two boat to seek some go out , and in one place we find four or five branch , which out of the river come into the lake , and they come from Hochelaga . but in the say branch , because of the great fierceness and swiftness wherewith they break out , and the course of the water , they make certain bar and should , and at that time there be but a fathom water . those shoulde be pass , we find four or five fathom , and as far as we can perceive by the flood , it be that time of the year that the water be low , for at other time they flow high by three fathom . all these four or five branch do compass about five or six hand very pleasant , which make the head of the lake : about fifteen league beyond , they do all come into one . that day we land in one of the say hand , and meet with five man that be hunt of wild beast , who as free and familiar come to our boat without any fear , as if we have ever be bring up together . our boat be somewhat near the shore , one of they take our captain in his arm , and carry he on shore , as light and as easy as if he have be a child of five year old : so strong and sturdy be this fellow . we find that they have a great heap of wild rat that live in the water , as big as a cony , rat as and very good to eat , which they give unto our cap - as taine , who for a recompense give they knife and 229 Hochelaga distant from the lake of angolesme 45. league . the english voyage glassen bead . we ask they with sign if that be the way to Hochelaga , they answer yea , and that we have yet three day sail thither . how our captain cause our boat to be mend and dress to go to Hochelaga : and because the way be somewhat difficult and hard , we leave our pinnace behind : and how we come thither , and what entertainment we have of the people . Chap. 6. the next day our captain see that for that time it be not possible for our pinnace to go on any further , he cause our boat to be make ready , and as much munition and victual to be put in they , as they can well bear : he depart with they , accompany with many gentleman , that be to say , Claudius of Ponte Briand , cupbearer to the lord dolphin of France , Charles of Pommeraye , John gouion , John Powlet , with twenty 8c eight mariner : and mace Jallobert , and William briton , who have the charge under the captain of the other two ship , to go up as far as they can into that river : we sail with good and prosperous weather until the second of October , on which day we come to the town of Hochelaga , distant from the place where we have leave our pinnace five and forty league . in which place of Hochelaga , and all the way we go , we meet with many of those countryman , who bring we fish and such other victual as they have , still dance and great rejoice at our come . our captain to lure they in , and to keep they our friend , to recompense they , give they knife , bead , and such small trifle , wherewith they be great satisfy . so soon as we be come near Hochelaga , there come to meet we above a thousand person , man , woman and child , who afterward do as friendly and merry entertain and receive we as any father will do his child , which he have not of long time see , the man dance on one side , the woman on another , and likewise the child on 230 * 535-anoth : after that they bring we great store of fish , and of their bread make of Millet , cast they into our [ three . 220. ] boat so thick , that you will have think it to fall from heaven . which when our captain see , he with many of his company go on shore : so soon as ever we be aland they come cluster about we , make very much of we , bring their young child in their arm , only to have our captain and his company to touch they , make sign and show of great mirth and gladness , that last more than half a hour . our captain see their love kindness and entertainment of we , cause all the woman orderly to be set in array , and give they bead make of tin , and other such small trifle , and to some of the man he give knife : than he return to the boat to supper , and so pass that night , all which while all those people stand on the shore as near our boat as they may , make great fire , and dance very merry , still cry aguiaze , which in their tongue signify mirth and safety . how our captain with five gentleman and twenty arm man all well in order , go to see the town of Hochelaga , and the situation of it . Chap. 7. our captain the next day very early in the morning , the three of have very gorgeous attire himself , cause all qct0^r . his company to be set in order to go to see the town and habitation of those people , and a certain mountain that be somewhat near the city : with who go also five gentleman and twenty mariner , leave the rest to keep and look to our boat : we take with we three man of Hochelaga to bring we to the place . all along as we go we find the way as well beat and frequent as can be , the fair and best country that possible can be see , full of as goodly great oak as be in any wood in France , under which the ground be all cover over . with fair acorn . after we have go about four or bernik from five mile , we meet by the way one of the chief lord of the rivet side . 231 the english voyage the city , accompany with many more , who so soon as he see we beckon and make sign upon we , that we must rest we in that place where they have make a great fife and so we do . after that we have rest our self there a while , the say lord begin to make a long discourse , even as we have say above , they be accustom to do in sign of mirth and friendship , show our captain and all his company a joyful countenance , and good will , who give he two hatchet , a pair of knife and a cross which he make he to kiss , and then put it about his neck , for which he give our captain hearty thanks . this do , we go along , and about a mile and a half far , we begin to find goodly and large field , full of such corn as the country yield . it be even as the millet of Bresil , as great and somewhat big than small peason , wherewith they live even as we do with we . in the midst of those field be the city of Hochelaga , place near , and as it be join to a great mountain that be till round about , very fertili , on the top of which you may see very far , we name it mount royal . the city of Hochelaga be round , compass about with timber , with three course of rampire , one within another frame like a sharp spire , but lay across above . the middlemost of they be make and build , as a direct line , but perpendicular . the rampire be frame and fashion with piece of timber , lay along on the ground , very well and cunning join together after their fashion . this enclosure be in height about two rod . it have but one gate or entry thereat , which be shut with pile , stake , and bar . over it , and also in many place of the wall , there be place to run along , and ladder to get up , all full of stone , for the defence of it . there be in the town about fifty house , about fifty pace long , and twelve , or fifteen broad , build all of wood , cover over with the bark of the wood as broad as any board , very fine and cunning join together . within the say house , there be many room , lodging and chamber . in the midst of every one there be a great 232 court , in the middle whereof they make their fire . they live in common together : then do the husband , wife and child each one retire themselves to their chamber . they have also on the top of their house certain garret , wherein they keep their corn to make their bread withal : they call it carraconny , which they make as hereafter shall follow . they have certain piece of wood , make hollow like those whereon we beat our hemp , and with certain beetle of wood they beat their corn to powder : than they make paste of it , and of the paste , cake or wreathe , than they lie they on a broad and hot stone , and then cover it with hot stone , and so they bake their bread in stead of oven . they make also sundry sort of pottage with the say corn and also of pease and of bean , whereof they have great store , as ... - ... 0 - cumber , and also with other fruit , as musk-millions , and very great other fruit . cucumber . they have also in their house certain vessel as big as any but or tun , wherein they preserve and keep their fish , cause the same in summer to be dry in the sun , and live therewith in winter , whereof they make great provision , as we by experience have see . all their viand and meat be without any taste or savour of salt at all . they sleep upon bark of tree lay all along upon the ground be overspread with the skin of certain wild beast , wherewith they also cloth and cover themselves . the thing most precious that they have in all the world they call Asurgny : it be as white as any snow : they take it in the say river of Cornibotz , in the manner follow . when any one have deserve death , or that they take any of their enemy in war , first they kill he , then with certain knife they give great slash and stroke upon their buttock , flank , thigh , and shoulder : then they cast the same body so mangle down to the bottom of the river , in a place where the say Esurgny be , and there leave it ten dr 12 hour , than they take it up again , and in the cut find the say Esurgny or Cornibotz . of they they make bead , and wear they about their 233 Matz , pease , bean , muskmillton , cu - plenty offish and the preserve thereof . [ Iii . 221. ] neck , even as we do chain of gold and silver , account it the precious thing in the world . they have this virtue and property in they , they will stop or staunch bleed at the nose , for we have prove it . Theise people be give to no other exercise , but only to husbandry and fish for their sustenance : they have no care of any other wealth or commodity in this world , for they have no knowledge of it , and that be , because they never travel and go out of their country , as those of Canada and Saguenay do , albeit the Canadians with eight or nine village more alongst that river be subject unto they . how we come to the town of Hochelaga , and the entertainment which there we have , and of certain gift which our captain give they , with diverse other thing . Chap. 8. so soon as we be come near the town , a great number of the inhabitant thereof come to present themselves before we after their fashion , make very much of we : we be by our guide bring into the midst of the town . they have in the middlemost part of their house a large square place , be from side to side a good stone cast , whither we be bring , and there with sign be command to stay : then sudden all the woman and maiden of the town gather themselves together , part of which have their arm full of young child , and as many as can came to rub our race , our arm , and what part of the body soever they can touch , weep for very joy that they see we , show we the best countenance that possible they can , desire we with their sign , that it will please we to touch their child . that do , the man cause the woman to withdraw themselves back , than they every one sit down on the ground round about we , as if they will have show and rehearse some comedy or other show : then present come the woman again , 234 every one bring a four square mat in manner of carpet , and spread they abroad on the ground in that place , they cause we to sit upon they . that do , the lord and king of the country be bring upon 9 or 10 man shoulder , ( who in their tongue they call Agouhanna ) sit upon a great stag skin , and they lay he down upon the foresay mat near to the captain , every open beckon unto we that he be their lord and king . This Agouhanna be a man about fifty year old : he be no whit better apparel than any of the rest , only except , that he have a certain thing make of the skin of hedgehog like a red wreath , and that be in stead of his crown . he be full of the palsy , and his member shrink together . after he have with certain sign salute our captain and all his company , and by manifest token bid all welcome , he show his leg and arm to our captain , and with sign desire he to touch they , and so he do , rub they with his own hand : then do Agouhanna take the wreath or crown he have about his head , and give it unto our captain : that do they bring before he diverse disease man , some blind , some cripple , some lame and impotent , and some so old that the hair of their eyelid come down and cover their cheek , and lay they all along before our captain , to the end they may of he be touch : for it seem unto they that God be descend and come down from heaven to heal they . our captain see the misery and devotion of this poor people , recite the gospel of saint John , that be to say , in the beginning be the word ; touch every one that be disease , pray to God that it will please he to open the heart of this poor people , and to make they know his holy word , and that they may receive baptism and Christendom : that do , he take a service-book in his hand , and with a loud voice read all the passion of Christ , word by word , that all the standard by may hear he : all which while this poor people keep silence , and be 235 marvellous attentive , look up to heaven , and imitate we in gesture . than he cause the man all orderly to be set on one side , the woman on another , and likewise the child on a other , and to the chief of they he give hatchet , to the other knife , and to the woman bead and such other small trifle . then where you child be , he cast ring , counter , and brooch make of tin , [ three . 222. ] whereat they seem to be very glad . that do , our captain command trumpet and other musical instrument to be sound , which when they hear , they be very merry . than we take our leave and go to our boat : the woman see that , put themselves before to stay we , and bring we out of their meat that they have make ready for we , as fish , pottage , bean , and such other thing , think to make we eat , and dine in that place : but because the meat have no savour at all of salt , we like they not , but thank they , and with sign give they to understand that we have no need to eat . when we be out of the town , diverse of the man and woman follow we , and bring we to the top mount royal . of the foresay mountain , which we name mount royal , it be about a league from the town . when as we be on the top of it , we may discern and a ridge of plain see thirty league about . on the northside of mountain to ; it there be many hill to be see run west and Hochelaga h . ast , and as many more on the south , among and and another between the which the country be as fair and as to the south , pleasant as possible can be see , be level , smooth , and very plain , fit to be husband and till : and in the midst of those field we see the river further up a great way than where we have leave our boat , where be the great and the swift fall of water that any where have be see , and as great , wide and large as our sight may discern , go Southwest along three fair the 3 fault and round mountain that we see , as we judge about late in ? afteene league from we . those which bring we degree of^ thither tell and show we , that in the say river there latitude . be three such fall of water more , as that be where we 236 1535-had leave our boat : but because we can not understand their language , we can not know how far they be one from another . Moreover they show we with sign , that the say three false be pass , a man may sail the space of three month more alongst that river , and that along the hill that be on the north side there be a great river , which ( even as the other ) come from the west , we think it to be the river that run 2% mor of through the country of Saguenay : and without any a&uenay sign or question move or ask of they , they take west the chain of our captain whistle , which be of silver , where there be and the dagger-haft of one of our fellow mariner , gold and hang on his side be of yellow copper guilt , and show we that such stuff come from the say river , and that there be Agouionda , that be as much to say , as evil people , who go all arm even to their finger end . also they show we the manner and make of their armour : they be make of cord and wood , fine and cunning wrought together . they give we also to understand that those Agouionda do continual war one against another , but because we do not understand they well , we can not perceive how far it be to that country . our captain show they red copper , which in their language they call caignetadze , and look toward that country , with sign ask they if any come from thence , they shake their head answer no : but they show we that it come from Saguenay , and that lie clean contrary to the other . Red copper in after we have hear and see these thing of they , we draw to our boat accompany with a great multitude of those people : some of they when as they see any of our fellow weary , will take they up on their shoulder , and carry they as on horseback . so soon as we come to our boat we hoist sail to go towards our pinnace , doubt of some mischance . our departure grieve and displease they very much , for they follow we along the river as far as they can : we go so fast that on Monday be the four of October 237 we come where our pinnace be . the Tuesday follow be the five of the month , we hoist sail , and with our pinnace and boat depart from thence towards the province of Canada , to the port of the holy cross , where we have leave our ship . the seven day we come against a river that come from the north , and enter into that river , at the entrance whereof be four little hand full of fair and goodly tree : we name that river the river of Fovetz : but because one of those island stretch it self a great way into the river , our captain at the point of it cause a goodly great cross to be set up , and command the boat to be make ready , that with the next tide he may go up the say river , and consider the quality of it , which we do , and that day go up as far as we can : but because we find it to be of no importance , and very shallow , we return and sail down the river . how we come to the port of the holy cross , and in what state we find our ship : and how the lord of the country come to visit our captain , and our captain he : and of certain particular custom of the people . Chap. 9 upon Monday be the 11 of October we come to the port of the holy cross , where our ship be , and find that the master and mariner we have leave there , have make and rear a trench before the ship , altogether close with great piece of timber set upright [ three . 223. i and very well fasten together : then have they beset the say trench about with piece of artillery and other necessary thing to shield and defend themselves from the power of all the country . so soon as the lord of the country hear of our come , the next day be the twelve of October , he come to visit we , accompany with Taignoagny , Domagaia and many other , feign to be very glad of our come , make 238 much of our captain , who as friendly as he can , entertain they , albeit they have not deserve it . Donnacona their lord desire our captain the next day to come and see Canada , which he promise to do : for the next day be the 13 of the month , he with all his gentleman and fifty mariner very well appoint , go to visit Donnacona and his people , about a league from our ship . the place where they make their abode be call Stadacona . when we be about a stone cast from their house , many of the inhabitant come to meet we , be all set in a rank , and ( as their custom be ) the man all on one side , and the woman on the other , still dance and sing without any cease : and after we have salute and receive one another , our captain give they knife and such other sleight thing : than he cause all the woman and child to pass along before he , give each one a ring of tin , for which they give he hearty thanks : that do , our captain be by Donnacona and Taignoagny , bring to see their house , which ( the quality consider ) be very well provide , and store with such victual as the country yield , to pass away the winter withal . than they show we the skin of five man head spread upon board as we do use parchment : Donnacona tell we that they be skin of Toudamani , a people dwell towards the south , who continual do war against they . Moreover they tell we , that it be two year past that those toudamans come to assault they , yea even into the say river , in a hand that lie over against Saguenay , where they have be the night before , as they be go a warfaring in Hognedo , with 200 person , man , woman , and child , who be all asleep in a fort that they have make , they be assault by the say Toudamans , who put fire round about the fort , and as they will have come out of it to save themselves , they be all slay , only five except , who escape . for which loss they yet sorrow , show Stadacona . Toudamani dwell southward of Canada . 239 with sign , that one day they will be revenge : that do , we come to our ship again . the manner how the people of that country live : and of certain condition : of their faith , manner , and custom . Chap. io . this people believe no whit in God , but in one who they call Cudruaigni : they say that often he speak with they and tell they what weather shall follow , whether good or bad . Moreover they say , that when he be angry with they he cast dust into their eye : they believe that when they die they go into the star , and thence by little and little descend down into the horizon , even as the star do , and that then they go into certain green field full of goodly fair and precious tree , flower , and fruit . after that they have give we these thing to understand , we show they their error , and tell that their Cudruaigni do but deceive they , for he be but a devil and a evil spirit : affirm unto they , that there be but one only God , who be in heaven , and who give we all necessary , be the creator of all himself , and that only we must believe in he : moreover , that it be necessary for we to be baptise , otherwise we be damn into hell . Theise and many other thing concern our faith and religion we show they , all which they do easy believe , call their Cudruaigni , Agouiada , that be to say , nought , so that very earnest they desire and pray our captain that he will cause they to be baptise , and their lord , and Taignoagny , doma-they desire io gaia , and all the people of the town come unto we , be baptize , hope to be baptise : but because we do not thorough know their mind , and that there be no body can teach they our belief and religion , we excuse our self , desire Taignoagny , and Domagaia , to tell the rest of their countryman , that he will come again another time , and bring priest and chrisome with we , for 240 without they they can not be baptise : which they do easy believe , for Domagaia and Taignoagny have see many child baptise in Britain while they be there . which promise when they hear they seem to be very glad . they live in common together : and of such commodity as their country yield they be indifferent well store , the inhabitant of the country cloth themselves with the skin of certain wild beast , but very miserable . in winter they be hose and shoe make of wild beast skin , and in summer they go barefooted . they keep and observe the rite of matrimony , save that every one wed 2 or 3 wife , which ( their husband be dead ) do never marry again , but for the death of their husband wear a certain black weed all the day of their life , besmear all their face with coaldust and grease mingle together as thick as the back of a knife , and by that they be know to be widow . they have a filthy [ three . 224. ] and detestable use in marry of their maiden , and that be this , they put they all ( after they be of lawful age to marry ) in a common place , as harlot free for every man that will have to do with they , until such time as they find a match . this i say , because i have see by experience many house full of those damosel , even as our school be full of child in France to learn to read . Moreover , the misrule and riot that they keep in those house be very great , for very wanton they sport and dally together , show whatsoever God have send they . they be no man of great labour . they dig their ground with certain piece of wood , as big as half a sword , on which ground grow their corn , which they call Offici : it their Maiz. be as big as our small peason : there be great quantity of it grow in bresill . they have also great store of musk-millions , pompion , gourd , cucumber , peason and Beanes * of every colour , yet differ from we . there grow also a certain kind of herb , whereof in summer they make great provision for all the year , vin 241 q make great account of it , and only man use of it , and first they cause it to be dry in the sun , then wear it about their neck wrap in a little beast skin make like a little bag , with a hollow piece of stone or wood like a pipe : then when they please they make powder of it , and then put it in one of the end of the say cornet or pipe , and lay a coal of fire upon it , at the other end suck so long , that they fill their body full of smoke , till that it come out of their mouth and nostril , even as out of the tonnell of a chimney . they say that this do keep they warm and in health : they nev^r go without some of it about they . we our self have try the same smoke , and have put it in our mouth , it seem almost as hot as pepper . the woman of that country do labour much more than the man , as well in fish ( whereto they be great give ) as in till and husband their ground , and other thing : as well the man as woman and child , be very much more able to resist cold then savage beast , for we with our own eye have see some of they , when it be cold ( which cold be extreme raw and bitter ) come to our ship stark naked go upon snow and ice , which thing seem incredible to they that have not see it . when as the snow and ice lie on the ground , they take great store of wild beast , as faun , stag , bear , martern , hare and fox , with diverse other sort who flesh they eat raw , have first dry it in you sun or smoke , and so they do their fish . as far forth as we can perceive and understand by these people , it be a very easy thing to bring they to some familiarity and civility , and make they learn what one will . the lord God for his mercy sake set thereunto his help hand when he see cause . amen . 242 of the greatness and depth of the say river , and of the sort of beast , bird , fish , and other thing that we have see , with the situation of the place . Chap. 11. the say river begin beyond the hand of the assumption , over against the high mountain of Hognedo , and of the seven hand . the distance over from one side to the other be about 35 or 40 league . in the midst it be above 200 fathom deep . the sure way to sail upon it be on the south side . and towards the north , that be to say , from the say 7 hand , from side to side , there be seven league distance , where be also two great river that come down from the hill of Saguenay , and make diverse very dangerous shelf in the sea . at the entrance of those two river we see many and great store of whale and sea horse . overthwart the say hand there be another little river that run along those marsh ground about 3 or 4 league , wherein there be great store of water fowl . from the entrance of that river to Hochelaga there be about 300 league distance : the originali beginning of it be in the river that come from Saguenay , which rise and spring among high and steep hill : it enter into that river before it come to the province of Canada on the north side . that river be very deep , high , and straight , wherefore it be very dangerous for any vessel to go upon it . after that river follow the province of Canada , wherein be many people dwell in open borough and village . there be also in the circuit and territory of Canada , along , and within the say river , many other hand , some great and some small , among which there be one that contain above ten league in length , full of goodly and high tree , and also many vine . you may go into it from both side , but yet the sure passage be on the south side . on the shore or bank of that river westward , there be a goodly , fair , and delectable bay or creek , convenient and fit for to 243 it be now find to be but 200 league . harbour ship . hard by there be in that river one place very narrow , deep , and swift run , but it be not pass the three part of a league , over against the which there be a goodly high piece of land , with a town therein : and the country about it be very well till and wrought , and as good as possible can be see . that be the place and abode of Donnacona , and of our two man we take in our first voyage , it be call Stadacona . but before we come to it , there be 4 other people town , [ three . 225. ] that be to say , Ayraste , Starnatan , Tailla , which stand upon a hill , Scitadin , and then Stadagona , under which town towards the north the river and port of the holy cross be , where we stay from the 15 of September , until the 16 of May 1536 , and there our ship remain dry , as we have say before . that place be pass , we find the habitation of the people call Teguenondahi , stand upon a high mountain , and the valley of hochelay , which stand in a champagne country . all the say country on both side of the river as far as hochelay and beyond , be as fair and plain as ever be see . there be certain mountain far distant from the say river , which be to be see above the foresay river fall town , from which mountain diverse river descend , from moun - which fall into the say great river . all that country ‘ be full of sundry sort of wood and many vine , unless it be about the place that be inhabit , where they have pull up the tree to till and labour the ground , and to build their house and lodging . there be great store of beast . stag , deer , bear , and other such like sort of beast , as cony , hare , martern , fox , otter , beaver , weasel , badger , and rat exceed great , and diverse other sort of wild beast . they cloth themselves with the skin of those beast , because they have nothing else to make they apparel ! withal . there be bird . also many sort of bird , as crane , swan , bustard , wild goose white and grey , duck , thrush , blackbird , turtle , wild pigeon , Lenites , finche , redbreast , stare , nightingale , sparrow , and other bird , 244 even as in France . also , as we have say before , the say river be the plentifull of fish that ever have of any man fish . be see or hear of , because that from the mouth to the end of it , accord to their season , you shall find all sort of fresh water fish and salt . there be also many whale , porpoise , seahorse , and adhothuis , which be a kind of fish that we have never see nor hear of before . they be as great as porpoise , as white as any snow , their body and head fashion as a grayhound , they be wont always to abide between the fresh and salt water , which begin between the river of Saguenay and Canada . of certain advertisement and note give unto we by those countryman , after our return from Hochelaga . Chap. 12. after our return from Hochelaga , we deal , traffic , and with great familiarity and love be conversant with those that dwell near unto our ship , except that sometime we have strife and contention with certain naughty people , full sore against the will of the other . we understand of Donnacona and of other , that the say river be call the river of Saguenay , and go to ' Saguenay , be somewhat more than a league far westnorthwest , and that 8 or 9 day journey beyond , it will bear but small boat . but the right and ready the right way way to Saguenay be up that river to Hochelaga , and then t0 Saguenay . into another that come from Saguenay , and then enter into the foresay river , and that there be yet one month sail thither . Moreover , they tell we and give we to understand , that there be people clad with cloth as we be , very honest , and many inhabit town , and that they have great store of gold and red copper : and that tear °f about the land beyond the say first river to Hochelaga read copper . and Saguenay , be a hand environ round about with that and other river , and that beyond Saguenay the say Twg or three river enter into two or 3 great lake , and that there be great lake . 245 the river of irrouacasfalling into the lake ofango-lesme . [ in . 226 , ] the english voyage a sea of fresh water find , and as they have hear say of those of Saguenay , there be never man hear of that find out the end thereof : for , as they tell we , they themselves be never there . Moreover they tell we , that where we have leave our pinnace when we go to Hochelaga , there be a river that go southwest , from whence there be a whole month sail to go to a certain land , where there be neither ice nor snow see , where the inhabitant do continual war one against another , where be great store of orange , almond , nut , and apple , with many other sort of fruit , and that the man and woman be clad with beast skin even as they : we ask they if there be any gold or red copper , they answer no . i take this place to be towards Florida , as far as i can perceive and understand by their sign and token . of a strange and cruel disease that come to the people of Stadacona , wherewith because we do haunt their company , we be so infect , that there die 25 of our company . Chap. 13. in the month of December , we understand that the pestilence be come among the people of Stadacona , in such sort , that before we know of it , accord to their confession , there be dead above 50 : whereupon we charge they neither to come near our fort , nor about our ship , or we . and albeit we have drive they from we , the say unknown sickness begin to spread itself among we after the strange sort that ever be either hear of or see , insomuch as some do lose all their strength , and can not stand on their foot , then do their leg swell , their sinew shrink as black as any cole* other also have all their skin spot with spot of blood of a purple colour : then do it ascend up to their ankel , . knee , thigh , shoulder , arm , and neck : their mouth become stink , their gum so rot , that all the flesh do fall off , even to the root of the tooth , which . 246 do also almost all fall out . with such infection do this sickness spread it self in our three ship , that about the middle of February , of a hundred and ten person that we be , there be not ten whole , so that one can not help the other , a most horrible and pitiful case , consider the place we be in , forsomuch as the people of the country will daily come before our fort , and see but few of we . there be already eight dead , and more than fifty sick , and as we think , past all hope of recovery . our captain see this our misery , and that the sickness be go so far , ordain and command , that every one shall devout prepare himself to prayer , and in remembrance of Christ , cause his image to be set upon a tree , about a flight shoot from the fort amid the ice and snow , give all man to understand , that on the Sunday follow , service shall be say there , and that whosoever can go , sick or whole , shall go thither in procession , sing the seven psalm of David , with other litany , pray most hearty that it will please the say our Christ to have compassion upon we . service be do , and as well celebrate as we can , our captain there make a vow , that if it will please God to give he leave to return into France , he will go on pilgrimage to our lady of Rocquemado . that day Philip Rouge-mount , bear in Amboise , die , be 22 year old , and because the sickness be to we unknown , our captain cause he to be rip to see if by any mean possible we may know what it be , and so seek mean to save and preserve the rest of the company : he be find to have his heart white , but rot , and more than a quart of red water about it : his liver be indifferent fair , but his lung black and mortify , his blood be altogether shrink about the heart , so that when he be open great quantity of rot blood issue out from about his heart : his milt towards the back be somewhat perish , rough as if it have be rub against a stone . Moreover , because one of his thigh be very black without , it be 247 open , but within it be whole and sound : that do , as well as we can he be bury . in such sort do the sickness continue and increase , that there be not above three sound man in the ship , and none be able to go under hatch to draw drink for himself , nor for his fellow . sometime we be constrain to bury some of the dead under the snow , because we be not able to dig any grave for they the ground be so hard freeze , and we so weak . beside this , we do great fear that the people of the country will perceive our weakness and misery , which to hide , our captain , who it please God always to keep in health , will go out with two or three of the company , some sick and some whole , who when he see out of the fort , he will throw stone at they and chide they , feign that so soon as he come again , he will beat they , and then with sign show the people of the country that he cause all his man to work and labour in the ship , some in calk they , some in beat of chalk , some in one thing , and some in another , and that he will not have they come forth till their work be do . and to make his tale seem true and likely , he will make all his man whole and sound to make a great noise with knock stick , stone , hammer , and other thing together , at which time we be so oppress and grieve with that sickness , that we have lose all hope ever to see France again , if God of his infinite goodness and mercy have not with his pitiful eye look upon we , and reveal a singular and excellent remedy against all disease unto we , the best that ever be find upon earth , as hereafter shall follow . 248 how long we stay in the port of the holy cross amid the snow and ice , and how many die of the say disease , from the begin of it to the midst of march . Chap. 14. from the midst of November until the midst of march , we be keep in amid the ice above two fathom thick , and snow above four foot high and more , high than the side of our ship , which last till that time , in such sort , that all our drink be freeze in the vessel , and the ice through all the ship be above a handbreadth thick , as well above hatch as beneath , and so much of the river as be fresh , even to Hochelaga , be freeze , in which space there die five and twenty of our best and chief man , and all the rest be so sick , that we think they shall never recover again , only three or four except . than it please God to cast his pitiful eye upon we , and send we the knowledge of remedy of our health and recovery , in such manner as in the next chapter shall be show . How by the grace of God we have notice of a certain [ he . 227. ] tree , whereby we all recover our health : and the manner how to use it . Chap. 15. our captain consider our estate ( and how that sickness be increase and hot among we ) one day go forth of the fort , and walk upon the ice , he see a troop of those countryman come from Stadacona , among which be Domagaia , who not pass ten or twelve day afore , have be very sick with that disease , and have his knee swell as big as a child of two year old , all his sinew shrink together , his tooth spoil , his gum rot , and stink . our captain see he whole and sound , be thereat marvellous glad , hope to understand and 249 a perfect remedy against the french pock . the english voyage know of he how he have heal himself , to the end he may ease and help his man . so soon as they be come near he , he ask Domagaia how he have do to heal himself : he answer , that he have take the juice and sap of the leaf of a certain tree , and therewith have heal himself : for it be a singular remedy against that disease . than our captain ask of he if any be to be have thereabouts , desire he to show he , for to heal a servant of he , who while he be in Canada with Donnacona , be strike with that disease : that he do because he will not show the number of his sick man . Domagaia straight send two woman to fetch some of it , which bring ten or twelve branch of it , and therewithal ! show the way how to use it , and that be thus , to take the bark and leaf of the say tree , and boil they together , then to drink of the say decoction every other day , and to put the dregs of it upon his leg that be sick : moreover , they tell we , that the virtue of that tree be , to heal any other disease : the tree be in their language call Ameda or Hanneda , this be think to be the sassafras tree . our captain present cause some of that drink to be make for his man to drink of it , but there be none dare taste of it , except one or two , who venture the drink of it , only to taste and prove it : the other see that do the like , and present recover their health , and be deliver of that sickness , and what other disease soever , in such sort , that there be some have be disease and trouble with the french pock four or five year , and with this drink be clean heal . after this medicine be find and prove to be true , there be such strife about it , who shall be first to take of it , that they be ready to kill one another , so that a tree as big as any oak in France be spoil and lop bare , and occupy all in five or six day , and it wrought so well , that if all the physician of Mountpelier and Louvain have be there with all the drug of Alexan - 250 dria , they will not have do so much in one year , as that tree do in six day , for it do so prevail , that as many as use of it , by the grace of God recover their health . how the lord Donnacona accompany with Taignoagny and diverse other , feign that they will go to hunt stag , and deer , tarry out two month , and at their return bring a great multitude of people with they , that we be not wont to see before . A.D. * 535 - Chap. 16. while that disease last in our ship , the lord Donnacona , Taignoagny , with many other go from home , feign that they will go to catch stag and deer , which be in their tongue call Ajounesta , and asquenoudo , because the ice and snow be not so break along the river that they can sail : it be tell we of Domagaia and other , that they will stay out but a fortnight , and we believe it , but they stay above two month , which make we mistrust that they have be go to raise the country to come against we , and do we some displeasure , we see our self so weak and faint . albeit we have use such diligence and policy in our fort , that if all the power of the country have be about it , they can have do nothing but look upon we : and while they be forth , many of the people come daily to our ship , and bring we fresh meat , as stag , deer , fish , with diverse other thing , but hold they at such a excessive price , that rather then they will sell they any thing cheap , many time they will carry they back again , because that year the winter be very long , and they Alongwmter . have some scarcity and need of they . [ how Donnacona 25x how Donnacona come to Stadacona again with a great number of people , and because he will not come to visit our captain , feign himself to be sore sick , which he do only to have the captain come see he . Chap. 17. on the one and twenty day of April Domagaia come to the shore side , accompany with diverse lusty and strong man , such as we be not wont to see , and tell we that their lord Donnacona will the next day come and see we , and bring great store of dear flesh , and other thing with he . the next day he come and bring a great number of man to Stadacona , to what end , and for what cause we know not , but ( as the proverb say ) he that take heed and shield himself from all man , may hap to escape from some : for we have need to look about we , consider how in number we be diminish , and in strength great weaken , both by reason of our sickness and also of the number that be dead , so that we be constrain to leave one of our ship in the port of the holy cross . our captain be warn of their come , and how they have bring a great number of man with they , for Domagaia come to tell it we , and dare not pass the river that be betwixt Stadacona and we , as he be wont to do , whereupon we mistrust some treason . our captain see this , send one of his servant to they , accompany with John Poulet be best belove of those people , to see who be there , and what they do . the say Poulet and the other feign themselves only to be come to visit Donnacona , and bring he certain present , because they have be together a good while in the say donnaconas town . so soon as he hear of their come , he get himself to bed , feign to be very sick . that do , they go to Taignoagny his house to see he , and wheresoever they go , they see so many people , that in a manner one 252 can not stir for another , and such man as they be never wont to see . Taignoagny will not permit our man to enter into any other house , but still keep they company , and bring they half way to their ship , and tell they that if it will please our captain to show he so much favour as to take a lord of the country , who name be agonna , of who he have receive some displeasure , and carry he with he into France , he shall therefore for ever be bind unto he , and will do for he whatsoever he will command he , and bid the servant come again the next day , and bring a answer . our captain be advertise of so many people that be there , not know to what end , purpose to play a pretty prank , that be to say , to take their lord Donnacona , Taignoagny , Domagaia , and some more of the chief of they prisoner , in so much as before he have purpose , to bring they into France , to show unto our king what he have see in those western part , and marvel of the world , for that Donnacona have tell we , that he have be in the country of Saguenay , in which be infinite ruby , gold , and other riches , and Rubles , gold , that there be white man , who clothe themselves with woollen cloth even as we do in France . Moreover he riches in report , that he have be in another country of a Saguenay . people call picquemians , and other strange people . a people call the say lord be a old man , and even from his picquemians . childhood have never leave off nor cease from travail into strange country , as well by water and river , as by land . the say Poulet , and the other have tell our captain their embassage , and show he what Taignoagny his will be , the next day he send his servant again to bid Taignoagny come and see he , and show what he shall , for he shall be very well entertain , and also part of his will shall be accomplish . Taignoagny send he word , that the next day he will come and bring the lord Donnacona with he , and he that have so offend he , which he do not , but stay two day , in which time none come from Stadacona to 253 our ship , as they be wont to do , but rather flee from we , as if we will have slay they , so that than we plain perceive their knavery . the town of but because they understand , that those of Sidatin do tdatm . frequent our company , and that we have forsake the bottom of a ship which we will leave , to have the old nail out of it , the three day follow they come from Stadacona , and most of they without difficulty do pass from one side of the river to the other with small skiff : but Donnacona will not come over : Taignoagny , and Domagaia stand talk together above a hour before they will come over , at last they come to speak with our captain . there Taignoagny pray he that he will cause the foresay man to be take and carry into France . our captain refuse to do it , say , that his king have forbid he to bring any man or woman into France , only that he may bring two or three young boy to learn the language , but that he will willing carry he to Newfoundland , and there leave he in a island . our captain speak this , only to assure they , that they shall bring Donnacona with they , who they have leave on the other side : which word , when Taignoagny hear , he be very glad , think he shall never return into France again , and therefore promise to come the next day , which be the day of the holy cross , and to bring Donnacona and all the people with he . [ Iii . 229. ] how that upon Holy-rood day our captain cause a cross to be set up in our fort : and how the lord Donnacona , Taignoagny , Domagaia , and other of their company come : and of the take of the say lord . Chap. 18. the three of May be Holyroode day , our captain for the solemn nitie of the day , cause a goodly fair cross of 35 foot in height to be set up , under the crosset of which he cause a shield to be hang , 254 wherein be the arm of France , and over they be write in antique letter , Franciscus primus dei gratia francorum rex regnat . and upon that day about noon , there come a great number of the people of Stadacona , man , woman , and child , who tell we that their lord Donnacona , Taignoagny , and Domagaia be come , whereof we be very glad , hope to retain they . about two of the clock in the afternoon they come , and be come near our ship , our captain go to salute Donnacona , who also show he a merry countenance , albeit very fearful his eye be still bend towards the wood . Shortly after come Taignoagny , who bid Donnacona that he shall not enter into our fort , and therefore fire be bring forth by one of our man , Sc kindle where their lord be . our captain pray he to come into our ship to eat and drink as he be wont to do , and also Taignoagny , who promise , that after a while he will come , and so they do , and enter into our ship : but first it be tell our captain by Domagaia that Taignoagny have speak ill of he , and that he have bid Donnacona he shall not come aboard our ship . our captain perceive that , come out of the fort , and see that only by Taignoagny his warning the woman run away , and none but man stay in great number , wherefore he straight command his man to lay hold on Donnacona , Taignoagny , and Domagaia , and Donnacona , two more of the chief who he point unto : then Taignoagny , he command they to make the other to retire . present after , the say lord enter into the fort with the captain , but by and by Taignoagny come to make he come out again . our captain see that there be no other remedy , begin to call unto they to take they , at who cry and voice all his man come forth , and take the say lord with the other , who they have appoint to take . the Canadians see their lord take , begin to run away , even as sheep before the wolf , some cross over the river , some through the wood , each one seek for his own advantage . that 255 four and twenty chain of Esurgny the english voyage do , we retire our self , and lay up the prisoner under good guard and safety . how the say Canadians the night follow come before our ship to seek their man , cry and howl all night like wolves : of the talk and conclusion they agree upon the next day : and of the gift which they give our captain . Chap. 19 the night follow they come before our ship , ( the river be betwixt we ) strike their breast , and cry and howl like wolf , still call Agouhanna , think to speak with he , which our captain for that time will not permit , neither all the next day till noon , whereupon they make sign unto we , that we have hang or kill he . about noon , there come as great a number in a cluster , as ever we see , who go to hide themselves in the forest , except some , who with a loud voice will call and cry to Donnacona to speak unto they . our captain then command Donnacona to be bring up on high to speak unto they , and bid he be merry , for after he have speak , and show unto the king of France what he have see in Saguenay and other country , after ten or twelve month , he shall return again , and that the king of France will give he great reward , whereat Donnacona be very glad , and speak to the other , tell it they , who in token of joy , give out three great cry , and then Donnacona and his people have great talk together , which for want of interpreter , can be describe . our captain bid Donnacona that he shall cause they to come to the other side of the river , to the end they may better talk together without any fear , and that he shall assure they : which Donnacona do , and there come a boat full of the chief of they to the ship , and there anew begin to talk together , give great praise to our captain , and give he a present of four and twenty chain of Esurgny , for that be the great 256 and precious riches they have in this world , for they esteem more of that , then of any gold or silver . after they have long talk together , and that their lord see that there be no remedy to avoid his go into France , he command his people the next day , to bring he some victual to serve he by the way . our captain give Donnacona , as a great present , two fry pan of copper , eight hatchet , and other small trifle , as knife , and bead , whereof he seem to be very glad , who send they to his wife and child . likewise , he give to they that come to speak with Donacona , they thank he great for they , and then go to their lodging . how the next day , be the five of May , the say people come again to speak unto their lord , and how four woman come to the shore to bring he victual . Chap. 20. upon the five of May , very early in the morning , a great number of the say people come again to speak unto their lord , and send a boat , which in their tongue they call Casnoni , wherein be only four woman , without any man , for fear their man shall be retain . Theise woman bring great store of victual , as great millet , which be their corn that they live withal , flesh , fish , and other thing , after their fashion . Theise woman be come to our ship , our captain do very friendly entertain they . then Donnacona pray our captain to tell those woman that he shall come again after ten or twelve month , and bring Donnacona to Canada with he : this he say only to appease they , which our captain do : wherefore the woman , as well by word as sign , seem to be very glad , give our captain thank , and tell he , if he come again , and bring Donnacona with he , they will give he many thing : in sign whereof , each one give our captain a chain of Esurgny , and then pass vin 257 r [ three . 230. ] coudre . a knife of red copper bring from Saguenay . the isle of hare . the english voyage to the other side of the river again , where stand all the people of Stadacona , who take all leave of their lord , go home again . on Saturday follow , be the sixth of the month , we depart out of the say port of Santa Croix , and come to harbour a little beneath the island of Orleans , about twelve league from the port of the holy cross , and upon Sunday we come to the island of filbert , where we stay until the sixteenth of that month , till the fierceness of the water be pass , which at that time run too swift a course , and be too dangerous to come down along the river , and therefore we stay till fair weather come . in the mean while many of donnaconas subject come from the river of Saguenay to he , but be by Domagaia advertise , that their lord be take to be carry into France , they be all amaze : yet for all that they will not leave to come to our ship , to speak to Donnacona , who tell they that after twelve month he shall come again , and that he be very well use by the captain , gentleman , and mariner . which when they hear , they great thank our captain and give their lord three bundle of beaver , and sea wolves skin , with a great knife of red copper that come from Saguenay , and other thing . they give also to our captain a chain of Esurgny , for which our captain give they ten or twelve hatchet , and they give he hearty thanks , and be very well content . the next day , be the sixteenth of May , we hoist sail , and come from the say island of filbert , to another about fifteen league from it , which be about five league in length , and there , to the end we may take some rest the night follow , we stay that day , in hope the next day we may pass and avoid the danger of the river of Saguenay , which be great . that evening we go aland and find great store of hare , of which we take a great many , and therefore we call it the island of hare : in the night there arise a contrary wind , with such storm and tempest , that we be constrain to 258 return to the island of filbert again , from whence we be come , because there be none other passage among the say island , and there we stay till the one and twenty of that month , till fair weather and good wind come again : and then we sail again , and that so prosperous , that we pass to honguedo , which passage until that time have not be discover : we cause our ship to course athwart cape Prat which be the beginning of the port of Chaleur : and because the wind be good and convenient , we sail all day and all night without stay , and the next day we come to the middle of brion island , which we be not mind lsle °f to do , to the end we may shorten our way . Theise brion-two land lie northwest , and southeast , and be about fifty league one from another . the say island be in latitude 47 degree and a half . upon Thursday be the twenty six of the month , and the feast of the ascension of our lord , we coast over to a land and shallow of low sand , which be about eight league southwest from brion island , above which be large champain , full of tree and also a enclose sea , whereas we can neither see , nor perceive any gap or way to enter thereinto . on Friday follow , be the 27 of the month , because the wind do change on the coast , we come to brion island again , where we stay till the begin of June , and towards the southeast of this island , we see a land , seem unto we as a island , we coast it about two league and a half , and by the way we have notice of three other high island , lie [ three . 231. ] towards the sand : after we have know these thing we return to the cape of the say land , which do divide it self into two or three very high cape : the water there be very deep , and the flood of the sea run so swift , that it can possible be swift . that day we come to cape loreine , which be in forty seven degree and a half towards the south : on which cape there be a low land , and it seem that there be some entrance of a river , but there be no haven of any worth . 259 above these land we see another cape towards the south , we name it saint Paul cape , it be at 47 degree and a quarter . the Sunday follow , be the four of June , and Whitsonday , we have notice of the coast lie eastsoutheast , distant from the Newfoundland about two and twenty league : and because the wind be against we , we go to a haven , which we name saint spiritus porte , where we stay till Tewesday that we depart thence , sail along that coast until ! we come to saint Peter island . we find along the say coast many very dangerous island and shelf , which lie all in the way eastsoutheast and westnorthwest , about three and twenty league into the sea . while we be in the say saint Peter island we meet with many ship of France and of Britain , we stay there from saint Barnabas day , be the eleven of the month , until the sixteenth that we depart thence and come to cape raze , and enter into a port call Rognoso , where we take in fresh water , and wood to pass the sea : there we leave one of our boat . then upon Monday , be the nineteenth of June , we go from that port , and with such good and prosperous weather we sail along the sea , in such sort , that upon the sixth of July 1536 we come to the porte of saint Malo , by the grace of God , to who we pray , here end our navigation , that of his infinite mercy he will grant we his grace and favour , and in the end bring we to the place of everlasting felicity . amen . here follow the language of the country , and kingdom of Hochelaga and Canada , of we call new France : but first the name of their number . Secada encage Indahir 6 Tigneni 2 Aiaga 7 Hasche 3 Addigue 8 hannaion 4 madellon 9 Oviscon saint 260 assem 10 here follow the name of the chief part of man , and other word necessary to be know . the head aggonzi God cudragny the brow the eye hegueniascon higata give i " | some drink 1 quazahoaquea the ear abontascon give i to | [ f quaso hoa the mouth esahe breakfast j i [ quascaboa the tooth esgongay give i my ] 1 i quaza hoa | i quatfriam the tongue osnache supper i the throat a gonhon let we go ] 1 i casigno ag - [ ( nydahoa the beard hebelim to bed j the face h tegouascon a man aguehum the hair aganiscon a woman agruaste the arm ajayascon a boy addegesta the flank aissonne a wench agniaquesta thestomacke aggruascon a child exiasta the belly eschehenda a gown cabata the thigh < [ hetnegradas-l con a doublet Hosen caioza hemondoha the knee 1 agochine - [ godascon shoe a shirt atha amgoua the leg [ agouguene-i bind a cap corn castrua osizi the foot onchidascon bread carraconny [ hl 232. ] the hand aignoascon water ame the finger agenoga flesh quahouascon the nail a gedascon Reisins queion a man 1 damson honnesta member baptize > ainoascon fig absconda a woman 1 grape ozoba member j > castaigne nut quahoya a eel esgueny a hen sahomgahoa a snail l indeguezi a lamprey zisto a tortoise heuleuxima a salmon ondacon wood conda a whale ainne honne leaf of ] i k ioga a goose sadeguenda Trees i r a street 6i add 2 Cucumber 1 seed i to morrow the heaven the earth the sun the moon the star the wind good morrow aignag let we go to play . come and i speak with i i baptize 1 casigno j ( caudy i i assigniquad - [ ( dadia look upon i 1 > quagathoma hold your 1 peace i let we go | with you boat i > aista 1 f casigno cas-j ( novy give i a ] knife j 1 ( buazahca ag - baptize ( oheda a hatchet a bow adogne ahenca casconda achide quenhia damga ysmay assomaha stagnehoham cohoha quahetan h casigno donnascat aionnesta asquenondo sourhanda agaya Canada agogasy coda cohena agacha honnesca camsa athau odazani azista quea canoca sahe adhotathny addathy adanahoe addagrim adhoasseve a dart let we go a hunt a stag a sheep a hare a dog a town the sea the wave of the sea a island a hill the ice snow cold hot fire smoke a house Beanes cinnamom my father my mother my brother my sister they of Canada say , that it be a month sail to go to a land where cinnamom and clove be gather . here end the relation of James Cartiers discovery and navigation toi the Newfoundlands , by he name new France . the three voyage of discovery make by captain Jaques Cartier , 1540 unto the country of Canada , Hochelaga , and Saguenay . king Francis the first have hear the report of captain Cartier his pilot generail in his two former voyage of discovery , as well by write as by word of mouth , touch that which he have find and see in the Wester ne part discover by he in the part of Canada and Hochelaga , and have also see and talk with the people , which the say Cartier have bring out of those country , whereof one be king of Canada , who name be Donnacona , and other : which after that they have be a long time in France and Britain , be baptize at their own desire and request , and die in the say country of Britain . and albeit his majesty be advertise by the say Cartier of the death and decease of all the people which be bring over by he ( which be ten in number ) save one little girl about ten year old , yet he resolve to send the say Cartier his pilot thither again , with John Francis de la Roche , knight , lord of Roberval , who he appoint his lieutenant and governor in the country of Canada and Hochelaga , and the say Cartier captain generail and leader of the ship , that they may discover more than be do before in the former voyage , and attain ( if it be possible ) unto the knowledge of the country of Saguenay , whereof the people bring by Cartier , as be declare , make mention unto the king , that there be great riches , and very good country . and the king cause a certain sum of money to be deliver to furnish out the say voyage with five ship : which thing be perform by the say monsieur Roberval and Cartier . after that they have agree together to rig the say five ship at saint Malo in Britain , where the two 263 ten savage bring into France . John Francis de la Roche , lord of Roberval . great riches and very good soil in Saguenay , which be beyond you fault . 23. of may , 1540 the great mischief of lose the season . the english voyage former voyage have be prepare and set forth . and the say Monsieur Roberval send Cartier thither for the same purpose . and after that Cartier have cause the say five ship to be build and furnish and set in good order , monsieur Roberval come down to s. malo and find the ship fall down to the road , with their yard across full ready to depart and set sail , stay for nothing else but the come of the generali , and the payment of the furniture . and because monsieur Roberval the king lieutenant have not as yet his artillery , powder and munition , and other thing necessary come down , which he have provide for the voyage , in the country of champagne and Normandy : and because the say thing be very necessary , and that he be loath to depart without they , he determine to depart from s. malo to Roan , and to prepare a ship or two at Honfleur , whither he think his thing be come : and that the say Cartier shall depart with the five ship which he have furnish , and shall go before . consider also that the say Cartier have receive letter from the king , whereby he do express charge he to depart and set sail immediate upon the sight and receit thereof , on pain of incur his displeasure , and to lay all the fault on he . and after the conclusion of these thing , and the say Monsieur Roberval have take muster and view of the gentleman , soldier , and mariner which be retain and choose for the performance of the say voyage , he give unto captain Cartier full authority to depart and go before , and to govern all thing as if he have be there in person : and himself depart to Honfleur to make his far preparation . after these thing thus dispatch , the wind come fair , the foresay five ship set sail together well furnish and victual for two year , the 23. of may , 1540 and we sail so long with contrary wind and continual torment , which fall out by reason of our late departure , that we be on the sea with our say five ship full three month before we can arrive at the port and haven 264 of Canada , without ever have in all that time 30 hour of good wind to serve we to keep our right course : so that our five ship through those storm lose companyone of another , all save two that keep together , to wit that wherein the captain be , and the other wherein go the viscount of Beaupre , until at length at the end of one month we meet all together at the haven of Carpont in Newfoundland . but the length of time which we be in pass between Britain and Newfoundland be the cause that we stand in great need of water , because of the cattle , aswell goat , hog , as other beast which we carry for breed in the country , which we be constrain to water with cider and other drink . now therefore because we be the space of three month in sail on the sea , and stay in Newfoundland , wait for monsieur Roberval , and take in of fresh water and other thing necessary , we arrive not before the haven of saint Croix in Canada , ( where in the former voyage we have remain eight month ) until the 23. day of August . in which place the people of the country come to our ship , make show of joy for our arrival , and namely he come thither which have the rule and government of the country of Canada , name Agona , which be appoint king there by donacona , when in the former voyage we carry he into France : and he come to the captain ship with 6. or 7. boat , and with many woman and child . and after the say Agona have inquire of the captain where donacona and the rest be , the captain answer he , that Donacona be dead in France , and that his body rest in the earth , and that the rest stay there as great lord , and be marry , and will not return back into their country : the say Agona make no show of anger at all these speech : and i think he take it so well because he remain lord and governor of the country by the death of the say Donacona . after which conference the A.D. 1540 Carpont haven . transport of diverse sort of cattellfir breed . the 23. of August . the new king of Canada . say Agona take a piece of tan leather of a yellow skin edge about with esnoguy ( which be their riches and 265 the thing which they esteem most precious , as we esteem gold ) which be upon his head in stead of a crown , and he put the same on the head of our captain , and take from his wrist two bracelet of esnoguy , and put they upon the captain arm , coll he about the neck and show unto he great sign of joy : which be great this - all dissimulation , as afterward it well appear . the cap-simulatimt of tajne take his say crown of leather and put it again a upon his head , and give he and his wife certain small present , signify unto he , that he have bring certain new thing , which afterward he will bestow upon he : for which the say Agona thank the captain . and after that he have make he and his company eat and drink , they depart and return to the shore with their boat . after which thing the say captain go with two of his boat up the river , beyond Canada and the port of saint Croix , to view a haven and a small river , a good road which be about 4. league high : which he find better +•f and more commodious to ride in and lay his ship , than “ croix . mnc 1 the former . and therefore he return and cause all his ship to be bring before the say river , and at a low water he cause his ordinance to be plant to place his ship in more safety , which he mean to keep and stay in the country , which be three : which he do [ three . 234. ] the day follow , and the rest remain in the road in the midst of the river ( in which place the victual and other furniture be discharge , which they have bring ) from the 26. of August until the second of September , what time they depart to return for s. malo , in which ship he send back mace jolloberte his brother in law , and Steven Noel his nephew , skilful and excellent pilot , with letter unto the king , and to advertise he what have be do and find : and how Monsieur de Roberval be not yet come , and that he fear that by occasion of contrary wind and tempest he be drive back again into France . How after the departure of the two ship which be send back into Britain , and that the fort be begin to be build , the captain prepare two boat to go up the great river to discover the passage of the three fault or fall of the river . the say captain have dispatch two ship to return to carry news , accord as he have in charge from the king , and that the fort be begin to be build , for preservation of their victual and other thing , determine with the viscount of Beaupre , and other gentleman , master , and pilot choose for counsel , to make a voyage with two boat furnish with man and victual to go as far as Hochelaga , of purpose to view and understand the fashion of the fault of water , which be to be pass to go to Saguenay , that he may be the ready in the spring to pass far , and in the winter time to make all thing needful in a readiness for their business . the foresay boat be make ready , the captain and Martine de Painpont , with other gentleman and the remnant of the mariner depart from the say place of Charlesburg royal the seven day of September in the year aforesaid 1540 and the viscount of Beaupre stay behind for the guard and government of all thing in the fort and as they go up the river , the captain go to see the lord of hochelay , which dwell between Canada and Hochelaga : which in the former voyage have give unto the say captain a little girl , and have oftentimes inform he of the treason which Taignoagny and Domagaya ( who the captain in his former voyage have carry into France ) will have wrought against he . in regard of which his courtesy the say captain will not pass by without visit of he , and to let he understand that the captain think himself behold unto he , he give unto he two young boy , 269 [ three . 235. ] the viscount of Beaupre and the rest of their council . the rich country of Saguenay situate beyond the fault which be in 44. deg . they depart from Charlesburg royal the 7. of Septem . the town oftutonaguy . bad ground and a great current . a town of friendly people . another village of good people which dwell over against the second salt . the english voyage and leave they with he to learn their language , and bestow upon he a cloak of Paris read , which cloak be set with yellow and white button of tin , and small bell . and withal he give he two basin of Laton , and certain hachet and knife : whereat the say lord seem high to rejoice , and thank the captain . this do , the captain and his company depart from that place : and we sail with so prosperous a wind , that we arrive the eleven day of the month at the first salt of water , which be two league distant from the town of tutonaguy . and after we be arrive there , we determine to go and pass as far up as it be possible with one of the boat , and that the other shall stay there till it return : and we double man she to row up against the course or stream of the say salt . and after we have pass some part of the way from our other boat , we find bid ground and great rock , and so great a current , that we can not possible pass any further with our boat . and the captain resolve to go by land to see the nature and fashion of the salt . and after that we be come on shore , we find hard by the water side a way and beat path go towards the say fault , by which we take our way . and on the say way , and soon after we find a habitation of people which make we great cheer , and entertain we very friendly . and after that he have signify unto they , that we be go towards the fault , and that we desire to go to Saguenay , four young man go along with we to show we the way , and they bring we so far that we come to another village or habitation of good people , which dwell over against the second salt , which come and bring we of their victual , as pottage and fish , and offer we of the same . after that the captain have inquire of they as well by sign as word , how many more fault we have to pass to go to Saguenay , and what distance and way it be thither , this people show we and give we to understand , that we be at the 270 1540 second salt , and that there be but one more to pass , they be at that the river be not navigable to go to Saguenay , and that the say salt be but a three part far than ' r-wgr vtz have travail , show we then same with certain little navigable to stick , which they lay upon the ground in a certain pass to sague-distance , and afterward lay other small branch be - na9 ' between both , represent the fault . and by the say mark , if their saying be true , it can be but six league by land to pass the say fault . here after follow the figure of the three fault . after that we have be advertise by the say people , of the thing abovemention , both because the day be far spend , and we have neither drink nor eat the same day , we conclude to return unto our boat , and we come thither , where we find great store of people to the number of 400. person or thereabouts , which 400 person seem to give we very good entertainment and to rejoice of our come : and therefore our captain give ‘ each of they certain small trifle , as comb , brooch of tin and copper , and other small toy , and unto the chief man every one his little hatchet and hook , tike °f whereat they make certain cry and ceremony of joy . new ^ibim . but a man must not trust they for all their fair ceremony and sign of joy , for if they have think they have be too strong for we , then will they have do their best to have kill we , as we understand afterward . the savage this be do , we return with our boat , and pass by the dwell of the lord of hochelay , with who the ’ captain have leave the two youth as he come up the river , think to have find he : but he can find no body save one of his son , who tell the captain that he be go to Maisouna , as our boy also tell we , say , that it be two day since he depart . but the §avages in truth he be go to Canada to conclude with Agona , conspire towhat they shall do against we . and when we be gether against arrive at our fort , we understand by our people , that the trench . 271 a very great number of savage assemble together . the fault be in 44. deg . a penny easy to pass . but 5. league journey to pass the 3 fault . the english voyage the savage of the country come not any more about our fort as they be accustom , to bring we fish , and that they be in a wonderful doubt and fear of we . wherefore our captain , have be advertise by some of our man which have be at Stadacona to visit they , that there be a wonderful number of the country people assemble together , cause all thing in our fortress to be set in good order : etc the rest be want . the voyage of John Francis de la Roche , knight , lord of Roberval , to the country of Canada , Saguenai , and Hochelaga , with three tall ship , and two hundred person , both man , woman , and child , begin in April , 1542. in which part he remain . the same summer , and all the next winter . ir John Francis de la Roche knight , lord of Roberval , appoint by the king as his lieutenant general in the country of Canada , Saguenay , and Hochelaga , furnish 3. tall ship , chief at the king cost : and have in his fleet 200. person , aswell man as woman , accompany with diverse gentleman of quality , as namely with monsieur saineterre he lieutenant , l’Espiney his ensign , captain Guinecourt , monsieur noire fontaine , dieu lamont , frote , la Brosse , Francis de Mire , la salle , and roieze , and John alfonse of Xanctoigne a excellent pilot , set sail from rochel the 16. of April 1542. the same day about noon we come athwart of chief the boy , where we be enforce to stay the night follow . on Monday the seventeenth of the say month we depart from chief de-boy . the wind serve we notable for a time : but within few day it come quite contrary , 283 Jacques Cartier steal away . [ Iii . 24I . ] the english voyage which hinder our journey for a long space : for we be sudden enforce to turn back , and to seek harbour in belle isle , on the coast of Bretaigne , where we stay so long , and have such contrary weather by the way , that we can not reach newfound land , until the seven of June . the eight of this month we enter into the road of saint John , where we find seventeen ship of fisher . while we make somewhat long abide here , Jaques Cartier and his company return from Canada , whither he be send with five sail the year before , arrive in the very same harbour . who , after he have do his duty to our generali , tell he that he have bring certain Diamonts , and a quantity of gold over , which be find in the country . which ore the Sunday next ensue be try in a furnace , and find to be good . Furthermore , he inform the generali that he can not with his small company withstand the savage , which go about daily to annoy he : and that this be the cause of his return into France . nevertheless , he and his company commend the country to be very rich and fruitful ! . but when our generali be furnish with sufficient force , command he to go back again with he , he and his company , move as it seem with ambition , because they will have all the glory of the discovery of those part themselves , steal privy away the next night from we , and without take their leaf depart home for Bretaigne . we spend the great part of June in this harbour of saint John , partly in furnish ourselves with fresh water , whereof we stand in very great need by the way , and partly in compose and take up of a quarrel between some of our countryman , and certain Portugal . at length , about the last of the aforesaid month , we depart hence , and enter into the grand bay , and pass by the isle of ascension : and final arrive four league westward of the isle of Orleans . in this place we find a convenient harbour for our ship , where we cast 284 1542. anchor , go a shore with our people , and choose out a convenient place to fortify ourselves in , fit to command the main river , and of strong situation against all invasion of enemy . thus toward the end of July , we July . bring our victual and other munition and provision on shore , and begin to travail in fortify of our self . of the fort of france-roy , and that which be do there . have describe the beginning , the midst , and the end of the voyage make by monsieur Roberval in the country of Canada , Hochelaga , Saguenay , and other country in the west part : he sail so far , ( as it be declare in other book ) that he arrive in the say country , accompany with two hundred person , soldier , mariner , and common people , , with all furniture necessary for a fleet . the say generali at his first arrival build a fair fort , near and somewhat westward above Canada , which be very beautiful to behold , and of great force , situate upon a high mountain , wherein there be two court of building , a great tower , and another of forty or fifty foot long : wherein there be diverse chamber , a hall , a Kitchine , house of office , seller high and low , and near unto it be a oven and mill , and a stoove to warm man in , and a well before the house . and the building be situate upon the great river of Canada , call France prime , by mon - France prime . sieur Roberval . there be also at the foot of the mountain another lodging , part whereof be a great tower of two story high , two court of good building , where at the first all our victual , and whatsoever be bring with we be send to be keep : and near unto that tower there be another small river . in these two place above and beneath , all the mean sort be lodge . and in the month of August , and in the begin of Autist 1542. September every man be occupy in such work as each one be able to do . but the fourteenth of Septem - September 14. ber , our aforesaid generali send back into France two 285 ship which have bring his furniture , and he appoint for admiral monsieur de saineterre , and the other captain be Monsieur Guinecourt , to carry news unto the king , and to come back again unto he the year next ensue , furnish with victual and other thing , as it shall please the king : and also to bring news out of France how the king accept certain diamond which be send he , and be find in this country . after these two ship be depart , consideration be have how they shall do , and how they may pass out the winter in this place . first they take a view of the victual , and it be find that they fall out short : the proportion and they be scantle so , that in each mess they have but two loaf weigh a pound a piece , and half a pound of beef . they eat bacon at dinner with half a pound of butter : and beef at supper , and about two handful of bean without butter . on the Wednesday , Friday , and Saturday they do eat dry cod , and sometime they do eat it green at dinner with butter , and they eat of porpoise and bean at supper . about that time the savage bring we great store of aloses , which be a fish somewhat read like a salmon , to get knife and other small trifle for they . in the end many of our people fall sick of a certain disease in their leg , reins , and stomach , so that they seem to be deprive of all their limb , and there die thereof about fifty . the length of note that the ice begin to break up in April . Monsieur Roberval use very good justice , and punish every man accord to his offence . one who name be Michael Gaillon , be hang for his theft . John of Nantes be lay in iron , and keep prisoner for his offence , and other also be put in iron , and diverse be they have whip , as well man as woman : by which mean they woman with live in jet . they . the manner of the savage . [ ill . 242. ] to dedare unto you the state of the savage , they be people of a goodly stature , and well make , they be very white , but they be all naked : and if they be apparel as the french be , they will be as white and as fair : but they paint themselves for fear of heat and sun burn . in stead of apparel , they wear skin upon they like mantle ; and they have a small pair of breech , wherewith they cover their privity , as well man as woman . they have hose and shoe of leather excellent make . and they have no shirt : neither cover they their head , but their hair be truss up above the crown of their head , and plait or braid . touch their victual , they eat good meat , but all unsalted , but they dry it , and afterward they broil it , as well fish as flesh . they have no certain dwell place , and they go from place to place , as they think they may best find food , as alose in one place , and other fish , salmon , sturgeon , mullet , surmullet , Barz , carp , eel , Pinperneaux , and other fresh water fish , and store of porpoise . they feed also of stag , wild boar , bugle , porkespynes , and store of other wild beast . and there be as great store of foul as they can desire . touch their bread , they make very good : and it be of great mill : and they live very well ; for they take care for nothing else . they drink seal oil , but this be at their great feast . they have a king in every country , and be wonderful obedient unto he : and they do he honour accord unto their manner and fashion . and when they travail from place to place , they carry all their good with they in their boat . their apparel . so have they of Ceula , and Quivira , and Meta incognita . their victual . they remove from place to place . fish . beast . foul . their bread of great mill or Maiz. drink of seal oy le at their great feast . their government . the woman nurse their child with the breast , and they sit continual , and be wrap about the belly with skin of fur . the first voyage make to the coast of America , with two bark , where in be captain m. Philip Amadas , and m. Arthur Barlowe , who discover part of the country now call Virginia , anno 1584. write by one of the say captain , and send to sir Walter Ralegh knight , at who charge and direction , the say voyage be set forth . [ in . 246. ] he 27 day of April , in the year of our redemption , 1584 we depart the west of England , with two bark well furnish with man and victual , have receive our last and perfect direction by your letter , confirm the former instruction , and commandment de liver by your self at our leave the river of Thames . and i think it a matter both unnecessary , for the manifest discovery of the country , as also for tediousness sake , to remember unto you the diurnal of our course , sail thither and return : only i have presume to present unto you this brief discourse , by which you may judge how profitable this land be likely to succeed , as well to your self , ( by who direction and charge , and by , who servant this our discovery have be perform ) as also to her highness , and the common wealth , in which we hope your wisdom will|be satisfy , consider that as much by we have be bring to light , as by those small mean , and number of man we have , can any way have be expect , or hope for . the ten of May we arrive at the canary , and the ten of June in this present year , we be fall with the island of the west Indies , keep a more south - a southerly course not easterly course then be needful , because we doubt . .. that the current of the bay of Mexico , disbogging be - ^Virginia . between the cape of Florida and Havana , have be of 297 great force then afterwards we find it to be . at which island , we find the air very unwholesome , and our man grow for the most part ill dispose : so that have refresh our self with sweet water , and fresh victuali , we depart the twelve day of our arrival there . Theise Islands , with the rest adjoin , be so well know to your self , and to many other , as i will not trouble you with the remembrance of they . a sweet smell the second of July , we find shoal water , where we from the land . smejt so sweet } anj so strong a smell , as if we have be in the midst of some delicate garden abound with all kind of odoriferous flower , by which we be assure , that the land can not be far distant : and keep good watch , and bear but slack sail , the four of the same month we arrive upon the coast , which we suppose to be a continent and firm land , and we sail along the same a hundred and twenty english mile before we can find any entrance , or river issue into the sea the first the first that appear unto we , we enter , though not n^r - without some difficulty , and cast anchor about - three harque - buz-shot within the haven mouth , on the left hand of the same : and after thanks give to God for our safe arrival thither , we man our boat , and go to view “ July x^pos - the land next adjoin , and “ to take possession of the session take . samej | n the right of the queen most excellent majesty , as rightful queen , and princess of the same , and after deliver the same over to your use , accord to her majesty grant , and letter patent , under her highness great seal . which be perform , accord to the ceremony use in such enterprise , we view the land about we , be , whereas we first land , very sandy and abundance of low towards the water side , but so full of grape , as the grape . very beat ancl surge of the sea overflow they , of which we find such plenty , as well there as in all place else , both on the sand and on the green soil on the hill , as in the plain , as well on every little shrub , as also climb towards the top of high cedar , that i think in all the world the like abundance be not to be find : and 298 my self have see those part of Europe that most abound , find such difference as be incredible to be write . we pass from the sea side towards the top of the isle of those hill next adjoin , be but of mean highth , and from thence we behold the sea on both side to the north , and to the south , find no end any of both way . this land lie stretch it self to the west , which after we find to be but a island of twenty mile long , and not above six mile broad . under the bank or hill whereon we stand , we behold the valley replenish with goodly cedar tree , and have discharge our harquebuz-shot , such a flock of crane ( the most part white ) arise under we , with such a cry redouble by many echo , as if a army of man have shout all together . this island have many goodly wood full of deer , cony , hare , and foul , even in the midst of summer in incredible abundance . the wood be not such as you find in Bohemia , Moscovia , or Hercynia , barren and fruitless , but the high and red cedar of the world , goodly far better the ceder of the azore , of the Indies , or ^ars ' 0 Lybanus , Pynes , cypress , sassafras , the lentisk , or the saphras^ ' tree that bear the mastic , the tree that bear the rind of black cinnamon , of which master winter bring [ in . 247. ] from the strait of Magellan , and many other of excellent smell and quali tie . we remain by the side of this island two whole day before we see any people of the country : the three day we espy one small boat row towards we have in it three person : this boat come to the island side , four harquebuz-shot from our ship , and there two of the people remain , the three come along the shoreside towards we , and we be then all within board , he walk up and down upon the point of the land next unto we : then the master and the pilot conference of the admiral , Simon Ferdinando , and the captain wthasavage . Philip Amadas , my self , and other row to the land , who come this fellow attend , never make any 299 show of fear or doubt . and after he have speak of many thing not understand by we , we bring he with his own good like , aboard the ship , and give he a shirt , a hat and some other thing , and make he taste of our wine , and our meat , which he like very well : and after have view both bark , he depart , and go to his own boat again , which he have leave abundance of in a little cove or creek adjoin : assoon as he be two bow shoot into the water , he fall to fish , and in less than half a hour , he have lade his boat as deep , as it can swim , with which he come again to the point of the land , and there he divide his fish into two part , point one part to the ship , and the other to the pinnace : which , after he have ( as much as he may ) requite the former benefit receive , depart out of our sight . the arrival the next day there come unto we diverse boat , and nther^ * n one the king brother , accompany with ’ forty or fifty man , very handsome and goodly people , and in their behaviour as mannerly and civil as any of Europe . his name be Granganimeo , and the king be call Wingina , the country Wingandacoa , and now by her majesty Virginia . the manner of his come be in this sort : he leave his boat altogether as the first man do a little from the ship by the shore , and come along to the place over against the ship , follow with forty man . when he come to the place , his servant spread a long mat upon the ground , on which he sit down , and at the other end of the mat four other of his company do the like , the rest of his man stand round about he , somewhat a far off : when we come to the shore to he with our weapon , he never move from his place , nor any of the other four , nor never mistrust any harm to be offer from we , but sit still he beckon we to come and sit by he , which we perform : and be set he make all sign of joy and welcome , strike on his head and his breast and afterwards on we , to show we 300 be all one , smile and make show the best he can of all love , and familiarity . after he have make a long speech unto we , we present he with diverse thing , which he receive very joyful , and thankful . none of the company dare speak one word all the time : only the four which be at the other end , speak one in the other ear very soft . the king be great obey , and his brother and child reverence : the king himself in person be at our being there , sore wound in a fight which he have with the king of the next country , call Wingina , and be shoot in two place through the body , and once clean through the thigh , but yet he recover : by reason whereof and for that he lie at the chief town of the country , be six day journey off , we see he not at all . after we have present this his brother with such thing as we think he like , we likewise give somewhat to the other that sit with he on the mat : but present he arise and take all from they and put it into his own basket , make sign and token , that all thing ought to be deliver unto he , and the rest be but his servant , and follower . a day or two after this , we fall to trade with they , exchange some thing traffickemth that we have , for chamoy , buff , and dear skin : the savage . when we show he all our packet of merchandise , of all thing that he see , a bright tin dish most please he , which he present take up and clap it before his tin much breast , and after make a hole in the brim thereof and hang it about his neck , make sign that it will defend he against his enemy arrow : for those people maintain a deadly and terrible war , with the people and king adjoin . we exchange our tin dish for twenty skin , worth twenty crown , or twenty noble : and a copper kettle for fifty skin worth fifty crown . they offer we good exchange for our hatchet , and axe , and for knife , and will have give any thing for sword : but we will not 3oi the english voyage depart with any . after two or three day the king brother come aboard the ship , and drink wine , and eat of our meat and of our bread , and like exceed thereof : and after a few day overpass , he bring his wife with he to the ship , his daughter and two or three child : his wife be very well favour , of mean stature , and very bashful : she have on her back a long cloak of leather , with the fiirre side next to her body , and before she a piece of the same : about her forehead she have a band of white corail , and so have her husband many time : in her ear she have bracelet of pearl hang down to her middle , ( whereof we deliver your worship a little bracelet ) and those be of the bigness of good pease . the rest of her woman of the better sort have pendant of copper hang in either ear , and some of the child of the king brother and other noble man , have five or six in either ear : he himself have upon his head a broad plate of gold , or copper , for be unpolished we know not what metal it shall be , neither will he by any mean suffer we to take it off his head , but feel it , it will bow very easy . his apparel be as his wife , only the woman wear their hair long on both side , and the man but on one . they be of colour yellowish , and their hair black for the most part , and yet we see child that have very fine aburne , and chestnut colour hair . after that these woman have be there , there come down from all part great store of people , bring with they leather , coral , diverse kind of die very excellent , and exchange with we : but when Granganimeo the king brother be present , none dare trade but himself : except such as wear red piece of copper on their head like himself : for that be the difference between the noble man , and the governor of country , and the mean sort . and we both note there , and you have understand since by these man , which we bring home , that no people in the world carry more respect to their king , nobili tie , and governor , than these doe . the 302 king brother wife , when she come to we ( as she do many time ) be follow with forty or fifty woman always : and when she come into the ship , she leave they all on land , save she two daughter , her nurse and one or two more . the king brother always keep this order , as many boat as he will come withal to the ship , so many fire will he make on the shore a far off , to the end we may understand with what strength and company he approach . their boat be make of one tree , either of pine or of pitch tree : a pitch tree . wood not common know to our people , nor find grow in England . they have no edge-tool to make they withal : if they have any they be very few , and those it seem they have twenty year since , which , as those two man declare , be out of a wreck which happen upon their coast of some christian ship , be beat that way by some storm and outrageous weather , whereof none of the people be save , but only the ship , or some part of her be cast upon the sand , out of who side they draw the nail and the spike , and with those they make their best instrument . the man - manner ner of make their boat be thus : they burn down some great tree , or take such as be wind fall , and put gum and rosin upon one side thereof , they set fire into it , and when it have burn it hollow , they cut out the coal with their shell , and ever where they will burn it deep or wide they lie on gum , which burn away the timber , and by this mean they fashion very fine boat , and such as will transport twenty man . their oar be like scoop , and many time they set with long pool , as the depth serve . the king brother have great like of our armour , a sword , and diverse other thing which we have : and offer to lay a great box of pearl in gage for they : but we refuse it for this time , because we will not make they know , that we esteem thereof , until we have understood in what place of the country the pearl grow : which now your worship do very well understand . 3°3 he be very just of his promise : for many time we deliver he merchandise upon his word , but ever he come within the day and perform his promise . he send we every day a brace or two of fat buck , cony , hare , fish the best of the world . he send we diverse kind of fruit , melon , walnut , cucumber , gourd , pease , and diverse root , and fruit very excellent good , and of their country corn , which be very white , fair and well taste , and grow three time in five month : in may they sow , in July they reap , in June they sow , in August they reap : in July they sow , in September they reap : only they cast the corn into the ground , break a little of the soft turf with a wooden mattock , or pickeaxe : our self prove the soil , and put some of our pease in the ground , and in ten day they be of fourteen inche high : they have also bean very fair of diverse colour and wonderful plenty : some grow natural , and some in their garden , and so have they both wheat and oat . the soil be the most plentiful , sweet , fruitful and wholesome of all the world : there be above fourteen several sweet smell timber tree , and the most part of their underwoods be bay and such like : they have those oak that we have , but far great and better . after they have be diverse time aboard our ship , my self , with seven moor go twenty mile into the river , that run toward the city of skicoak , which river they call Occam : and the evening follow , we come to a koanoak island , which they call Raonoak , distant from the harbour island , by which we enter , seven league : and at the north end thereof be a village of nine house , build of cedar , and fortify round about with sharp tree , to keep out their enemy , and the entrance into it ' make like a turn pike very artificial ; when we come towards it , stand [ three . 249. ] near unto the water side , the wife of Granganimo the king brother come run out to meet we very cheerfully and friendly , her husband be not then in the village ; some of her people she command to draw 3°4 1584-our boat on shore for the beat of the billoe : other 2% great she appoint to carry we on their back to the dry ground , and other to bring our oar into the house for ers fear of steal . when we be come into the utter room , have five room in her house , she cause we to sit down by a great fire , and after take off our clothes and wash they , and dry they again : some of the woman pluck off our stocking and wash they , some wash our foot in warm water , and she she self take great pain to see all thing order in the best manner she can , make great haste to dress some meat for we to eat . after we have thus dry our self , she bring we a solemn into the inner room , where she set on the board stand - banquet . ing along the house , some wheat like furmentie , sodden venison , and roast , fish sodden , boil , and roast , Melon raw , and sodden , root of diverse kind , and diverse fruit : their drink be common water , but while the grape last , they drink wine , and for want of cask to keep it , all the year after they drink water , but it be sodden with ginger in it , and black cinnamon , and sometime sassafras , and diverse other wholesome , and medi-cinable herb and tree . we be entertain with all love and kindness , and with as much bounty ( after their manner ) as they can possible devise . we find the people most gentle , love , and faithful , void of all guile and treason , and such as live after the manner of the golden age . the people only care how to defend themselves from the cold in their short winter , and to feed themselves with such meat as the soil afford : there meat be very well sodden and they make broth very sweet and savoury : their vessel be earthen pot , very large , white and sweet , their dish be wooden platter of sweet timber : within the place where they feed be their lodging , and within that their idol , which their i dole . they worship , of who they speak incredible thing . while we be at meat , there come in at the gate two or three man with their bow and arrow from hunt , vin 305 u who when we espy , we begin to look one toward another , and offer to reach our weapon : but assoon as she espy our mistrust , she be very much move , and cause some of her man to run out , and take away their bow and arrow and break they , and withal beat the poor fellow out of the gate again . when we depart in the evening and will not tarry all night , she be very sorry , and give we into our boat our supper half dress , pot and all , and bring we to our boat side , in which we lay all night , remove the same a pretty distance from the shore : she perceive our jealousy , be much grieve , and send diverse man and thirty woman , to sit all night on the bank side by we , and send we into our boat five mat to cover we from the rain , use very many word to entreat we to rest in their house : but because we be few man , and if we have miscarry , the voyage have be in very great danger , we dare not adventure any thing , though there be no cause of doubt : for a more kind and love people there can not be find in the world , as far as we have hitherto have trial . beyond this island there be the main land , and over against this island fall into this spacious water , the great river call Occam by the inhabitant on which stand a town call Pomeiock , and six day journey from the same be situate their great city , call skicoak , which this people affirm to be very great : but the savage be never at it , only they speak of it by the report of their father and other man , who they have hear affirm it to be above one hour journey about . into this river fall another great river , call Cipo , in which there be find great store of muscle in which there be pearl : likewise there descend into this Occam , another river , call Nomopana , on the one side whereof stand a great town call Chawanook , and the lord of that town and country be call Pooneno : this Pooneno be not subject to the king of Wingandacoa , 306 but be a free lord : beyond this country be there another king , who they call Menatonon , and these three king be in league with each other . towards the southwest , four day journey be situate a town call Sequotan , which be the southermost town of Wingandacoa , near unto which , six and twenty year pass there be a ship s^p cast cast away , whereof some of the people be save , and aw^‘ those be white people , who the country people preserve . and after ten day remain in a out island unhabit , call Wocokon , they with the help of some of the dweller of Sequotan , fasten two boat of the country together and make mast unto they , and sail of their shirt , and have take into they such victual as the country yield , they depart after they have remain in this out island 3 week : but short after it seem they be cast away , for the boat be find upon the coast , cast a land in another island adjoin : other then these , there be never any people apparel , or white of colour , either see or hear of among these [ he . 250. ] people , and these aforesaid be see only of the inhabitant of Seco tan , which appear to be very true , for they wonder marvelous when we be among they at the whiteness of our skin , ever covet to touch our breast , and to view the same . beside they have our ship in marvelous admiration , and all thing else be so strange unto they , as it appear that none of they have ever see the like . when we discharge any piece , be it but a hargubuz , they will tremble thereat for very fear , and for the strangeness of the same : for the weapon which themselves use be bow and arrow : the arrow be but of small cane , head with a sharp shell or tooth of a fish sufficient enough to kill a naked man . their sword be of wood harden : likewise they their wa-use wooden breastplate for their defence . they have pan ' beside a kind of club , in the end whereof they fasten the sharp horn of a stag , or other beast . when they go to war they carry about with they their idol , 307 of who they ask counsel , as the roman be wont of the oracle of Apollo . they sing song as they march towards the battle in stead of drum and trumpet : their war be very cruel and bloody , by reason whereof , and of their civil dissension which have happen of late year among they , the people be marvelous waste , and in some place the country leave desolate . adjoin to this country aforesaid call Secotan begin a country call Pomovik , belong to another king who they call piamacum , and this king be in league with the next king adjoin towards the set of the sun , and the country newsiok , situate upon a goodly river call Neus : these king have mortali war with Wingina king of Wingandacoa : but about two year pass there be a peace make between the king Piemacum , and the lord of Secotan , as these man which we have bring with we to England , have give we to understand : but there remain a mortali malice in the secotane , for many injury and slaughter do upon they by this Piemacum . they invite diverse man , and thirty woman of the best of his country to their town to a feast : and when they be altogether merry , and pray before their idol , ( which be nothing else but a mere illusion of the devil ) the captain or lord of the town come sudden upon they , and slay they every one , reserve the woman and child : and these two have oftentimes since persuade we to surprise Piemacum his town , have promise and assure we , that there will be find in it great store of commodity . but whether their persuasion be to the end they may be revenge of their enemy , or for the love they bear to we , we leave that to the trial hereafter . beyond this island call Roanoak , be main island very plentiful of fruit and other naturali increase , together with many town , and village , along the side of the continent , some bound upon the island , and some stretch up further into the land . when we first have sight of this country , some think 308 the first land we see to be the continent : but after we enter into the haven , we see before we another mighty long sea : for there lie along the coast a tract of island , two hundred mile in length , adjoin to the ocean sea , and between the island , two or three entrance : when you be enter between they ( these island be very narrow for the most part , as in most place six mile broad , in some place less , in few more ) than there appear another great sea , contain in breadth in some place , forty , and in some fifty , in some twenty mile over , before you come unto the continent : and in this enclose sea there be above a hundred island of diverse bigness , whereof one be sixteen mile long , at which we be , find it a most pleasant and fertile ground , replenish with goodly cedar , and diverse other sweet wood , full of corrant , of flax , and many other notable commodity , which we at that time have no leisure to view . beside this island there be many , as i have say , some of two , or three , of four , of five mile , some more , some less , most beautiful and pleasant to behold , replenish with deer , cony , hare and diverse beast , and about they the goodly and best fish in the world , and in great abundance . thus sir , we have acquaint you with the particular of our discovery , make this present voyage , as far forth as the shortness of the time we there continue will affbord we take view of : and so content our self with this service at this time , which we hope hereafter to enlarge , as occasion and assistance shall|be give , we resolve to leave the country , and to apply our self to return for England , which we do accord , and arrive safe in the west of England about the midst of September . and whereas we have above certify you of the country take in possession by we , to her majesty use , and so to you by her majesty grant , we think good for the better assurance thereof to record some of the particular gentleman , and man of account , who then be 3°9 Roanoak sixteen mile long . present , as witness of the same , that thereby all occasion of cavil to the title of the country , in her majesty behalf may be prevent , which otherwise , such as like not the action may use and pretend , who name be : master Philip Amadas , master Arthur Barlow , j - captain . it William Greenevile , John wood , James Browewich , ! Henry green , ’ Benjamin wood , Simon Ferdinando , Nicholas Petman , John Hewes , ► of the company . we bring home also two of the savage be lusty man , who name be Wanchese and Manteo . the voyage make by sir Richard Greenvile , for sir Walter Ralegh , to Virginia , in the year 1585. he 9 day of April , in the year abovesaid , we depart from Plymmouth , our fleet consist of the number of seven sail , to wit , the tiger , of the burden of seven score ton , a flyboat call the roebuck , of the like burden , the lion of a hundred ton or thereabouts , the Elizabeth , of fifty ton , and the Dorothy , a small bark : whereunto be also adjoin for speedy service , two small pinnace . the principali gendeman of our company , be these , m. Ralph lane , m. Tomas Candish , m. John Arundel , m. Raymund , m. Stukley , m. Bremige , m. Vincent , and m. John Clarke , and diverse other , whereof some be captain , and other some assistant for counsel , and good direction in the voyage . the 14. day of April we fall with Lancerota and Forteventura , isle of the canary , and from thence 310 we continue our course for Dominica , one of the antiles of the west India , wherewith we fall the 7. day of May , and the 10. day follow we come to a anchor at Cotesa , a little hand situate near to the hand of S. John , where we land , and refresh our self all that day . the 12. day of may we come to a anchor in the bay of moskito , in the hand of S. John , within a falcon shoot of the shore : where our generali sir Richard greenevil , and the most part of our company land , and begin to fortify very near to the sea side : the river run by the one side of our fort , and the other two side be environ with wood . the 13. day we begin to build a new pinnace within the fort , with the timber that we then fell in the country , some part whereof we fetch three mile up in the land , and bring it to our fort upon truck , the Spaniard not dare to make or offer resistance . the 16. day there appear unto we out of the wood eight horseman of the Spaniard , about a quarter of a mile from our fort , stay about half a hour in view our force : but assoon as they see ten of our shot march towards they , they present retire into the wood . the 19 day master candish , who have be separate from our fleet in a storm in the bay of Portugal , arrive at Cotesa , within the sight of the tiger : our think he a far off to have be either a Spaniard or Frenchman of war , think it good to weigh anchor , and to go room with he , which the tiger do , and discern he at last to be one of our consort , for joy of who come our ship discharge their ordinance , and salute he accord to the manner of the sea . the 22. day twenty other spanish horseman show themselves to we upon the other side of the river : who be see , our generali dispatch 20. footman towards they , and two horseman of we , mount upon spanish horse , which we before have take in the time 311 A.D. I585 - they land upon the hand of . john’de Porto Rico. of our be on the hand : they show to our man a flag of truce , and make sign to have a parley with we : whereupon two of our man go half of the way upon the sand , and two of they come and meet they : the two Spaniard offer very great salutation to our man , but begin accord to their spanish proud humour , to - expostulate with they about their arrival and fortify in their country , who notwithstanding by our man discreet answer be so cool , that ( whereas they be tell , that our principali intention be only to furnish our self with water and victuales , and other necessary , whereof we stand in need , which we crave may be yield we with fair and friendly mean , otherwise our resolution be to practise force , and to relieve ourselves by the sword ) the Spaniard in conclusion see our man so resolute , yield to our request with large promise of all courtesy , and great favour , and so our man and they depart . the 23. day our pinnace be finish , and launch : which be do , our generali with his captain and gentleman , march up into the country about the space of 4. mile , where in a plain marsh they stay expect the come of the Spaniard accord to their promise , to furnish we with victual : who keep their old custom for perjury and breach of promise , come not , whereupon our generali fire the wood thereabouts , and so retire to our fort , which the same day be fire also , and each man come aboard to be ready to set sail the next morning . the 29. day we set sail from saint Johns , be many of we sting before upon shore with the muskito : but the same night we take a spanish frigate , which be forsake by the Spaniard upon the sight of we , and the next day in the morning very early we take another frigate , with good and rich fraught , and diverse Spaniards of account in she , which afterward we ransom for good round sum , and land they in saint Johns . 312 the 26. day our lieutenant master Ralph lane go in one of the frigate which we have take , to roxo bay upon the southwest side of saint Johns , to fetch salt , be thither conduct by a spanish pilot : as soon as he arrive there , he land with his man to the number of 20. and entrench himself upon the sand immediate , compass one of their salt hill within the trench : who be see of the Spaniard , there come down towards he two or three troop of horseman and footman , who give he the look , and gaze on , but dare not come near he to offer any resistance , so that master lane maugre their troop , carry their salt aboard and jade his frigate , and so return again to our fleet the 29. day , which ride at saint germane bay the same day we all depart , and the next day arrive in the hand of Hispaniola . June . the 1. day of June our anchor at Isabel , on the north side of Hispaniola . the 3. day of June , the governor of Isabel , and captain of the port de plata , be certify by the report of sundry Spaniards , who have be well entertained aboard our ship by our generali , that in our fleet be many brave and gallant gentleman , who great desire to see the governor aforesaid , he thereupon send gentle commendation to our generali , promise within few day to come to he in person , which he perform accord . the 5. day the aforesaid governor accompany with a lusty friar , and twenty other Spaniard , with their servant , and negro , come down to the sea side , where our ship ride at anchor , who be see , our generali man immediate the most part of his boat with the chief man of our fleet , every man appoint , and furnish in the best sort : at the land of our generali , the spanish governor receive he very courteous , and the spanish gentleman salute 3X3 our english gentleman , and their inferior sort do also salute our soldier and sea man , like our man , and likewise their quality , although at the first they seem to stand in fear of we , and of so many of our boat , whereof they desire that all may not land their man , yet in the end , the courtesy that pass on both side be so great , that all fear and mistrust on the Spaniard part be abandon . in the mean time while our English generali and the spanish governor discourse betwixt they of diverse matter , as of the state of the country , the multitude of the town and people , and the commodity of the hand , our man provide two banquet house cover with green bough , the one for the gentleman , the other for the servant , and a sumptuous banquet be bring in serve by we all in plate , with the sound of trumpet , and consort of music , wherewith the Spaniard be more than delight . which banquet be end , the Spaniard in recompense of our courtesy , cause a great hear of white bull , and cow to be bring together from the mountain , and appointed for every gentleman and captain that will ride , a horse ready saddle , and then single out three of the best of they to be hunt by horseman after their manner , so that the pastime grow very pleasant for the space of three hour , wherein all three of the beast be kill , whereof one take the sea , and there be slay with a musket . after this sport , many rare present and gift be give and bestow on both part , and the next day we play the merchant in bargain with they by way of truck and exchange of diverse of their commodity , as horse , mere , cow , bull , goat , swine , sheep , bullhides , sugar , ginger , pearl , tobacco , and such like commodity of the hand . the 7. day we depart with great good will from the Spaniard from the hand of Hispaniola : but the wise sort do impute this great show of friendship , and courtesy use towards we by the Spaniard rather to the 314 force that we be of , and the vigilancy , and watchful - [ three . 253 ] nes that be among we , then to any hearty good will , or sure friendly entertainment : for doubtless if they have be strong than we , we may have look for no better courtesy at their hand , than master John haukin receive at saint John de ullua , or John Oxnam near the strait of Dariene , and diverse other of our countryman in other place . the 8. day we anchor at a small hand to take seal , which in that place we understand to have be in great quantity , where the generali and certain other with he in the pinnace be in very great danger to have be all cast away , but by the help of God they escape the hazard , and return aboard the admiral in safety . the 9 , day we arrive and land in the he of Caycos , they land on in which hand we search for salte-ponde , upon the pes °f advertisement and information of a Portugal : who in aic0 ' deed abuse our generali and we , deserve a halter for his hire , if it have so please we . the 12. we anchor at guanima , and land . guanima . the 15. and 16. we anchor and land at Cyguateo . Cyguateo . the 20. we fall with the main of Florida . the 23. we be in great danger of a wrack on a breach call the cape of fear . the 24. we come to anchor in a harbour , where we catch in one tide so much fish as will have yield we twenty pound in London : this be our first land they land in in Florida . Florida . the 26. we come to anchor at Wocokon . the 29. we weigh anchor to bring the tiger into the harbour , where through the unskilfulness of the master who name be Fernando , the admiral strike on ground , and sink . the 3. we send word of our arrive at Wococon , to July . Wingina at Roanoak . the 6. m. John Arundel be send to the main , and Manteo with he : and captain Aubry and captain boniten the same day be send to croatoan , where they 315 find two of our man leave there with 30. other by captain Reymond , some 20. day before . the 8. captain Aubry and captain Boniten return , with two of our man find by they , to we at Wocokon . the 11. day the generali accompany in his tilt boat with master John Arundel , master Stukley , and diverse other gentleman , master lane , master candish , master Hariot , and twenty other in the new pinnace , captain Amadas , captain Clarke , with ten other in a shipboat , Francis brook , and John white in another ship-boat , pass over the water from Wococon to the main land victual for eight day , in which voyage we first discover the town of pomejok , Aquascogoc and Secotan , and also the great lake call by the savage paquipe , with diverse other place , and so return with that discovery to our fleet . the 12. we come to the town of pomeiok . the 13. we pass by water to aquascogok . the 15. we come to Secotan , and be well entertain there of the savage . the 16. we return thence , and one of our boat with the admiral be send to aquascogok , to demand a silver cup which one of the savage have steal from we , and not receive it accord to his promise , we burn , and spoil their corn , and town , all the people be flee . the 18. we return from the discovery of Secotan , and the same day come aboard our fleet ride at Wococon . the 21. our fleet anker at Wococon , we weigh anchor for Hatoraske . the 27. our fleet anchor at Hatorask , and there we rest . the 29. Grangino brother to king Wingina come aboard the admiral , and Manteo with he . the 2. the admiral be send to weapomeiok . the 5. m. John Arundel be send for England . 316 the 25. our generali weigh anchor , and set sail for England . about the 31. he take a spanish ship of 300 ton rich load , board she with a boat make with board of chest , which fall asunder , and sink at the ship side , assoon as ever he and his man be out of it . the 10. of September , by foul weather the generali September . then ship in the prize , lose sight of the tiger . the 6. the tiger fall with the land end , and the October . same day come to anchor at Falmouth . the 18. the general come with the prize to Plymmouth , and be courteous receive by diverse of his worshipful friend . a extract of master Ralph lane letter to m. Richard Hakluyt esquire , and another gentleman of the middle temple , from Virginia . n the mean while you shall understand , that since sir Richard greenvil departure from we , as also before , we have discover the main to be the goodly oil under the cope of heaven , so abound with sweet tree , that bring such sundry rich and pleasant gum , grape of such greatness , yet wild , as France , Spain nor Italy have no great , so many sort of apothecary drug , such several kind of flax , and one kind like silk , the same gather of a grass , as common there , as grass be here . and now within these few day we have find here maiz or guinie wheat , who ear yield corn for bread 400. upon one ear , and the cane make very good and perfect sugar , also Terra Samia , otherwise terra sigillata . beside that , it be the goodly and most please territory of the world : for the continent be of a huge and unknown greatness , and very well people and town , though savage , and the climate so wholesome , that we have not one sick since we touch the land here . to conclude , if Virginia have but horse and cow in some reasonable proportion , i dare assure my self be inhabit with english , no realm in Christendom be comparable to it . for this already we find , that what commodity soever Spain , France , Italy , or the east part do yield unto we , in wine of all sort , in oil , in flax , in rosen , pitch , frankincense , corran , sugar , and such like , these part do abound with the growth of they all , but be Savages that possess the land , they know no use of the same . and sundry other rich commodity , that no part of the world , be they west or east Indies , have , here we find great abundance of . the people natural be most [ three . 255. ] the rich and manifold commodity of Virginia . commodity courteous , and very desirous to have clothes , but especial Virgula * course do rather than silk , course canvas they also ' like well of , but copper carri the price of all , so it be make red . thus good m. Hakluyt and m. H. i have join you both in one letter of remembrance , as two that i love dear well , and commend i most hearty to you both , i commit you to the tuition of the almighty . from the new fort in Virginia , this three of September , 1585. your most assure friend Ralph lane . a account of the particularity of the employments of the english man leave in Virginia by sir Richard greenevill under the charge of master Ralph lane generali of the same , from the 17. of August 1585. until the 18. of June 1586. at which time they depart the country : send and direct to sir Walter Ralegh . hat i may proceed with order in this discourse , i think it requisite to divide it into two part . the first shall declare the particularity of such part of the country within the main , as our weak number , and supply of thing necessary do inable we to enter into the 2. part of this discourse . discovery of . the second part shall set down the reason general move we to resolve on our departure at the instant with the generali sir Francis Drake , and our common request for passage with he , when the bark , pinnace , and boat with the master and mariner mean by he to be leave in the country , for the supply of such , as for a further time mean to have stay there , be carry away with tempest and foul weather : in the beginning whereof shall be declare the conspiracy of Pemisapan , with the savage of the main to have cut we off , etc 320 the material original position here be too large for reproduction in this reissue . a pdf can be download from the web address give on page iv they Cambridge core . term oh ? usej-u-vaiabieathttpsv / www . cambridge.org / core / term . the first part declare the particularity of the country of Virginia . irst therefore touch the particularity of the country , you shall understand that our discovery of the same have be extend from the hand of Roanoak , ( the same have be the place of our settlement or inhabitation ) into the south , into the north , into the north - west , and into the west . the uttermost place to the southward of any discovery be Secotan , be by estimation fourscore mile distant from Roanoak . the passage from thence be through a broad sound within the main , the same be without ken of land , and yet full of flat and shoald : we have but one boat with four oar to pass through the same , which boat can not carry above fifteen man with their furniture , baggage , and victuali for seven day at the most : and as for our pinnace , beside that she draw too deep water for that shallow sound , she will not stir for a oar : for these and other reason ( winter also be at hand ) we think good whole to leave the discovery of those part until our strong supply . to the northward our further discovery be to the chesepians , distant from Roanoak about 130. mile , the passage to it be very shallow and most dangerous , by reason of the breadth of the sound , and the little succour that upon any flaw be there to be have . but the territory and soil of the chesepians ( be distant fifteen mile from the shore ) be for pleasantness of seat , for temperature of climate , for fertility of soil , and for the commodity of the sea , beside multitude of bear ( be a excellent good victuali ) with great wood of sassafras , and walnut tree , be not to be excel by any other whatsoever . there be sundry king , who they call weroance , and country of great fertility adjoin to the same , as the excellende of the seat of cheseplook . Viii 321 the town of Chawanook able to make 700. man of war . the english voyage the mandoage , tripanick , and opossians , which all come to visit the colony of the english , which i have for a time appoint to be resident there . to the northwest the far place of our discovery be to Chawanook distant from Roanoak about 130. mile . our passage thither lie through a broad sound , but all fresh water , and the channel of a great depth , navigable for good ship , but out of the channel full of shoald . the town about the water side situate by the way be these follow : Passaquenoke the woman town , Chepanoc , weapomeiok , muscamunge , and metackwem : all these be under the jurisdiction of the king of weapomeiok , call Okisco : from muscamunge we enter into the river , and jurisdiction of Chawanook : there the river begin to straighten until it come to Chawanook , and then grow to be as narrow as the Thames betewene Westminster , and Lambeth . between muscamunge and Chawanook upon the left hand as we pass thither , be a goodly high land , and there be a town which we call the blind town , but the savage call it Ohanoak , and have a very goodly corn field belong unto it : it be subject to Chawanook . Chawanook it self be the great province and signiory lie upon that river , and the very town it self be able to put 700. fight man into the field , beside the force of the province it self . the king of the say province be call Menatonon , a man impotent in his limb , but otherwise for a savage , a very grave and wise man , and of a very singular good discourse in matter concern the state , not only of his own country , and the disposition of his own man , but also of his neighbour round about he as well far as near , and of the commodity that each country yield . when i have he prisoner with i , for two day that we be together , he give i more under-322 1585-86 . stand and light of the country than i have receive by all the search and savage that before i or any of my company have have conference with : it be in march last past 1586. among other thing he tell i , that go three day journey in a Canoa , up his river of Chawanook , and then descend to the land , you be within four day journey to pass over land Northeast to a certain king country , who province lie upon the sea , but his place of great strength be a island - a i^nd in situate , as he describe unto i , in a bay , the water a Ba9‘ round about the island very deep . out of this bay he signify unto i , that this purksm ex~ king have so great quantity of pearl , and do so c ™ ding quan-ordinarily take the same , as that not only his own ’ skin that he wear , and the better sort of his gentleman and follower be full set with the say pearl , but also his bed , and house be garnish with they , and that he have such quantity of they , that it be a wonder to see . he show i that the say king be with he at Chawanook two year before , and bring he certain pearl , but the same of the worst sort , yet be he fain to buy they of he for copper at a dear rate , as he think . he give i a rope of the same pearl , but they be black , and nought , yet many of they be very great , and a few among a number very orient and round , all which i lose with other thing of i , come aboard sir Francis Drake his fleet : yet he tell i that the say king have great store of pearl that be white , great , and round , and that his black pearl his man do take out of shallow water , but the white pearl his man fish for in very deep water . it seem to i by his speech , that the say king have traffic with white man that have clothes as we have , for these white pearl , and that be the reason that he will not depart with other then with black pearl , to those of the same country . 323 a enterprise of speciali importance . [ Iii . 257. ] the english voyage the king of Chawanook promise to give i guide to go over land into that king country whensoever i will : but he advise i to take good store of man with i , and good store of victuali , for he say , that king will be loath to suffer any stranger to epter into his country , and especial to meddle with the fish for any pearl there , and that he be able to make a great many of man into the field , which he say will fight very well . hereupon i resolve with my self , that if your supply have come before the end of April , and that you have send any store of boat or man , to have have they make in any reasonable time , with a sufficient number of man and victual to have find we until the new corn be come in , i will have send a small bark . with two pinnace about by sea to the northward to have find out the bay he speak of , and to have sound the bar if there be any , which shall have ride there in the say bay about that hand , while i with all the small boat i can make , and with two hundred man will have go up to the head of the river of Chawanook with the guide that menatonon will have give i , which i will have be assure shall have be of his best man , ( for i have his best belove son prisoner with i ) who also shall have keep i company in a handlocke with the rest , foot by foot , all the voyage over land . my meaning be further at the head of the river in the place of my descent where i will have leave my boat , to have raise a sconce with a small trench , and a palisado upon the top of it , in the which , and in the guard of my boat i will have leave five and twenty , or thirty man , with the rest will i have march with as much victuali as every man can have carry , with their furniture , mattock , spade and axe , two day journey . in the end of my march upon some convenient plot will i have raise another sconce accord to the former , where i will have 324 leave fifteen or twenty . and if it will have fall out convenient , in the way i will have raise my say sconce upon some corn field , that my company may have live upon it . and so i will have hold this course of insconse whither m. every two day march , until i have be arrive at the bay or port he speak of : which find to be move 0 worth the possession , i will there have raise a main fort , both for the defence of the harbour , and our ship also , and will have reduce our whole habitation from Roanoak and from the harbour and port there ( which by proof be very nought ) unto this other beforemention , from whence , in the four day march before specify , can i at all time return with my company back unto my boat ride under my sconce , very near whereunto direct from the west run a most notable river , and in all those part most famous , call the river of Moratoc . this river open into the broad sound of weapomeiok . and whereas the river of Chawanook , and all the other sound , and bay , salt and fresh , show no current in the world in calm weather , but be move altogether with the wind : this river of Moratoc have so violent a current from the west and Southwest , that it make i almost of opinion that with oar it will scarce be navigable : it pass with many creek and turn , and for the space of thirty mile row , and more , it be as broad as the Thames betwixt greenwich and the isle of dog , in some place more , and in some less : the current run as strong , be enter so high into the river , as at London bridge upon a vale water . and for that not only Menatonon , but also the savage of Moratoc themselves do report strange thing of the head of that river , and that from Moratoc it self , which be a principali town upon that river , it be thirty day as some of they say , and some say fourty day voyage to the head thereof , which head 325 cmspiracie oj the savage against the english . the english voyage they say spring out of a main rock in that abundance , that forthwith it make a most violent stream : and further , that this huge rock stand so near unto a sea , that many time in storm ( the wind come outward from the sea ) the wave thereof be beat into the say fresh stream , so that the fresh water for a certain space , grow salt and brackish : i take a resolution with my self , have dismiss Menatonon upon a ransom agree for , and send his son into the pinnace to Roanoak , to enter present so far into that river with two double whirry , and fourty person one or other , as i can have victuali to carry we , until we can meet with more either of the moratok , or of the mangoak , which be another kind of savage , dwell more to the westward of the say river : but the hope of recover moor victuali from the savage make i and my company as narrow to escape starve in that discovery before our return , as ever man do , that miss the same .. for Pemisapan , who have change his name of win-gina upon the death of his brother Granganimo , have give both the choanist , and mangoak word of my purpose touch they , i have be enforce to make he privy to the same , to be serve by he of a guide to the mangoak , and yet he do never rest to solicit continual my go upon they , certify i of a generail assembly even at that time make by Menatonon at Chawanook of all his weroance , and ally to the number of three thousand bow , prepare to come upon we at Roanoak , and that the mangoak also be join in the same confederacy , who be able of themselves to bring as many more to the enterprise : and true it be that at that time the assembly be hold at Chawanook about we , as i find at my come thither , which be unlooked for do so dismay they , as it make we have the better hand at they . but this confederacy against we of the choanist and Mangoaks be altogether and whole procure by Pemisapan him-326 self , as Menatonon confess unto i , who send they continual word , that our purpose be full bend to destroy they : on the other side he tell i , that they have the like meaning towards we . he in like sort have send word to the mangoak of my intention to pass up into their river , and to kill they ( as he say ) both they and the moratok , with who before we be enter into a league , and they have ever deal kind with we , abandon their town along the river , and retire themselves with their * crenepos , and their corn within the main : * then-insomuch as have pass three day voyage up the women‘ river , we can not meet a man , nor find a grain of corn in any their town : whereupon consider with my self that we have but two day victuali leave , and that we be then 160. mile from home , beside casualty of contrary wind or storm , and suspect treason of our own Savages in the discovery of our voyage intend , though we have no intention to be hurtful to any of they , otherwise then for our [ three . 258. ] copper to have have corn of they : i at night upon the corpse of guard , before the put forth of centinel , advertise the whole company of the case we stand in for victuali , and of my opinion that we be betray by our own Savages , and of purpose draw forth by they upon vain hope to be in the end starve , see all the country flee before we , and therefore while we have those two day victuali leave , 1 thought it good for we to make our ■ return homeward , and that it be necessary for we to get the other side of the sound of weopomeiok in time , where we may be relieve upon the wear of Chypanum , and the woman town , although the people be flee . thus much i signify unto they , as the safe way : nevertheless i do refer it to the great number of voice , whether we shall adventure the spend of our whole victuali in some further view of that most goodly river in hope to meet with some better hap , 327 a marvellous mineral in the country of Chaunls Temoatan . the english voyage or otherwise to retire our self back again . and for that they may be the better advise , i will they to deliberate all night upon the matter , and in the morning at our go aboard to set our course accord to the desire of the great part . their resolution full and whole be ( and not three find to be of the contrary opinion ) that while there be leave but one half pint of corn for a man , we shall not leave the search of that river , and that there be in the company two mastiff , upon the pottage of which with sassafras leave ( if the worst fell out ) the company will make shift to live two day , which time will bring they down the current to the mouth of the river , and to the entry of the sound , and in two day more at the far they hope to cross the sound and to be relieve by the wear , which two day they will fast rather than be draw back a foot till they have see the mangoaks , either as friend or foe . this resolution of they do not a little please i , since it come of themselves , although for mistrust of that which afterward do happen , i pretend to have be rather of the contrary opinion . and that which make i most desirous to have some do with the mangoak either in friendship or otherwise to have have one or two of they prisoner , be , for that it be a thing most notorious to all the country , that there be a province to the which the say mangoak have recourse and traffic up that river of Moratoc , which have a marvelous and most strange Minerali . this mine be so notorious among they , as not only to the savage dwell up the say river , and also to the savage of Chawanook , and all they to the westward , but also to all they of the main : the country name be of fame , and be call Chaunis Temoatan . the minerail they say be wassador , which be copper , but they call by the name of wassador every mettle 328 whatsoever : they say it be of the colour of our copper , but our copper be better than they : and the reason be for that it be red and hard , whereas that of Chaunis Temoatan be very soft , and pale : they say that they take the say mettle out of a river that fall very swift from high rock and hill , and they take it in shallow water : the manner be this . they take a great bowl by their description as great as one of our target , and wrap a skin over the hollow part thereof , leave one part open to receive in the minerail : that do , they watch the come down of the current , and the change of the colour of the water , and then sudden chap down the say bowl with the skin , and receive into the same as much oar as will come in , which be ever as much as their bowl will hold , which present they cast into a fire , and forthwith it melt , and do yield in five part , at the first melt , two part of metal for three part of oar . of this metal the mangoak have so great store , by report of all the savage adjoin , that they beautify their house with great plate of the same : and this to be true , i receive by report of all the country , and particular by young Skiko , the king of Chawanooks son my prisoner , who also himself have be prisoner with the mangoak , and set down all the particularity to i before mention : but he have not be at chawnis Temoatan himself : for he say , it be twenty day journey overland from the mangoak , to the say mineral country , and that they pass through certain other territory between they and the mangoak , before they come to the say country . upon report of the premise , which i be very inquisitive in all place where i come to take very particular information of , by all the savage that dwell towards those part , and especial of Menatonon himself , who in every thing do very particular inform i , and promise i guide of his own man , who shall pass over with i , even to the say country 329 of Chaunis Temoatan ( for overland from Chawanook to the mangoak be but one day journey from sun rise to sun set , whereas by water it be seven day with the soon : ) these thing , i say , make i very desirous by all mean possible to recover the mangoak , and to get some of that their copper for a assay , and therefore i willing yield to their [ three . 259. ] resolution : but it fall out very contrary to all expectation , and likelihood : for after two day travel , and our whole victuali spend , lie on shore all night , we can never see man , only fire we may perceive make alongst the shore where we be to pass , and up into the country , until the very last day . in the evening whereof , about three of the clock we hear certain savage call as we think , Manteo , who be also at that time with i in the boat , whereof we all be very glad , hope of some friendly conference with they , and make he to answer they , they present begin a song , as we think , in token of our welcome to they : but Manteo present betake he to his piece , and tell i that they mean to fight with we : which word be not so soon speak by he , and then a conflict light horseman ready to put to shore , but there light begin by they a vopje of their arrow among they in the boat , * s' but do no hurt ( God be thank ) to any man . in - mediate , the other boat lie ready with their shot to skoure the place for our hand weapon to land upon , which be present do , although the land be very high and steep , the savage forthwith quit the shore , and betake themselves to flight : we land , and have fair and easy follow for a small time after they , who have wooded themselves we know not where : the sun draw then towards the set , and be then assure that the next day if we will pursue they , though we may happen to meet with they , yet we shall be assure to meet with none of their victuali , which we then have good cause to think of : therefore choose for the company a con - 330 venient ground in safety to lodge in for the night , make a strong corpse of guard , and put out good centinel , i determine the next morning before the rise of the sun to be go back again , if possible we may recover the mouth of the river , into the broad sound , which at my first motion i find my whole company ready to assent unto : for they be now come to their dog porridge , that they have bespeak for themselves if that befall they which do , and i before do mistrust we shall hardly escape . the end be , we come the next day by night to the river mouth within four or five mile of the same , have row in one day down the current , as much as in , four day we have do against the same : we lodge upon a hand , where we have nothing in the world to eat but pottage of sassafras leave , the like whereof for a meat be never use before as i think . the broad sound we have to pass the next day all fresh and fast : that day the wind blow so strong , and the billow so great , that there be no possibility of passage without sink of our boat . this be upon easter eve , which be fast very true . upon Easter day in the morning the wind come very calm , we enter the sound , and by four of the clock we be at Chipanum , whence all the savage that we have leave there be flee , but their wear do yield we some fish , as God be please not utter to suffer we to be lose : for some of our company of the light horseman be far spend . the next morning we arrive at our home Roanoak . i have set down this voyage somewhat particular , to the end it may appear unto you ( as true it be ) that there want no great good will from the most to the least among we , to have perfect this discovery of the mine : for that the discovery of a good i , by the goodness of God , or a passage to the Southsea , or some way to it , and nothing else can bring this country in request to be inhabit by our nation . 331 the great current of the river of Morattico . and with the discovery of either of the two above show , it will be the most sweet and healthfull climate , and therewithal ! the most fertile soil ( be manure ) in the world : and then will sassafras , and many other root and gum there find make good merchandise and lade for ship , which otherwise of themselves will not be worth the fetch . provide also , that there be find out a better harbour than yet there be , which must be to the northward , if any there be , which be my intention to have spend this summer in the search of , and of the mine of Chawnis Temoatan : the one i will have do , if the bark that i shall have have of sir Francis Drake , by his honourable courtesy , have not be drive away by storm : the other if your supply of more man , and some other necessary have come to we in any convenient sufficiency . for this river of Moratico promise great thing , and by the opinion of m. hariot the head of it by the description of the country , either rise from the bay of Mexico , or else from very near unto the same , that open out into the south sea . And touch the minerali , thus do m. Youghan affirm , that though it be but copper , see the savage be able to melt it , it be one of the rich mineral in the world . wherefore a good harbour find to the northward , as before be say , and from thence four day overland , to the river of Choanoak sconce be raise , from whence again overland through the province of Choanoak one day voyage to the first town of the mangoak up the river of Moratico by the way , as also upon the say river for the defence of our boat like sconce be set , in this course of proceed you shall clear your self from all those danger and broad shallow sound before mention , and gain within four day travel ! into the heart of the main 200. mile at the least , and so pass your discovery into that most notable 332 1585-86 . country , and to the likely part of the main , with far great felicity than otherwise can be perform . thus sir , i have though simple , yet true set down unto you , what my labour with the rest of the gentleman , and poor man of our company ( not without both pain and peril , which the lord in his mercy many way deliver we from ) can yield unto you , which may have be perform in some more perfection , if the lord have be please that only that which you have provide for we have at the first be leave with we , or that he have not in his eternal providence now at the last set some other course in these thing , than the wisdom of man can look into , which true the carry away by a most strange and unlooked for storm of all our provision , with bark , master , mariner , and sundry also of my own company , all have be so courteous supply by the generail sir Francis Drake , the same have be most sufficient to have perform the great part of the premise , must ever make i to think the hand of God only ( for some his good purpose to my self yet unknown ) to have be in the matter . the second part touch the conspiracy of Pemisapan , the discovery of the same , and at the last , of our request to depart with sir Francis drake for England . Nsenore a savage father to Pemisapan be the only friend to our nation that we have among they , and about the king , die the 20. of April 1586. he alone have before oppose himself in their consultation against all matter propose against we , which both the king and all the rest of they after grangemoes death , be very willing to have prefer . and he be not only by the mere providence of God during his life , a mean to save we from hurt , as poison and such like , 333 this skill of make wear will he learn . the english voyage but also to do we very great good , and singular in this . the king be advise and of himself dispose , as a ready mean to have assure bring we to ruin in the month of march 1586. himself also with all his savage to have run away from we , and to have leave his ground in the hand unsowed : which if he have do , there have be no possibility in common reason , ( but by the immediate hand of God ) that we can have be preserve from starve out of hand . for at that time we have no wear for fish , neither can our man skill of the make of they , neither have we one grain of corn for seed to put into the ground . in my absence on my voyage that i have make against the chaonist , and mangoak , they have raise a brute among themselves , that i and my company be part slay , and part starve by the chaonist , and mangoak . one part of this tale be too true , that i and i be like to be starve , but the other false . nevertheless until my return it take such effect in pemisapans breast , and in those against we , that they grow not only into contempt of we , but also ( contrary to their former reverend opinion in show , of the almighty god of heaven , and Jesus Christ who we serve and worship , who before they will acknowledge and confess the only God ) now they begin to blaspheme , and flat to say , that our lord God be not God , since he suffer we to sustain much hunger , and also to be kill of the renapoak , for so they call by that generail name all the inhabitant of the whole main , of what province soever . insomuch as old Ensenore , neither any of his fellow , can for his sake have no more credit for we : and it come so far that the king be resolve to have present go away as be aforesaid . but even in the begin of this bruit i return , which when he see contrary to his expectation , and the advertisement that he have receive : that not only my self , and my company be all safe , but also by report of 334 his own 3. Savages which have be with i beside Manteo in that voyage , that be to say , Tetepano , his sister husband Eracano , and Cossine , that the chanoist and mangoak ( who name and multitude beside their valour be terrible to all the rest of the province ) dare not for the most part of they abide we , and that those that do abide we be kill , and that we have take Menatonon prisoner , and bring his son that he best love to Roanoak with i , it do not a little assuage all devise against we : on the other side , it make ensenores opinion to be receive again with great respect . for he have often before tell they , and then renew those his former speech , both to the king and the rest , that we be the servant of God , and that we be not subject to be destroy by they : but contrary wise , that they among they that seek our destruction , shall find their own , and not be able to work we , and that we be dead man be able to do they more hurt , then now we can do be alive : a opinion very confident at this day hold by the wise among they , and of their old man , as also , that they have be in the night , be 100 mile from any of we , in the air shoot at , and strike by some man of we , that by sickness have die among they : and many of they hold opinion , that we be dead man return into the world again , and that we do not remain dead but for a certain time , and that then we return again . all these speech then again grow in fui credit with they , the king , and all , touch we , when he see the small troop return again , and in that sort from those who very name be terrible unto they : but that which make up the matter on our side for that time be a accident , yea rather ( as all the rest be ) the good providence of the almighty for the save of we , which be this . within certain day after my return from the say journey , Menatonon send a messenger to visit his son the prisoner with i , and send i certain pearl 33 [ three . 261. ] the beginning of their harvest in July . the english voyage for a present , or rather , as Pemisapan tell i , for the ransom of his son , and therefore i refuse they : but the great cause of his send then , be to signify unto i , that he have command Okisko king of weo-pomiok , to yield himself servant , and homager , to the great Weroanza of England , and after she to sir Walter Raleigh : to perform which commandment receive from Menatonon , the say Okisko joyht with this menatonons messenger send four ' and twenty of his principall man to Roanoak to Pemisapan , to signify that they be ready to perform the same , and so have send those his man to let i know that from that time forward , he , and his successor be to acknowledge her majesty their only sovereign , and next unto she , as be aforesaid . all which be do , and acknowledge by they all , in the presence of Pemisapan his father , and all his savage in counsel then with he , it do for the time thorough ( as it seem ) change he in disposition towards we : insomuch as forthwith Ensenore win this resolution of he , that out of hand he shall go about , and withal , to cause his man to set up wear forthwith for we : both which he at that present go in hand withal , and do so labour the expedition of it , that in the end of April he have sow a good quantity of ground , so much as have be sufficient , to have feed our whole company ( God bless the growth ) and that by the belly , for a whole year : beside that he give we a certain plot of ground for our self to sow . all which put we in marvelous comfort , if we can pass from April until the begin of July , ( which be to have be the begin of their harvest , ) that than a new supply out of England or else our own store will well enough maintain we : all our fear be of the two month betwixt , in which mean space if the savage shall not help we with Cassavi , and china , arid that our wear shall fail we , ( as often they do , ) we may very well starve , notwithstanding the grow corn , like the starve 336 the material original position here be too large for reproduction in this reissue . a pdf can be download from the web address give on page iv 1585-86 . horse in the stable , with the grow grass , as the proverb be : which we very hardly have escape but only by the hand of God , as it please he to try we . for within few day after , as before be say , Ensenore our friend die , who be no soon dead , but certain of our great enemy about Pemisapan , as osacan a wero-ance , tanaquiny and Wanchese most principal , be in hand again to put their old practise in ure against we , which be ready embrace , and all their former devise against we , reneue , and new bring in question . but that of starve we , by their forbear to sow , be break by Ensenore in his life , by have make the king all at one instant to sow his ground , not only in the hand , but also at Dasamonquepeio in the main , within two league over against we . nevertheless there want no store of mischievous practise among they , and of all they resolve principal of this follow . first that Okisko king of weopomeiok with the man - conspira-doages shall be move , and with great quantity of °fpemisa~ copper entertain to the number of 7. or 8. hundred p ' bow , to enterprise the matter thus to be order . they of weopomeiok shall be invite to a certain kind of month mind which they do use to solemnise in their savage manner for any great personage dead , and shall have be for Ensenore . at this instant also shall the mandoak , who be a great people , with the chesepians and their friend to the number of 700. of they , be arm at a day appoint to the main of Dasamonquepeio , and there lie close at the sign of fierce , which shall interchangeable be make on both side , when Pemisapan with his troop above name shall have execute i , and some of our weroance ( as they call all our principali officer , ) the main force of the rest shall have come over into the hand , where they mean to have dispatch the rest of the company , who they do imagine to find both dismay and disperse abroad in the island , seek of crab and fish to live withal . the manner of their enterprise be this . vni 337 y the sufficiende of our man to deal against the savage . 10. to a hundredth . the Savages Uve by fish , and hunt , till harvest . the english voyage Tarraquine and Andacon two principali man about Pemisapan , and very lusty fellow , with twenty more appoint to they have the charge of my person to see a order take for the same , which they mean shall in this sort have be execute . in the dead time of the night they will have beset my house , and put fire in the reed that the same be cover with : mean ( as it be likely ) that my self will have come run out of a sudden amaze in my shirt without arm , upon the instant whereof they will have knock out my brain . the same order be give to certain of his fellow , for m. heriot : so for all the rest of our better sort , all our house at one instant be set on fire as afore be say , and that as well for they of the fort , as for we at the town . now to the end that we may be the few in number together , and so be the more easy deal withal ( for in deed ten of we with our arm prepare , be a terror to a hundred of the best sort of they , ) they agree and do immediate put it in practice , that they shall not for any copper sell we any victual whatsoever : beside that in the night they shall send to have our wear rob , and also to cause they to be break , and once be break never to be repair again by they . by this mean the king stand assure , that i must be enforce for lack of sustenance there , to disband my company into sundry place to live upon shell fish , for so the savage themselves do , go to Hatorask , croatoan , and other place , fish and hunt , while their ground be in sow , and their corn grow : which fail not his expectation . for the famine grow so extreme among we , or wear fail we of fish , that i be enforce to send captain Stafford with 20. with he to croatoan my lord admiral hand to serve two turn in one , that be to say , to feed himself and his company , and also to keep watch if any ship come upon the coast to warn we of the same . i send m. pridiox with the pinnace to Hatorask , and ten with he , with the provost marshal to live there , and also to wait 338 for ship : also i send every week ten 6. or 20. of the rest of the company to the main over against we , to live of Casada and oyster . in the mean while Pemisapan go of purpose to Dasamonquepeio for three cause : the one to see his ground there break up , and sow for a second crop : the other to withdraw himself from my daily send to he for supply of victuali for my company , for he be afraid to deny i any thing , neither dare he in my presence but by colour and with excuse , which t be content to accept for the time , mean in the end as i have reason , to give he the jump once for all : but in the mean while , as i have ever do before , i and i bear all wrong , and accept of all excuse . my purpose be to have rely my self with menatonon , and the chaonist , who in truth as they be more valiant people and in great number than the rest , so be they more faithful in their promise , and since my late be there have give many token of earnest desire they have to join in perfect league with we , and therefore be great offend with Pemisapan and weopomeiok for make he believe such tale of we . the three cause of this go to Dasamonquepeio be to dispatch his messenger to weopomeiok , and to the mandoage as aforesaid : all which he do with great impress of copper in hand , make large promise to they of great spoil . the answer within few day after come from weopomeiok , which be divide into two part . first for the king Okisko , who deny to be of the party for himself , or any of his especial follower , and therefore do immediate retire himself with his force into the main : the other be concern the rest of the say province who accept of it : and in like sort the mandoag receive the impress . the day of their assembly aforesaid at Roanoak be appoint the 10. of June : all which the premise be discover by Skyco , the king Menatonon his son my 339 prisoner , who have once attempt to run away , i lay he in the bylboe , threaten to cut off his head , who i remit at pemisapans request : whereupon he be persuade that he be our enemy to the death , he do not only feed he with himself , but also make he acquaint with all his practise . on the other side , the young man find himself as well use at my hand , as i have mean to show , and that all my company make much of he , he flat discover all unto i , which also afterward be reveal unto i by one of pemisapans own man , that night before he be slay . Theise mischief be all instant upon i and my company to be put in execution , it stand i in hand to study how to prevent they , and also to save all other , which be at that time as aforesaid so far from i : whereupon i send to Pemisapan to put suspicion out of his head , that 1 mean present to go to croatoan , for that i have hear of the arrival of our fleet , ( though i in truth have neither herd nor hope for so good adventure , ) and that i mean to come by he , to borrow of his man to fish for my company , and to hunt for i at croatoan , as also to buy some four day provision to serve for my voyage . he send i word that he will himself come over to Roanoak , but from day to day he defer , only to bring the weopomeiok with he and the mandoag , who time appoint be within eight day after . it be the last of May 1586 when all his own savage begin to make their assembly at Roanoak , at his commandment send abroad unto they , and i resolve not to stay long upon his come over , since he mean to come with so good company , but think good to go and visit he with such as i have , which i resolve to do the next day : but that night i mean by the way to give they in the island a canvisado , and at the instant to seize upon all the canoas about the island , to keep he from advertisement . but the town take the alarm before i mean it to 340 they : the occasion be this . i have send the master of the light horseman , with a few with he , to gather up all the canoas in the set of the sun , and to take as many as be go from we to Dasamonquepeio , but to suffer any that come from thence , to land . he meet with a Canoa go from the shore , and overthrow the Canoa , and cut off slaughter two Savages head : this be not do so secret but he be discover from the shore ; whereupon the cry arise : for in truth they , privy to their own villainous purpose against we , hold as good espial upon we , both day and night , as we do upon they . the alarm give , they take themselves to their bow , and we to our arm : some three or four of they at the first be slay with our shot : the rest flee into the wood . the next morning with the light horseman and one Canoa take 25 with the colonel of the chesepians , and the sergeant major , i go to Dasamonquepeio : and be land , send Pemisapan word by one of his own savage that meet i at the shore , that i be go to croatoan , and mean to take he in the way to complain unto he of Osocon , who the night pass be convey away my prisoner , who i have there present tie in a handlocke . hereupon the king do abide my come to he , and find my self amid seven or eight of he principali weroance and follower , ( not regard any of the common sort ) i give the watchword agree upon , ( which be , Christ our victory ) and immediate those his chief man and himself have by the mercy of God for our deliverance , that which they have purpose for we . the king himself be shoot through by the colonel with a pistol , lie on the ground for dead , and i look as watchful for the save of Manteos friend , as other be busy that none of the rest shall escape , sudden he start up , and run away as though he have not be touch , insomuch as he overrun all the company , be by the way shoot thwart the buttock by my irish boy with my petronel . in the end a 341 irish man serve i , one Nugent , and the deputy provost , undertake he ; and follow he in the wood , overtake he : and i in some doubt lest we have lose both the king and my man by our own negligence to have be intercept by the savage , we meet he Pemisapan return out of the wood with pemisapans head in slay - he hand .. This fall out the first of June 1586 , and the eight of the same come advertisement to i from captain Stafford , lie at my lord admiral island , that he have discover a great fleet of three and twenty sail : but whether they be friend or foe , he can not yet discern . he advise i to stand upon as good guard as i can . the nine of the say month he himself come unto i , have that night before , and that same day travel by land twenty mile : and i must true report of he from the first to the last ; he be the gentleman that never spare labour or peril either by land or water , fair weather or foul , to perform any service commit unto he . a letter from he bring i a letter from the generali sir Francis sir Francis Drake , with a most bountiful and honourable offer for ’ the supply of our necessity to the performance of the action we be enter into ; and that not only of victual , munition , and clothe , but also of bark , pinnaces , and boat ; they also by he to be victual , man , and furnish to my contentation . the ten day he arrive in the road of our bad harbour : and come there to a anchor , the eleven day i come to he , who i find in deed most honourable to perform that which in writing and message he have most courteous offer , he have aforehand propound the matter to all the captain of his fleet , and get their like and consent thereto . with such thank unto he and his captain for his care both of we and of our action , not as the matter deserve , but as i can both for my company and my 342 ' self , i ( be aforehand prepare what i will desire ) crave at his hand that it will please he to take with he into England a number of weak and unfit man for my good action , which i will deliver to he ; and in place of they to supply i of his company with oare-man , artificer , and other . that he will leave we so much ship and victuali , as about August then next follow will carry i and all my company into England , when we have discover somewhat , that for lack of needful provision in time leave with we as yet remain undo . that it will please he withal to leave some sufficient master not only to carry we into England , when time shall be , but also to search the coast for some better harbour , if there be any , and especial to help we to some small boat and oare-man . also for a supply of caliver , hand weapon , match and lead , tool , apparel , and such like . he have receive these my request , accord to his usual commendable manner of government ( as it be tell i ) call his captain to counsel ; the resolution be that i shall send such of my officer of my company as i use in such matter , with their note , to go aboard with he ; which be the master of the victual , the keeper of the store , and the vicetreasurer : to who he appoint forthwith for i the Francis , be a very proper bark of 70 tun , and take present order for bring of victual aboard she for 100 man for four month , with all my other demand whatsoever , to the uttermost . and further , he appoint for i two pinnace , and four small boat : and that which be to perform all his former liberality towards we , be that he have get the full assent of two of as sufficient experiment master as be any in his fleet , by judgement of they that know they , with very sufficient ging to tarry with i , and to employ themselves most earnest in the action , as i shall appoint they , until the term which 343 [ three . 264. . ] i promise of our return into England again . the name of one of those master be Abraham Kendal , the other Griffith Herne . while these thing be in hand , the provision aforesaid be bring , and in bring aboard , my say master be also go aboard , my say bark have accept of their charge , and my own officer , with other in like sort of my company with they ( all which be dispatch by the say generali the 12 of the say month ) the 13 of the same there arise such a unwonted storm , and continue four day , that have like to have drive all on shore , if the lord have not hold his holy hand over they , and the generali very provident foresee the worst himself , then about my dispatch put himself aboard : but in the end have drive sundry of the fleet to put to sea the Francis also with all my provision , my two master , and my company aboard , she be see to be free from the same , and to put clear to sea this storm have continue from the 13 to the 16 of the month , and thus my bark put away as aforesaid , the generali come ashore make a new proffer unto i ; which be a ship of 170 ton , call the bark Bonner , with a sufficient master and guide to tarry with i the time appoint , and victual sufficient to carry i and my company into England , with all provision as before : but he tell i that he will not for any thing undertake to have she bring into our harbour , and therefore he be to leave she in the road , and to leave the care of the rest unto my self , and advise i to consider with my company of our case , and to deliver present unto he in write what i will require he to do for we : which be within his power , he do assure i aswell for his captain as for himself , shall be most willing perform . Heereupbn call such captain and gentleman of my company as then be at hand , who be all as privy as my self to the general offer : their whole re - 344 quest be to i , that consider the case that we stand in , the weakness of our company , the small number of the same , the carry away of our first appoint bark , with those two especial master , with our principali provision in the same , by the very hand of God as it seem , stretch out to take we from thence ; consider also , that his second offer , though most honourable of his part , yet of we not to be take , insomuch as there be no possibility for she with any safety to be bring into the harbour : see furthermore , our hope for supply with sir Richard Greenvill , so undoubted promise we before easter , not yet come , neither then likely to come this year , consider the do in England for Flanders , and also for America , that therefore i will resolve my self with my company to go into England in that fleet , and accord to make request to the generali in all our name , that he will be please to give we present passage with he . which request of we by my self deliver unto he , he most ready assent unto : and so he send immediately his pinnace unto our island for the fetch away of a few that there be leave with our baggage , the weather be so boisterous , and the pinnace so often on ground , that the most of all we have , with all our card , book and write be by the sailor cast overboard , the great number of the fleet be much aggrieve with their long and dangerous abode in that miserable road . ' from whence the generali in the name of the almighty , weigh his anchor ( have bestow we among his fleet ) for the relief of who he have in that storm sustain more peril of wrack then in all his former most honourable action against the Spaniard , with praise unto God for all , set sail the nineteenth of June 1586 , and arrive in Portsmouth the seven and twenty of July ’ the same year . [ Iii . 266. ] a brief and true report of the new find land of Virginia : of the commodity there find , and to be raise , aswell merchantable as other : Written by Thomas Heriot , servant to sir Walter Ralegh , a member of the colony , and there employ in discover a full twelvemonth . Ralph lane one of her majesty esquire , and governor of the colony in Virginia , above mention , for the time there resident , to the gentle reader wish all happiness in the lord . lbeit ( gentle reader ) the credit of report in this treatise contain the can little be further by the testimony of one as my self , through affection judge partiali , though without desert : nevertheless , forsomuch as i have be request by some my particular friend , who conceive more right of i , to deliver free my knowledge of the same , not only for the satisfy of they , but also for the true information of any other whosoever , that come not with a prejudicate mind to the read thereof : thus much upon my credit i be to affirm , that thing universal be so true set down 348 in this treatise by the author thereof , a actor in the colony , and a man no less for his honesty then learn commendable , as that i dare bold avouch , it may very well pass with the credit of truth even among the most true relation of this age . which as for my own part i be ready any way with my word to acknowledge , so also ( of the certainty thereof assure by my own experience ) with this my public assertion i do affirm the same . farewell in the lord . to the adventurer , favourer , and well-willer of the enterprise for the inhabit and plant in Virginia . Ince the first undertake by sir Walter Ralegh to deal in the action of discover of that country which be now call and know by the name of Virginia , many voyage have be thither make at sundry time to his great charge ; as first in the year 1584 , and afterward in the year 1585 , 1586 , and now of late this last year 1587 : there have be diverse and variable report , with some slanderous and shameful speech bruit abroad by many that return from thence : especial of that discovery which be make by the colony transport by sir Richard Grinvile in the year 1585 , be of all other the most principali , and as yet of most effect , the time of their abode in the country be a whole year , when as in the other voyage before they stay but six week , and the other after be only for supply and transportation , nothing more be discover then have be before . which report have not do a little wrong to many that otherwise will have also favour and adventure in the action , to the honour and benefit of our nation , beside the particular profit and credit which will redound to themselves the dealer therein , as i hope by the sequel of 349 event , to the shame of those that have avouch the contrary , shall be manifest , if you the adventurer , favourer and well-willer do but either increase in number , or in opinion continue , or have be doubtful , renew your good like and furtherance to deal therein accord to the worthiness thereof already find , and as you shall understand hereafter to be requisite . touch which worthiness through cause of the diversity of relation and report , many of your opinion can not be firm , nor the mind of some that be well dispose be settle in any certainty . i have therefore think it good , be one that have be in the discovery , and in deal with the naturali inhabitant special employ : and have therefore see and know more than the ordinary , to impart so much unto you of the fruit of our labour , as that you may know how injurious the enterprise be slander , and that in public manner at this present , chief for two respect . first , that some of you which be yet ignorant or doubtful of the state thereof , may see that there be sufficient cause why the chief enterpriser with the favour of her majesty , notwithstanding such report , have not only since continue the action by send into the country again , and replant this last year a new colony , but be also ready , accord as the time and mean will affbord , to follow and prosecute the same . second , that you see and know the continuance of the action , by the view hereof you may general know and learn what the country be , and thereupon consider how your deal therein , if it proceed , may return you profit and gain , be it either by inhabit and plant , or otherwise in further thereof . and lest that the substance of my relation shall be doubtful unto you , as of other by reason of their diversity , i will first open the cause in a few word , wherefore they be so different , refer my self to 35° your favourable construction , and to be adjudge of , as by good consideration you shall find cause . of our company that return , some for their misdemeanour and ill deal in the country have be there worthy punish , who by reason of their bad nature , have malicious not only speak ill of their governor , but for their sake slander the country it self . the like also have those do which be of their consort . some be ignorant of the state thereof , notwithstanding since their return among their friend and acquaintance , and also other , especial if they be in company where they may not be gainsay , will seem to know so much as no man more , and make no man so great traveller as themselves . they stand so much , as it may seem , upon their credit and reputation , that have be a twelvemonth in the country , it will have be a great disgrace unto they , as they think , if they can not have say much , whether it be true or false . of which some have speak of more than ever they see , or otherwise know to be there . other sum have not be ashamed to make absolute denial of that , which although not by they , yet by other be most certain and there plentiful know , and other some make difficulty of those thing they have no skill of . the cause of their ignorance be , in that they be of that many that be never out of the island where we be seat , or not far , or at the least wise in few place else , during the time of our abode in the country : or of that many , that after gold and silver be not so soon find , as it be by they look for , have little or no care of any other thing but to pamper their belly : or of that many which have little understanding , less discretion , and more tongue then be needful or requisite . some also be off a nice bring up , only in city or town , or such as never ( as i may say ) have see 351 A.D. I587 - the world before . because there be not to be find any english city , nor such fair house , nor at their own wish any of their old accustom dainty food , nor any soft bed of down or feather , the country be to they miserable , and their report thereof accord . because my purpose be but in brief to open the cause of the variety of such speech , the particularity of they , and of many envious , malicious , and slanderous report and device else , by our own countryman beside , as trifle that be not worthy of wise man to be think upon , i mean not to trouble you withal , but will pass to the commodity , the substance of that which i have to make relation of unto you . the treatise whereof , for your more ready view and easy understanding , i will divide into three speciali part . in the first i will make declaration of such commodity there already find or to be raise , which will not only serve the ordinary turn of you which be and shall be the planter and inhabitant , but such a overplus sufficient to be yield , or by man of skill to be provide , as by way of traffic and exchange with our own nation of England , will enrich your self the provider : those that shall deal with you , the enterpriser in generali , and great profit our own countryman , to supply they with most thing which heretofore they have be fain to provide either of stranger or of our enemy , which commodity , for distinction sake , i call merchantable . in the second i will set down all the commodity which we know the country by our experience do yield of it self for victuali and sustenance of man life , such as be usual feed upon by the inhabitant of the country , as also by we during the time we be there . in the last part i will make mention general of such other commodity beside , as i be able to remember , and as i shall think behooveful for those that shall 352 1586. inhabit , and plant there , to know of , which special concern building , as also some other necessary use : with a brief description of the nature and manner of the people of the country . the first part of merchantable commodity . like of grass , or grass silk . there be a kind of grass in the country , upon the blade whereof there grow very good silk in form of a thin glitter skin to be strip off . it grow two foot and a half high or better : the blade be about two foot in length , and half a inch broad . the like grow in Persia , which be in the self same climate as Virginia , of which very many of the silk work that come from thence into Europe be make . hereof if it be plant and order [ three . 268. ] as in Persia , it can in reason be otherwise , but that there will rise in short time great profit to the dealer therein , see there be so great use and vent thereof aswell in our country as elsewhere . and by the mean of sow and plant it in good ground , it will be far great , better , and more plentiful than it be . although notwithstanding there be great store thereof in many place of the country grow natural and wild , which also by proof here in England , in make a piece of silk grogran , we find to be excellent good . worm silk . in many of our journey we find silkworm fair and great , as big as our ordinary walnut . although it have not be our hap to have find such plenty , as elsewhere to be in the country we have hear of , yet see that the country do natural breed and nourish they , there be no doubt but if art be add in plant of mulberry tree , and other , fit . for they in commodious place , for their feed and nourish , and some of they careful gather and husband in that sort , as by man of skill they 353 z be know to be necessary : there will rise as great profit in time to the Virginians , as thereof do now to the persian , Turks , Italians and Spaniard . flax and hemp . the truth be , that of hemp and flax there be no great store in any one place together , by reason it be not plant but as the soil do yield of it self : and howsoever the leaf and stem or stalk do differ from we , the stuff by judgement of man of skill be altogether as good as we : and if not , as further proof shall find otherwise , we have that experience of the soil , as that there can be show any reason to the contrary , but that it will grow there excellent well , and by plant will be yield plentiful , see there be so much ground whereof some may well be apply to such purpose . what benefit hereof may grow in cordage and linen who can easy understand ? alum . there be a vein of earth along the sea coast for the space of forty or fifty mile , whereof by the judgement of some that have make trial here in England , be make good alum , of that kind which be call Roch alum . the richness of such a commodity be so well know , that i need not to say any thing thereof . the same earth do also yield white coprasse , nitrum , and Alumen plumeum , but nothing so plentiful as the common alum , which be also of price , and profitable . Wapeih . a kind of earth so call by the naturali inhabitant , very like to terra sigillata , and have be refine , it have be find by some of our physician and Chyrurgians , to be of the same kind of virtue , and more effectual . the inhabitant use it very much for the cure of sore and wound : there be in diverse place great plentv . and in some place of a blue sort . pitch , tar , resin and turpentine . there be those kind of tree which yield they abundant and great store . in the very same island where we be seat , be fifteen mile of length , and five or six 35+ mile in breadth , there be few tree else but of the same kind , the whole island be full . sassafras , call by the inhabitant winauk , a kind of wood of most pleasant and sweet smell , and of most rare virtue in physic for the cure of many disease . it be find by experience to be far better and of more use than the wood which be call Guaiacum , or lignum vitas . for the description , the manner of use , and the manifold virtue thereof , i refer you to the book of monardes , translate and entitle in english , the joy full news from the west Indies . Cedar . a very sweet wood , and fine timber , whereof if nest of chest be there make , or timber thereof fit for sweet and fine bedsted , table , desk , lute , virginal , and many thing else , ( of which there have be proof make already ) to make up fraught with other principali commodity , will yield profit . wine . there be two kind of grape that the soil do yield natural , the one be small and sour , of the ordinary bigness as we in England , the other far great and of himself luscious sweet . when they be plant and husband as they ought , a principali commodity of wine by they may be raise . oil . there be two sort of walnut , both hold oil ; but the one far more plentiful than the other . when there be mill and other device for the purpose , a commodity of they may be raise , because there be infinite store . there be also three several kind of berry in the form of oke-akorne , which also by the experience and use of the inhabitant , we find to yield very good and sweet oil . Furthermore , the bear of the country be common very fat , and in some place there be many . their fatness , because it be so liquid , may well be term oil , and have many speciali use . fur . all along the sea coast there be great store of otter , which be take by wear and other engine make for the purpose , will yield good profit . we hope 355 A.D. 1586. also of marten fur , and make no doubt by the relation of the people , but that in some place of the [ three . 269. ] country there be store , although there be but two skin that come to our hand . Luzernes also we have understanding of , although for the time we see none . deer skin dress after the manner of chamoes , or undress , be to be have of the naturali inhabitant thousand yearly by way of traffic for trifle , and no more waste or spoil of deer then be and have be ordinary in time before . civet-cat . in our travel there be find one to have be kill by a savage or inhabitant , and in another place the smell where one or more have late be before , whereby we gather , beside then by the relation of the people , that there be some in the country : good profit will rise by they . iron . in two place of the country special , one about fourscore , and the other six score mile from the fort or place where we dwell , we find near the water side the ground to be rocky , which by the trial of a minerali man be find to hold iron rich . it be find in many place of the country else : i know nothing to the contrary , but that it may be allow for a good merchantable commodity , consider there the small charge for the labour and feed of man , the infinite store of wood , the want of wood and deerenesse thereof in England , and the necessity of ballast of ship . copper . a hundred and fifty mile into the main in two town we find with the inhabitant diverse small plate of copper , that have be make as we understand by the inhabitant that dwell further into the country , where as they say be mountain and river that yield also white grain of mettle , which be to be deem silver . for confirmation whereof , at the time of our first arrival in the country , i see , with some other with i , two small piece of silver gross beat , about the weight of a testron , hang in the ear of a 356 wiroan or chief lord that dwell about fourscore mile from we : of who through inquiry , by the number of day and the way , i learn that it have come to his hand from the same place or near , where i after understand the copper be make , and the white grain of metal find . the aforesaid copper we also find by trial to hold silver . pearl . sometime in feed on muscle we find some pearl : but it be our hap to meet with rag , or of a pied colour : not have yet discover those place where we hear of better and more plenty . one of our company , a man of skill in such matter , have gather together from among the savage people about five thousand : of which number he choose so many as . thousand make a fair chain , which for their likeness and fea^s uniformity in roundness , orientness , and pidenesse of * ‘ many excellent colour , with equality in greatness , be very fair and rare : and have therefore be present to her majesty , have we not by casualty , and through extremity of a storm lose they , with many thing else in come away from the country . sweet gum of diverse kind , and many other apothecary drug , of which we will make speciali mention , when we shall receive it from such man of skill in that kind , that in take reasonable pain shall discover they more particular than we have do , and then now i can make relation of , for want of the example i have provide and gather , and be now lose , with other thing by casualty before mention . die of diverse kind : there be Shoemake well know , and use in England for black : the seed of a herb call Wasebur , little small root call chap-pacor , and the bark of the tree call by the inhabitant tangomockonomindge : which die be for diverse sort of red : their goodness for our english clothes remain yet to be prove . the inhabitant use they only for the die of hair , and colour of their face , and mantle make of dear skin : and also for the die 357 of rush to make artificiali work withal in their mat and basket : have no other thing beside that they account of , apt to use they for . if they will not prove merchantable , there be no doubt but the planter there shall find apt use for they , as also for other colour which we know to be there . woad : a thing of so great vent and use among English dyer , which can not be yield sufficient in our own country for spare of ground , may be plant in Virginia , there be grind enough . the growth thereof need not to be doubt , when as in the island of the azore it grow plentiful , which be in the same climate . so likewise of mad . we carry thither sugar-cane to plant , which be not so well preserve as be requisite , and beside the time of the year be pass for their set when we arrive , we can not make that proof of they as we desire . notwithstanding , see that they grow in the same climate , in the south part of Spain , and in Barbary , our hope in reason may yet continue . so likewise for orange and Limmons . there may be plant also Quinses . whereby may grow in reasonable time , if the action be diligent prosecute , no small commodity in sugar , sucket , and Marmelades . many other commodity by plant may there also [ three . 270. ] be raise , which i leave to your discreet and gentle consideration : and many also may be there , which yet we have not discover . two more commodity of great value , one of certainty , and the other in hope , not to be plant , but there to be raise and in short time to be provide , and prepare , i may have specify . so likewise of those commodity already set down i may have say more : as of the particular place where they be find , and best to be plant and prepare : by what mean , and in what reasonable space of time they may be raise to profit , and in what proportion : but because other than well-willer may be there withal acquaint , not to the good of the action , i have witting omit 358 they : know that to those that be well dispose , i have utter , accord to my promise and purpose , for this part sufficient . the second part of such commodity as Virginia be know to yield for victuali and sustenance of man life , usual feed upon by the naturali inhabitant ; as also by we , during the time of our abode : and first of such as be sow and husband . agatowr , a kind of grain so call by the inhabitant : the same in the west Indies be call Mayz : English man call it guiny-wheat or turkey-wheat , accord to the name of the country from whence the like have be bring . the grain be about the bigness of our ordinary english pease , and not much different in form and shape : but of diverse colour : some white , some red , some yellow , and some blue . all of they yield a very white and sweet flower : be use accord to his kind , it make a very good bread . we make of the same in the country some malt , whereof be brew as good ale as be to be desire . so likewise by the help of hop , thereof may be make as good beer . it be a grain of marvellous great increase : of a thousand , fifteen hundred , and some two thousand fold . there be three sort , of which two be ripe in eleven and twelve week at the most , sometime in ten , after the time they be set , and be then of height in stalk about six or seven foot . the other sort be ripe in fourteen , and be about ten foot high , of the stalk some bear four head , some three , some one , and some two : every head contain five , six , or seven hundred grain , within a few more or less . of these grain , beside bread , the inhabitant make victuali , either by parch they , or seethe they whole until they 359 be break : or boil the flower with water into a pap - .... Okindgier , call by we bean , because in greatness and partly in shape they be like to the bean in England , save that they be flatter , of more diverse colour , and some pied . the leaf also of the stem be much different . in taste they be altogether as good as our english pease . wickonzowr , call by we pease , in respect of the bean , for distinction sake , because they be much less , although in form they little differ : but in goodness of taste much like , and be far better than our english pease . both the bean and pease be ripe in ten week after they be set . they make they victuali either by boil they all to piece into a broth , or boil they whole until they be soft , and begin to break , as be use in England , either by themselves , or mixed together : sometime they mingle of the wheat with they : sometime also , be whole sodden , they bruise or pun they in a mortar , and thereof make loaf or lump of doughish bread , which they use to eat for variety . macocquer , accord to their several form , call by we pompion , melon , and gourd , because they be of the like form as those kind in England . in Virginia such of several form be of one taste , and very good , and do also spring from one seed . there be of two sort : one be ripe in the space of a month , and the other in two month . there be a herb which in dutch be call Melden . some of those that i describe it unto take it to be a kind of orage : it grow about four or five foot high : of the seed thereof they make a thick broth , and pottage of a very good taste : of the stalk by burn into ash they make a kind of salt earth , wherewithal ! many use sometime to season their broth : other salt they know not . we our self use the leaf also for potherb . 360 there be also another great herb , in form of a marigold , about six foot in height , the head with the flower be a span in breadth . some take it to be Planta solis : of the seed hereof they make both a kind of bread and broth . all the aforesaid commodity for victuali be set or sow , sometime in ground apart and several by themselves , but for the most part together in one ground mixed : the manner thereof , with the dress and prepare of the ground , because i will note unto you the fertility of the soil , i think good brief to describe . the ground they never fatten with muck , dung , or [ three . 271. ] any other thing , neither plow nor dig it as we in England , but only prepare it in sort as follow . a few day before they sow or set , the man with wooden instrument make almost in form of mattock or hoe with long handle : the woman with short pecker or parer , because they use they sit , of a foot long , and about five inch in breadth , do only break the upper part of the ground to raise up the weed , grass , and old stub of corn stalk with their root . the which after a day or two day dry in the sun , be scrap up into many small heap , to save they labour for carry they away , they burn into ash . and whereas some may think that they use the ash for to better the ground , i say that then they will either disperse the ash abroad , which we observe they do not , except the heap be too great , or else will take speciali care to set their corn where the ash lie , which also we find they be careless of . and this be all the husband of their ground that they use . than their set or sow be after this manner . first for their corn , begin in one corner of the plot , with a pecker they make a hole , wherein they put four grain , with care that they touch not one another ( about a inch asunder ) and cover they with the mould 361 again : and so throughout the whole plot make such hole , and use they after such manner , but with this regard , that they be make in rank , every rank differ from other half a fathom or a yard , and the hole also in every rank as much . by this mean there be a yard spare ground between every hole : where accord to discretion here and there , they set as many bean and Peaze ; in diverse place also among the seed of macocquer , Melden , and Planta solis . the ground be thus set accord to the rate by we experiment , a english acre contain forty perch in length , and four in breadth , do there yield in crop or ofcome of corn , bean and Peaze , at the least two hundred London bushel , beside the macocquer , Melden , and Planta solis ; when as in England forty bushel of our wheat yield out of such a acre be think to be much . i think also good to note this unto you , that you which shall inhabit , and plant there , may know how special that country corn be there to be prefer before we : beside , the manifold way in apply it to victual , the increase be so much , that small labour and pain be needful in respect of that which must be use for we . for this i can assure you that accord to the rate we have make proof of , one man may prepare and husband so much ground ( have once bear corn before ) with less than four and twenty hour labour , as shall yield he victual in a large proportion for a twelvemonth , if he have nothing else but that which the same ground will yield , and of that kind only which i have before speak of : the say ground be also but of five and twenty yard square . and if need require , but that there be ground enough , there may be raise out of one and the selfsame ground two harvest or ofcome : for they sow or set , and may at any time when they think good , from the midst of march until the end of June : so that they also set when they have eat of their first crop . in some 362 1586. place of the country notwithstanding they have two harvest , as we have hear , out of one and the same ground . for english corn nevertheless , whether to use or not to use it , you that inhabit may do as you shall have further cause to think best . of the growth you need not to doubt : for barley , oat , and pease , we have see proof of , not be purposely sow , but fall casual in the worst sort of ground , and yet to be as fair as any we have ever see here in England . but of wheat , because it be musty , and have take salt water , we can make no trial : and of rye we have none . thus much have i digress , and i hope not unnecessary : now will i return again to my course , and entreat of that which yet remain , appertain to this chapter . there be a herb which be sow apart by it self , and be call by the inhabitant Uppowoc : in the west Indies it have diverse name , accord to the several place and country where it grow and be use : the Spaniard general call it tobacco . the leaf thereof tobacco . be dry and bring into powder , they use to take the fume or smoke thereof , by suck it through pipe make of clay , into their stomach and head ; from whence it purge superfluous flame and other gross humour , and open all the pore and passage of the body : by which mean the use thereof not only preserve the body from obstruction , but also ( if any be , so that they have not be of too long continuance ) in short time break they : whereby their body be notable preserve in health , and know not many grievous disease , wherewithal ! we in England be often time afflict . This Uppowoc be of so precious estimation among they , that they think their god be marvellous delight therewith : whereupon sometime they make hallow fire , and cast some of the powder therein for a sacrifice : be in a storm upon the water , to pacific their god , they cast some up into the air and into the [ three . 272. ] 363 water : so a wear for fish be new set up , they cast some therein and into the air : also after a escape of danger , they cast some into the air likewise : but all do with strange gesture , stamp , sometime dance , clap of hand , hold up of hand , and stare up into the heaven , utter therewithal ! , and chatter strange word and noise . we our self , during the time we be there , use to suck it after their manner , as also since our return , and have find many rare and wonder experiment of the virtue thereof : of which the relation will require a volume by it self : the use of it by so many of late man and woman of great call , as else , and some learned physician also , be sufficient witness . and these be all the commodity for sustenance of life , that i know and can remember , they use to husband : all else that follow , be find grow natural or wild . of root . OPenauk be a kind of root of round form , some of the bigness of walnut , some far great , which be find in moist and marish ground grow many together one by another in rope , as though they be fasten with a string . be boil or sodden , mmardes they be very good meat . monardes call these root , part z . lib . 1. gea ( js or pater nostri of Santa Helena . cap - 4 - okeepenauk be also of round shape , find in dry ground : some be of the bigness of a man head . they be to be eat as they be take out of the ground : for by reason of their dryness they will neither roast nor seethe . their taste be not so good as of the former root : notwithstanding for want of bread , and sometime for variety the inhabitant use to eat they with fish or flesh , and in my judgement they do as well as the household bread make of rye here in England . Kaishucpenauk , a white kind of root about the bigness of hen egg , and near of that form : their taste be not so good to our seem as of the other , and 364 1586. therefore their place and manner of grow not so much care for by we : the inhabitant notwithstanding use to boil and eat many . Tsinaw , a kind of root much like unto that which in England be call the china root bring from the east Indies . and we know not any thing to the contrary but that it may be of the same kind . Theise root grow many together in great cluster , and do bring forth a brier stalk , but the leaf in shape far unlike : which be support by the tree it grow near unto , will reach or climb to the top of the high . from these root while they be new or fresh , be chop into small piece , and stamp , be strain with water a juice that make bread , and also be boil , a very good spoonmeat in manner of a jelly , and be much better in taste , if it be temper with oil . This Tsinaw be not of that sort , which by some be cause to be bring into England for the china root ; for it be discover since , and be in use as be aforesaid : but that which be bring hither be not yet know , neither by we nor by the inhabitant to serve for any use or purpose , although the root in shape be very like . Coscushaw some of our company take to be that kind of root which the Spaniard in the west Indies call cassavy , whereupon also many call it by that name : it grow in very muddy pool , and moist ground . be dress accord to the country manner , it make a good bread , and also a good spoonmeat , and be use very much by the inhabitant . the juice of this root be the juice of poison , and therefore heed must be take before any thing cofushaw u be mad therewithal ! : either the root must be first slice and dry in the sun , or by the fire , and then be pun into flower , will make good bread : or else while they be green they be to be pare , cut in piece , and stamp : loaf of the same to be lay near or over the fire until it be sour ; and then be well pun again , bread or spoonmeat very good in taste and wholesome may be make thereof . 365 Habascon be a root of hot taste , almost of the form and bigness of a parsnip : off it self it be no victuali , but only a help , be boil together with other meat . there be also leek , differ little from we in England , that grow in many place of the country ; of which , when we come in place where they be , we gather and eat many , but the naturali inhabitant never . of fruit . chestnut there be in diverse place great store : some they use to eat raw , some they stamp and boil to make spoonmeat , and with some be sodden , they make such a manner of dough bread as they use of their bean before mention . [ Iii . 273. ] walnut . there be two kind of walnut , and of they infinite store : in many place , where be very great wood for many mile together , the three part of tree be walnut tree . the one kind be of the same taste and form , or little differ from we of England , but that they be hard and thick shell : the other be great , and have a very ragged and hard shell : but the kernel great , very oily and sweet . beside their eat of they after our ordinary manner , they break they with stone , and pun they in mortar with water , to make a milk which they use to put into some sort of their spoonemeat : also among their sod wheat , pease , bean and pompion , which make they have a far more pleasant taste . medlar , a kind of very good fruit : so call by we chief for these respect : first in that they be not good until they be rot , then in that they open at the head as our medlar , and be about the same bigness : otherwise in taste and colour they be far different ; for they be as red as cherry , and very sweet : but whereas the cherry be sharp sweet , they be luscious sweet . Mutaquesunnauk , a kind of pleasant fruit almost of the shape and bigness of english pear , but that they be 366 of a perfect red colour aswell within as without . they there be Hi. grow on a plant who leaf be very thick , and full of ^dfofTmua prickle as sharp as needle . some that have be in the Indies , where they have see that kind of red die of nofruithbring-great price , which be call cochinile , to grow , do de - eth forth . the scribe his plant right like unto this of Metaquesunnauk ; Gothinillo . but whether it be the true cochinile , or a bastard or wild kind , it can yet be certify , see that also , as i hear , cochinile be not of the fruit , but find on the leaf of the plant : which leave for such matter we have not so special observe . grape there be of two sort , which i mention in the merchantable commodity . strawberry there be as good and as great as those which we have in our english garden . mulberry , applecrab , hurt or hurtlebery , such as we have in England . Sacquenummener , a kind of berry almost like unto caper , but somewhat great , which grow together in cluster upon a plant or herb that be find in shallow water : be boil eight or nine hour accord to their kind , be very good meat and wholesome ; otherwise if they be eat they will make a man for the time frantic or extreme sick . there be a kind of reed which bear a seed almost like unto our rye or wheat ; and be boil be good meat . in our travel in some place we find wild pease like unto we in England , but that they be less , which be also good meat . of a kind of fruit or berry in form of acorn . there be a kind of berry or acorn , of which there be five sort that grow on several kind of tree : the one be call sagatemener , the second osamener , the three pummuckoner . Theise kind of acorn they use to dry upon hurdle make of reed , with fire underneath , almost after the manner as we dry malt in England . when they 367 be to be use , they first water they until they be soft , and then be sodden , they make a good victuali , either to eat so simple , or else be also pun to make loaf or lump of bread . Theise be also the three kind , of which i say before the inhabitant use to make sweet oil . another sort be call sapummener , which be boil or parch , do eat and taste like unto chestnut . they sometime also make bread of this sort . the five sort be call Mangummenauk , and be the acorn of their kind of oak , the which be dry after the manner of the first sort , and afterward water , they boil they , and their servant , or sometime the chief themselves , either for variety or for want of bread , do eat they with their fish or flesh . of beast . deer , in some place there be great store : near unto the sea coast they be of the ordinary bigness of we in England , and some less : but further up into the country , where there be better food , they be great : they differ from we only in this , their tail be long , and the snag of their home look backward . cony . those that we have see , and all that we can hear off be of a grey colour like unto hare : in some place there be such plenty that all the people of some town make they mantle of the fur or fly of the skin of those which they usual take . Saquenuckot and Maquowoc , two kind of small beast great than cony , which be very good meat . we never take any of they our self but sometime eat of such as the inhabitant have take and bring unto we . squirrel , which be of a grey colour , we have take and eat . bear , which be off black colour . the bear of this country be good meat . the inhabitant in time of winter do use to take and eat many : so also sometime do we . they be take common in this sort : in 368 some island or place where they be , be hunt for , assoon as they have espial of a man , they present run away , and then be chase , they climb and get up the next tree they can : from whence with arrow they be shoot down stark dead , or with those wound that they may after easy be kill . we sometime shoot they down with our caliver . i have the name of eight and twenty several sort of beast , which i have hear of to be here and there disperse in the country , especial in the main : of which there be only twelve kind that we have yet discover ; and of those that be good meat we know only they before mention . the inhabitant sometime kill the lion , and eat he : and we sometime as they come to our hand of their wolves or wolvish dog , which i have not set down for good meat , lest that some will understand my judgement therein to be more simple than need , although i can allege the difference in taste of those kind from we , which by some of our company have be experiment in both . of fowl . TUrkie cock and turquoise hen , stockdove , partridge , crane , Hernes , and in winter great store of swan and goose . of all sort of foul i have the name in the country language of fourscore and six , of which number , beside those that be name , we have take , eat , and have the picture as they be there draw , with the name of the inhabitant , of several strange sort of water foul eight , and seventeen kind more of land foul , although we have see and eat of many more , which for want of leisure there for the purpose , can not be picture : and after we be better furnish and store upon further discovery with their strange beast , fish , tree , plant , and herb , they shall|be also publish . there be also parrot , falcon , and Marlin hauk , vin 369 2 a in the gulf of California they use the like fish . which although with we they be not use for meat , yet for other cause i think good to mention . of fish . for four month of the year , February , march , April and may , there be plenty of sturgeon . and also in the same month of herring , some of the ordinary bigness of we in England , but the most part far great , of eighteen , twenty inch , and some two foot in length and better : both these kind of fish in those month be most plentiful ! , and in best season , which we find to be most delicate and pleasant meat . there be also trout , porpoise , ray , oldwife , mullet , plaice , and very many other sort of excellent good fish , which we have take and eat , who name i know not but in the country language : we have the picture of twelve sort more , as they be draw in the country , with their name . the inhabitant use to take they two manner of way ; the one be by a kind of wear make of reed , which in that country be very strong : the other way , which be more strange , be with pole make sharp at one end , by shoot they into the fish after the manner as irish man cast dart , either as they be row in their boat , or else as they be wade in the shallows for the purpose . there be also in many place plenty of these kind which follow : sea-crab , such as we have in England . oyster , some very great , and some small , some round , and some of a long shape : they be find both in salt water and brackish , and those that we have out of salt water be far better than the other , as in our country . also muscle , scalop , periwinkle , and crevice . Seekanauk , a kind of crusty shellfish , which be good meat , about a foot in breadth , have a crusty tail many leg like a crab , and her eye in her back . they 37° 1586. be find in shallows of water , and sometime on the shore . there be many tortoise both of land and sea kind , their back and belly be shell very thick ; their head , foot , and tail , which be in appearance , seem ugly , as though they be member of a serpent or venomous beast ; but notwithstanding they be very good meat , as also their egg . some have be find of a yard in breadth and better . and thus have i make relation of all sort of victuali that we feed upon for the time we be in Virginia , as also the inhabitant themselves , as far forth as i know and can remember , or that be special worthy to be remember . the three and last part of such other thing as be [ in . 275. ] behooveful for those which shall plant and inhabit to know of , with a description of the nature and manner of the people of the country . of commodity for building and other necessary use . hose other thing which i be more to make rehearsal of , be such as concern building , and other mechanical necessary use , as diverse sort of tree for house and ship-timber , and other use else : also lime , stone , and brick , lest that be not mention some might have be doubt of , or by some that be malicious the contrary report . Okes there be as fair , straight , tall , and as good timber as any can be , and also great store , and in some place very great . Walnut tree , as i have say before very many , some have be see excellent fair timber of four and five 371 fathom , and above fourscore foot straight without bough . fir tree fit for mast of ship , some very tall and great . Rakiock , a kind of tree so call that be sweet wood , of which the inhabitant that be near unto we do common make their boat or canoas of the form of trow , only with the help of fire , hatchet of stone , and shell : we have know some so great be make in that sort of one tree , that they have carry well 20. man at once , beside much baggage : the timber be great , tall , strait , soft , light , and yet tough enough i think ( beside other use ) to be fit also for mast of ship . cedar , a sweet wood good for ceiling , chest , box , bedstead , lute , virginal , and many thing else , as i have also say before . some of our company which have wander in some place where i have not be , have make certain affirmation of Cyprus , which for such and other excellent use be also a wood of price and no small estimation . Maple , and also which-hazel , whereof the inhabitant use to make their bow . Holly , a necessary thing for the make of birdlime . willow good for the make of wear and weeles to take fish after the english manner , although the inhabitant use only reed , which because they be so strong as also flexible , do serve for that turn very well and sufficient . Beech and Ashe , good for cask-hoop , and if need require , plow work , as also for many thing else . Eime . } { sassafras tree . Ascopo a kind of tree very like unto laurel , the bark be hot in taste and spicy , it be very like to that tree which monardes describe to be cassia Lignea of the west Indies . there be many other strange tree who name i know not but in the virginian language , of which i be 372 not now able , neither be it so convenient for the present to trouble you with particular relation : see that for timber and other necessary use , i have name sufficient . and of many of the rest , but that they may be apply to good use , 1 know no cause to doubt . now for stone , brick , and lime , thus it be . near unto the sea coast where we dwell , there be no kind of stone to be find ( except a few small pebble about four mile off ) but such as have be bring from further out of the main . in some of our voyage we have see diverse hard raggy stone , great pebble , and a kind of grey stone like unto marble of which the inhabitant make their hatchet to cleave wood . upon inquiry we hear that a little further up into the country be of all sort very many , although of quarry they be ignorant , neither have they use of any store whereupon they shall have occasion to seek any . for if every household have one or two to crack nut , grind shell , whet copper , and sometime other stone for hatchet , they have enough : neither use they any dig , but only for grave about three foot deep : and therefore no marveile that they know neither quarry , nor lime-stone , which both may be in place near than they wot of . in the mean time until there be discovery of sufficient store in some place or other convenient , the want of you which be and shall the planter therein may be as well supply by brick : for the make whereof in diverse place of the country there be clay both excellent good , and plenty , and also by lime make of oyster shell , and of other burn , after the manner as they use in the isle of tenet and shepy , and also in diverse other place of England : which kind of lime be well know to be as good as any other . and of oyster shell there be plenty enough : for beside diverse other particular place where be abundance , there be one shallow sound along the coast , where for the space of many mile together in length , and two or three mile in breadth , the ground be 373 [ three . 276. ] Jaques Cartier , voyage 2 , chapter 8. nothing else , be but half a foot or a foot under water for the most part . thus much can i say furthermore of stone , that about 120. mile from our fort near the water in the side of a hill , be find by a gentleman of our company , a great vein of hard rag stone , which i think good to remember unto you . the conclusion . owe i have ( as i hope ) make relation not of so few and small thing , but that the country ( of man that be indifferent and well dispose ) may be sufficient like : if there be no more know than i have mention , which doubtless and in great reason be nothing to that which remain to be discover , neither the soil , nor commodity . as we have reason so to gather by the difference we find in our travail , for although all which i have before speak of , have be discover and experiment not far from the sea coast , where be our abode and most of our travail : yet sometime as we make our journey further into the main and country ; we find the soil to be fat , the tree great and to grow thin , the ground more firm and deep mould , more and large champion , fine grass , and as good as ever we see any in England ; in some place rocky and far more high and hilly ground , more plenty of their fruit , more abundance of beast , the more inhabit with people , and of great policy and large dominion , with great town and house . why may we not then look for in good hope from the inner part of more and great plenty , as well of other thing , as of those which we have already discover ? unto the Spaniard happen the like in discover the main of the west Indies . the main also of this country of Virginia , extend some way so many hundred of league , as otherwise then by the relation of the inhabitant we have most certain knowledge of , where yet no christian prince have 383 any possession or deal , can but yield many kind of excellent commodity , which we in our discovery have not yet see . what hope there be else to be gather of the nature of the climate , be answerable to the hand of Japan , the land of China , Persia , jury , the hand of Cyprus and Candy , the south part of Greece , Italy and Spain , and of many other notable and famous country , because i mean not to be tedious , i leave to your own consideration . whereby also the excellent temperature of the air there at all season , much warm than in England , and never so vehement hot , as sometime be under and between the tropike , or near they , can be know unto you without further relation . for the wholesomeness thereof i need to say but thus [ three . 280. ] much : that for all the want of provision , as first of English victuali , except for twenty day , we live only by drink water , and by the victuali of the country , of which some sort be very strange unto we , and may have be think to have alter our temperature in such sort , as to have bring we into some grievous and dangerous this want be disease : second the want of english mean , f°r take beast , fish and foul , which ' by the help only of the inhabitant and their mean can not be so sudden and easy provide for we , nor in so great number and quantity , nor of that choice as otherwise may have be to our better satisfaction and contentment . some want also we have of clothes . Furthermore in all our travail , which be most special and often in the time of winter , our lodging be in the open air upon the ground . and yet i say for all this , there be but r four of our whole company ( be one hundred and eight ) that die all the year , and that but at the latter end thereof , and upon none of the aforesaid cause . for all four , especial three , be feeble , weak , and 384 sickly person before ever they come thither , and those that know they , much marvel that they live so long be in that case , or have adventure to travail . see therefore the air there be so temperate and wholesome , the soil so fertile , and yield such commodity , as i have before mention , the voyage also thither to and fro be sufficient experiment to be perform twice a year with ease , and at any season thereof : and the deal of sir Walter Ralegh so liberali in large give and grant land there , as be already know , with many help and furtherance else : ( than least that he have grant have be five hundred acre to a man only for the adventure of his person ) i hope there remain no cause whereby the action shall be mislike . if that those which shall thither travail to inhabit and plant be but reasonable provide for the first year , as those be which be transport the last , and be there , do use but that diligence and care , that be requisite , and as they may with ease : there be no doubt , but for the time follow , they may have victual that be excellent good and plenty enough , some more english sort of cattle also hereafter , as some have be before , and be there yet remain , may , and shall be ( god will ) thither transport . so likewise , our kind of fruit , root , and herb , may be there plant and sow , as some have be already , and prove well : and in short time also they may raise so much of those sort of commodity which i have speak of , as shall both enrich themselves , as also other that shall deal with they . and this be all the fruit of our labour , that i have think necessary to advertise you off at this present : what else concern the nature and manner of the inhabitant of Virginia , the number with the particularity of the voyage thither make , and of the action of such as have be by sir Walter Ralegh therein , and there employ , many worthy to be remember , as of Viii 385 2b the first discoverer of the country , of our generali for the time sir Richard grinvil , and after his departure of our governor there master Ralph lane , with diverse other direct and employ under their government : of the captain and master of the voyage make since for transportation , of the governor and assistant of those already transport , as of many person , accident , and thing else , i have ready in a discourse by it self in manner of a chronicle , accord to the course of time : which when time shall be think convenient , shall be also publish . thus refer my relation to your favourable construction , expect good success of the action , from he which be to be acknowledge the author and governor , not only of this , but of all thing else , i take my leave of you , this month of February 1587. the eight and twenty , George Howe , one of our twelve assistant be slay by diverse savage , which be come over to Roanoak , either of purpose to espy our company , and what number we be , or else to hunt deer , whereof be many in the island . Theise Savages be secret hide among high reed , where oftentimes they find the deer asleep , and so kill they , espy our man wade in the water alone , almost naked , without any weapon , save only a small fork stick , catch crab therewithal , and also be stray two mile from 392 his company , and shoot at he in the water , where they give he sixteen wound with their arrow : and after they have slay he with their wooden sword , they beat his head in piece , and flee over the water to the main . on the thirty of July master Stafford and twenty of our man pass by water to the island of croatoan , with Manteo , who have his mother , and many of his kindred dwell in that island , of who we hope to understand some news of our fifteen man , but especial to learn the disposition of the people of the country towards we , and to renew our old friendship with they . at our first land they seem as though they will fight with we : but perceive we begin to march with our shot towards they , they turn their back , and flee . then Manteo their country man call to they in their own language , who , assoon as they hear , they return , and throw away their bow and arrow , and some of they come unto we , embrace and entertain we friendly , desire we not to gather or spill any of their corn , for that they have but little . we answer they , that neither their corn , nor any other thing of they , shall be diminish by any of we , and that our come be only to renew the old love , that be between we and they at the first , and to live with they as brethren and friend : which answer seem to please they well , wherefore they request we to walk up to their town , who there feast we after their manner , and desire we earnest , that there may be some token or badge give they of we , whereby we may know they to be our friend , when we meet they any where out of the town or island . they tell we further , that for want of some such badge , diverse of they be hurt the year before , be find out of the island by master lane his company , whereof they show we one , which at that very instant lie lame , and have lie of that hurt ever since : but they say , they know our man mistake they , and hurt they in stead of winginos man , wherefore they hold we excuse . 393 A.D. I587 - August . the next day we have conference further with they , concern the people of Secotan , Aquascogoc , and pomeiok , will they of croatoan to certify the people of those town , that if they will accept our friendship , we will willing receive they again , and that all unfriendly deal past on both part , shall be utter forgive and forget . to this the chief man of croatoan answer , that they will glad do the best they can , and within seven day , bring the wiroance and chief governor of those town with they , to our governor at Roanoak , or their answer . we also understand of the man of croatoan , that our man master how be slay by the remnant of winginos man dwell then at Dasamonguepeuk , with who Wanchese keep company : and also we understand by they of croatoan , how that the 15 Englishman leave at Roanoak the year before , by sir Richard Grinvile , be sudden set upon , by 30 of the man of Secota , Aquascogoc , and Dasamonguepeuk , in manner follow . they convey themselves secret behind the tree , near the house where our man careless live : and have perceive that of those fifteen they can see but eleven only , two of those savage appear to the 11 Englishman , call to they by friendly sign , that but two of their chief man shall come arm to speak with those two savage , who seem also to be unarm . wherefore two of the chief of our Englishman go glad to they : but while one of those savage traitorous embrace one of our man , the other with his sword of wood , which he have secret hide under his manteli , strike he on the head and slay he , and present the other eight and twenty Savages show they self : the other Englishman perceive this , flee to his company , who the savage pursue with their bow , and arrow , so fast , that the Englishman be force to take the house , wherein all their victuali , and weapon be : but the 394 the four voyage to Virginia a.d. . 1587 - savage forthwith set the same on fire : by mean whereof our man be force to take up such weapon as come first to hand , and without order to run forth among the savage , with who they skirmish above a hour . in this skirmish another of our man be shot into the mouth with a arrow , where he die : and also one of the Savages be shoot into the side by one of our man , with a wild fire arrow , whereof he die present . the place where they fight be of great advantage to the savage , by mean of the thick tree , behind which the savage through their nimbleness , defend themselves , and so offend our man with their arrow , that our man be some of they hurt , retire fight to the water side , where their boat lie , with which they flee towards Hatorask . by that time they have row but a quarter of a mile , they espy their four fellow come from a creek thereby , where they have be to fetch oyster : these four they receive into their boat , leave Roanoak , and land on a little island on the right hand of our entrance into the harbour of Hatorask , where they remain a while , but afterward depart , whither as yet we know not . have now sufficient dispatch our business at croatoan , the same day we depart friendly , take our leave , and come aboard the fleet at Hatorask . the eight of August , the governor have long expect the come of the wiroanse of pomeiok , Aquascogoc , Secota , and Dasamonguepeuk , see that the seven day be pass , within which they promise to come in , or to send their answer by the man of croatoan , and no tiding of they hear , be certain also inform by those man of croatoan , that the remnant of Wingina his man , which be leave alive , who dwell at Dasamonquepeuk , be they which have slay George Howe , and be also at the drive of our eleven Englishman from Roanoak , he think to defer the revenge thereof no long . wherefore the same night about midnight , he pass over the water , 395 accompany with captain Stafford , and 24 man , whereof Manteo be one , who we take with we to be our guide to the place where those savage dwell , where he behave himself towards we as a most faithful Englishman . the next day , be the 9 of August , in the morning so early that it be yet dark , we land near the dwell place of our enemy , and very secret convey our self through the wood , to that side , where we have their house between we and the water : and have espy their fire , and some sit about it , we present set on they : the miserable soul herewith amaze , flee into a place of thick reed , grow fast by , where our man perceive they , shoot one of they through the body with a bullet , and therewith we enter the reed , among which we hope to acquit their evil do towards we , but we be deceive , for those savage be our friend , and be come from croatoan to gather the corn and fruit of that place , because they understand our enemy be flee immediate after they have slay George Howe , and for haste have leave all their corn , tobacco , and pompion stand in such sort , that all have be devour of the bird , and deer , if it have not be gather in time : but they have like to have pay dear for it : for it be so dark , that they be naked , and their man and woman apparel all so like other , we know not but that they be all man : and if that one of they which be a wiroances wife have not have a child at her back , she have be slay in stead of a man , and as hap be , another Savage know master Stafford , and run to he , call he by his name , whereby he be save . find our self thus disappoint of our purpose , we gather all the corn , pease , pompion , and tobacco that we find ripe , leave the rest unspoiled , and take menatoan his wife , with the young child , and the other savage with we over the water to Roanoak . 396 the four voyage to Virginia a.d. although the mistake of these savage somewhat grieve Manteo , yet he impute their harm to their own folly , say to they , that if their wiroance have keep their promise in come to the governor at the day appoint , they have not know that mischance . the 13 of August our savage Manteo , by the commandment of sir Walter Ralegh , be christen in [ three . 285. ] Roanoak , and call lord thereof , and of dasamonguepeuk , in reward of his faithful service .the five voyage of m. John white into the west Indies and part of America call Virginia , in the year 1590. the 20 of march the three ship the Hopewell , the John Evangelist , and the little John , put to sea from Plymmouth with two small shallop . the 25 at midnight both our shallop be sink be tow at the ship stearne by the boatswain negligence . on the 30 we see a head we that part of the coast of Barbary , lie east of cape Cantyn , and the bay of Asaphi . the next day we come to the he of mogador , where ride , at our pass by , a pinnace of London call the moonshine . [ Iii . 289. ] April . on the first of April we ankor in Santa Cruz ride , where we find two great ship of London lade in sugar , of who we have 2 shipboat to supply the loss of our shallop . 406 on the 2 we set sail from the road of Santa Cruz , for the canary . on Saturday the 4 we see Alegranza , the east lie of the canary . on Sunday the 5 of April we give chase to a double flyboat , the which , we also the same day fight with , and take she , with loss of three of their man slay , and one hurt . on Monday the 6 we see grand canary , and the next day we land and take in fresh water on the southside thereof . on the 9 we depart from grand canary , and . frame our course for Dominica . the last of April we see Dominica , and the same night we come to a anchor on the southside thereof . May . the first of May in the morning many of the savage come aboard our ship in their canow , and do traffic with we ; we also the same day land and enter their town from whence we return the same day aboard without any resistance of the savage ; or any offence do to they . the 2 of May our admiral and our pinnace depart from Dominica leave the John our viceadmiral play off and on about Dominica , hope to take some Spaniard outward bind to the Indies ; the same night we have sight of three small hand call los Santos , leave Guadalupe and they on our starboard . the 3 we have sight of saint Christopher hand , bear Northeast and by east off we . on the 4 we sail by the virgin , which be many break hand , lie at the east end of saint Johns hand : and the same day towards evening we land upon one of they call Blanca , where we kill a incredible number of fowl : here we stay 4°7 but three hour , and from thence stand into the shore northwest , and have bring this hand southeast off we , we put towards night through a open or swatch , call the passage , lie between the virgin , and the east end of saint John : here the pinnace leave we and sail on the south side of saint John. the 5 and 6 the admiral sail along the northside of saint John , so near the shore that the Spaniard discern we to be man of war ; and therefore make fire along the coast as we sail by , for so their custom be , when they see any man of war on their coast . the 7 we land on the northwest end of saint John , where we water in a good river call Yaguana , and the same night follow we take a frigate of ten tun come from Gwathanelo lade with hide and ginger . in this place Pedro a Mollato , who know all our state , run from we to the Spaniard . on the 9 we depart from Yaguana . the 13 we land on a hand call Mona , whereon be 10 or 12 house inhabit of the Spaniard ; these we burn and take from they a pinnace , which they have draw a ground and sink , and carry all her sail , mast , and rudder into the wood , because we shall not take he away ; we also chase the Spaniard over all the hand ; but they hide they in cave , hollow rock , and bush , so that we can not find they . on the 14 we depart from Mona , and the next day after we come to a hand call Saona , about 5 league distant from Mona , lie on the southside of Hispaniola near the east end : between these two hand we lie off and on 4 or 5 day , hope to take some of the Domingo fleet double this hand , as a near way to Spain then by cape Tyburon , or by cape S. Anthony . on Thursday be the 19 our vice-admiral , from who we depart at Dominica , come to we at Saona , 408 with who we leave a spanish frigate , and appoint he to lie off and on other five day between Saona and Mona to the end aforesaid ; then we depart from they at Saona for cape Tyburon . here i be inform that our man of the vice-admiral , at their departure from Dominica bring away two young savage , which be the chief casiques son of that country and part of Dominica , but they short after run away from they at Santa Cruz hand , where the vice-admiral land to take in ballast . on the 21 the admiral come to the cape Tyburon , where we find the John Evangelist our pinnace stay for we : here we take in two Spaniard almost starve on the shore , who make a fire to our ship as we pass by . those place for a 100 mile in length be nothing else but a desolate and mere [ three . 290. ] wilderness , without any habitation of people , and full of wild bull and boar , and great serpent . the 22 our pinnace come also to a anchor in aligato bay at cape Tyburon . here we understand of m. lane , captain of the pinnace ; how he be set William upon with one of the king galley belong to Santo lay ' Domingo , which be man with 400 man , who after he have fight with he 3 or 4 hour , give over the fight and forsake he , without any great hurt do on either part . the 26 the John our vice-admiral come to we to cape Tyburon , and the frigate which we leave with he at Saona . this be the appoint place where we shall attend for the meeting with the Santo Domingo fleet . on Whitsunday even at cape Tyburon one of our boy run away from we , and at ten day end return to our ship almost starve for want of food . in sundry place about this part of cape Tyburon we find the bone and carcase of diverse man , who have perish ( as we think ) by famine in those wood , be either straggle from their company , or land there by some man of war . 409 on the 14 of June we take a small spanish frigate which fall among we so sudden , as he double the point at the bay of cape Tyburon , where we ride , so that he can not escape we . this frigate come from Santo Domingo , and have but 3 man in she , the one be a expert pilot , the other a mountainer , and the three a vintner , who escape all out of prison at Santo Domingo , purpose to fly to Yaguana which be a town in the west part of his-spanishfap - paniola where many fugitive Spaniard be gather together . the 17 be Wednesday captain lane be send to Yaguana with his pinnace and a frigate to take a ship , which be there take in fraught , as we understand by the old pilot , who we have take three day before . the 24 the frigate return from captain lane at Yaguana , and bring we word to cape Tyburon , that captain lane have take the ship , with many passenger and negro in the same ; which prove not so rich a prize as we hope for , for that a Frenchman of war have take and spoil she before we come . nevertheless her load be think worth 1000 or 1300 pound , be hide , ginger , cannafistula , copper-pan , and Casavi . July - Edward t^he second of July Edward Spicer who we leave in Spicer . 1 England come to we at cape Tyburon , accompany with a small pinnace , whereof one m. harp be captain . and the same day we have sight of a fleet of 14 sail all of Santo Domingo , to who we present give chase , but they upon the first sight of we flee , and separate themselves scatter here and there : wherefore we be force to divide our self and so make after they until 12 of the clock at night . 410 but then by reason of the darkness we lose sight of each other , yet in the end the admiral and the moonlight happen to be together the same night at the fetch up of the vice-admiral of the spanish fleet , against who the next morning we fight and this fight take he , with loss of one of our man and two hurt , and of they 4 slay and 6 hurt . but what be become of our vice-admiral , our pinnace , and prize , and two frigate , in all this time , we be ignorant . the 3 of July we spend about rifle , rummage and fit the prize to be sail with we . the 6 of July we see Jamayca then which we leave on our larboard , keep Cuba in sight on our starboard . upon the 8 of July we see the hand of Pinos , which lie on the southside of Cuba nigh unto the west end or cape call cape S. Anthony . and the same day we give chase to a frigate , but at night we lose sight of she , partly by the slow sail of our admiral , and lack of the moonlight our pinnace , who captain Cooke have send to the cape the day before . on the both we come to cape S. Anthony , where we find our consort the moonlight and her pinnace abide for our come , of who we understand that the day before there pass by they 22 sail , some of they of the burden of 300 and some 400 ton load with the king treasure from the main , bind for Havana ; from this 11 of July until 22 we be much becalm : and the wind be very scarce , and the weather exceed hot , we be much pester with the Spaniard we have take : wherefore we be drive to land all the Spaniard save three , but the place where we land they be of their own choice on the southside of Cuba near unto the organ and Rio de puercos . the 23 we have sight of the cape of Florida , and the break hand thereof call the martyr . 411 the state of the current from the cape of Florida to Vir^nia . the english voyage the 25 be s. James day in the morning , we fall with the matan^as , a headland 8 league towards the east of Havana , where we purpose to take fresh water in , and make our abode two or three day . on Sunday the 26 of July ply too and fro between the matan^as and Havana , we be espy of three small pinnace of saint John de ullua bind for Havana , which be exceed rich load . Theise 3 pinnace come very bold up unto we , and so continue until they come within musket shoot of we . and we suppose they to be captain harp pinnace , and two small frigate take by captain harp : wherefore we show our flag . but they present upon the sight of it turn about and make all the sail they can from we towards the shore , and keep themselves in so shallow water , that we be not able to follow they , and therefore give they over with expense of shot and powder to no purpose . but if we have not so rash set out our flag , we may have take they all three , for they will not have know we before they have be in our hand . this chase bring we so far to leeward as Havana : wherefore not find any of our consort at you Matan^as , we put over again to the cape of Florida , and from thence through the chanel of Bahama . on the 28 the cape of Florida bear west of we . the 30 we lose sight of the coast of Florida , and stand to sea for to gain the help of the current which run much swift a far off then in sight of the coast . for from the cape to Virginia all along the shore be none but eddy current , set to the south and Southwest . the 31 our three ship be clear disbock , the great prize , the admiral , and the moonshine , but our prize be thus disbock depart from we without take leave of our admiral or consort , and sail direcdy for England . 412 on the first of August the wind scant , and from thence forward we have very foul weather with much rain , thunder , and great spout , which fall round about we nigh unto our ship . the 3 we stand again in for the shore , and at midday we take the height of the same . the height of that place we find to be 34 degree of latitude . towards night we be within three league of the low sandy hand west of Wokokon . but the weather sandy hand continue so exceed foul , that we can not come to a anchor nigh the coast : wherefore we stand off it again to sea until Monday the 9 of August . on Monday the storm cease , and we have very great likelihood of fair weather : therefore we stand in again for the shore : and come to a anchor at 11 fathom in 3 5 tty in degree of latitude , within a mile of the shore , where degree , we go on land on the narrow sandy hand , be one of the island west of Wokokon : in this hand we take in some fresh water and catch great store of fish in the shallow water . between the main ( as we suppose ) and that hand it be but a mile over and three or four foot deep in most place . on the 12 in the morning we depart from thence and towards night we come to a anchor at the north-east end of the island of croatoan , by reason of a breach 2 which we perceive to lie out two or three league into ° . rSagues the sea : here we ride all that night . tn ° ea ' the 13 in the morning before we weigh our anchor , our boat be send to sound over this breach : our ship ride on the side thereof at 5 fathom ; and a ship length from we we find but 4 and a quarter , and then deep and shallow for the space of two mile , so that sometime we find 5 fathom , and by great diverge by 7 , and within two cast with the lead 9 , and then ! Ounci ' 8 , next cast 5 , and then 6 , and then 4 , and then 9 again , and deep ; but 3 fathom be the last , 2 league off 413 from the shore . this breach be in 35 degr . and a half , and lie at the very north-east point of croatoan , whereas go a fret out of the main sea into the inner water , which part the island and the main land . the 15 of August towards evening we come to a Hatorask in anchor at Hatorask , in 36 degr . and one three , in five 36 degr . in a fajom water , three league from the shore . at our ierce ’ first come to anchor on this shore we see a great smoke rise in the he Raonoak near the place where i leave our colony in the year 1587 , which smoke put we in good hope that some of the colony be there expect my return out of England . the 16 and next morning our 2 boat go a shore , and captain cook , and Cap. Spicer , and their company with i , with intent to pass to the place at Raonoak where our countryman be leave . at our put from the ship we command our master gunner to make ready 2 minion and a falkon well load , and to shoot they off with reasonable space between every shot , to the end that their report may be hear to the place where we hope to find some of our people . this be accord perform , and our twoe boat put [ three . 292. ] off unto the shore , in the admiral boat we sound all the way and find from our ship until we come within a mile of the shore nine , eight , and seven fathom : but before we be half way between our ship and the shore we see another great smoke to the southwest of kindriker mount : we therefore think good to go to that second smoke first : but it be much further they land . from the harbour where we land , than we suppose it to be , so that we be very sore tire before we come to the smoke . but that which grieve we more be that when we come to the smoke , we find no man nor sign that any have be there late , nor yet any fresh water in all this way to drink . be thus weary with this journey we return to the harbour where we leave our boat , who in our absence have bring their cask a shore for fresh water , so we defer our 414 i59°-going to Roanoak until the next morning , and cause some of those sailor to dig in those sandy hill for fresh water whereof we find very sufficient . that water night we return aboard with our boat and our tn san whole company in safety . the next morning be the 17 of August , our boat and company be prepare again to go up to Roanoak , but captain Spicer have then send his boat ashore for fresh water , by mean whereof it be ten of the clock aforenoon before we put from our ship which be then come to a anchor within two mile of the shore . the admiral boat be half way towards the shore , when captain Spicer put off from his ship . the admiral boat first pass the breach , but not without some danger of sink , for we have a sea break into our boat which fill we half full of water , but by the will of God and careful styrage of captain cook we come safe ashore , save only that our furniture , victual , match and powder be much wet and spoil . for at this time the wind blue at Northeast and direct into the harbour so great a gale , that the sea break extreme on the bar , and the tide go very forcible at the entrance . by that time our admiral boat be hail ashore , and most of our thing take out to dry , captain Spicer come to the entrance of the breach with his mast stand up , and be half pass over , but by the rash and undiscreet styrage of Ralph Skinner his master mate , a very dangerous sea break into their boat and overset they quite , the man keep the boat some in it , and some hang on it , but the next sea set the boat on ground , where it beat so , that some of they be force to let go their hold , hope to wade ashore ; but the sea still beat they down , so that they can neither stand nor swim , and the boat twice or thrice be turn the keel upward , whereon captain Spicer and captain Skinner hang until they sink , and be see no more . but four that can swim a little keep themselves in ' deep water and be save by captain cook mean , 415 who so soon as he see their oversetting , strip himself , and four other that can swim very well , and with all haste possible row unto they , and save four . they be a 11 in all , and 7 of the chief be drown , who name be Edward Spicer , Ralph Skinner , Edward Kelley , Thomas Bevis , Hance the surgeon , Edward Kelborne , Robert Coleman . this mischance do so much discomfort the sailor , that they be all of one mind not to go any further to seek the planter . but in the end by the commandment and persuasion of i and captain cook , they prepare the boat : and see the captain and i so resolute , they seem much more willing . our boat and all thing fit again , we put off from Hatorask , be the number of 19 person in both boat : but before we can get to the place , where our planter be leave , it be so exceed dark , that we overshoot the place a quarter of a mile : there we espy towards the north end of the hand you light of a great fire through the wood , to the which we present row : when we come right over against it , we let fall our Grapnel near the shore , and sound with a trumpet a call , and afterwards many familiar english tune of song , and call to they friendly ; but we have no answer , we therefore land at daybreak , and coming to the fire , we find the grass and sundry rot tree burn about the place . from hence we go through the wood to that part of the hand direct over against Dasamongwepeuk , and from thence we return by the water side , round about the north point of the hand , until we come to the place where i leave our colony in the year 1586. in all this way we see in the sand the print of the savage foot of 2 or 3 sort tread you night , and as we enter up the sandy bank upon a tree , in the very brow thereof be curious carve these fair roman letter c r o : which letter present we know to signify the place , where i shall find the planter seat , accord to a secret token agree upon between they and i at my last departure 416 from they , which be , that in any way they shall not fail to write or carve on the tree or post of the door the name of the place where they shall be seat ; for at my come away they be prepare to remove from Roanoak 50 mile into the main . therefore at my departure from they in An. 1587 i will they , that if they shall happen to be distress in any of those place , that than they shall carve over the letter or name , a cross and in this form , but we find no such sign of distress . and have well consider of this , we pass towards the place where they be leave in [ three . 293. ] sundry house , but we find the house take down , and the place very strong enclose with a high palisado of great tree , with cortynes and flanker very fort-like , and one of the chief tree or post at the right side of the entrance have the bark take off , and 5 foot from the ground in fair capitali letter be grave croatoan without any cross or sign of distress ; this do , we enter into the palisado , where we find many bar of iron , two pig of lead , four iron fowler , iron sacker-shotte , and such like heavy thing , throw here and there , almost overgrow with grass and weed . from thence we go along by the water side , towards the point of the creek to see if we can find any of their boat or pinnisse , but we can perceive no sign of they , nor any of the last falcon and small ordinance which be leave with they , at my departure from they . at our return from the creek , some of our sailor meet we , tell we that they have find where diverse chest have be hide , and long sithence dig up again and break up , and much of the good in they spoil and scatter about , but nothing leave , of such thing as the savage know any use of , undefaced . present captain cook and i go to the place , which be in the end of a old trench , make two year pass by captain Amadas : wheere we find five chest , that have be careful hide of the planter , and of the same chest three be my own , and about the place Viii 417 2d many of my thing spoil and break , and my book tear from the cover , the frame of some of my picture and map rot and spoil with rain , and my armour almost eat through with rust ; this can be no other but the deed of the Savages our enemy at Dasamongwepeuk , who have watch the departure of our man to croatoan ; and assoon as they be depart , dig up every place where they suspect any thing to be bury : but although it much grieve i to see such spoil of my good , yet on the other side i great joy that i have safe find a certain token of their safe be at croatoan , which be the place where Manteo be bear , and the savage of the hand our friend . when we have see in this place so much as we can , we return to our boat , and depart from the shore towards our ship , with as much speed as we can : for the weather begin to overcast , and very likely that a foul and stormy night will ensue . therefore the same evening with much danger and labour , we get our self aboard , by which time the wind and sea be so great rise , that we doubt our cable and anchor will scarce hold until morning : wherefore the captain cause the boat to be man with five lusty man , who can swim all well , and send they to the little hand on the right hand of the harbour , to bring aboard six of our man , who have fill our cask with fresh water : the boat the same night return aboard with our man , but all our cask ready fill they leave behind , unpossible to be have aboard without danger of cast away both man and boat : for this night prove very stormy and foul . the next morning it be agree by the captain and my self , with the master and other , to weigh anchor , and go for the place at croatoan , where our planter be : for that then the wind be good for that place , and also to leave that cask with fresh water on shore in the hand until our return . so then 418 they bring the cable to the Capston , but when the anchor be almost apecke , the cable break , by mean whereof we lose another anchor , wherewith we drive so fast into the shore , that we be force to let fall a three anchor : which come so fast home that the ship be almost aground by Kenricks mount : so that we be force to let slip the cable end for end . and if it have not chance that we have fall into a channel of deep water , close by the shore than we account of , we can never have go clear of the point that lie to the southward of Kenricks mount . be thus clear of some danger , and get into deep water , but not without some loss : for we have but one cable and anchor leave we of four , and the weather grow to be foul and foul ; our victual scarce , and our cask and fresh water lose : it be therefore determine that we shall go for saint John or some other hand to the southward for fresh water . and it be further purpose , that if we can any way supply our want of victual and other necessary , either at Hispaniola , Sant John , or Trynidad , that than we shall continue in the Indies all the winter follow , with hope to make 2. rich voyage of one , and at our return to visit our countryman at Virginia . the captain and the whole company in the admiral ( with my earnest petition ) thereunto agree , so that it rest only to know what the master of the moonlight our consort will do herein . but when we demand they leave the coast of Virpnia , they if they will accompany we in that new determination , they allege that their weak and leak ship be not able to continue it ; wherefore the same night we part , leave the moonlight to go direct for England , and the admiral set his course for Trynidad , which course we keep two day . on the 28. the wind change , and it be set on [ three . 294. ] foul weather every way : but this storm bring the wind west and northwest , and blow so forcible , that we be able to bear no sail , but our forecourse 419 half mast high , wherewith we run upon the wind perforce , the due course for England , for that we be drive to change our first determination for Trynidad , and stand for the hand of azore , where we purpose to take in fresh water , and also there hope to meet with some english man of war about those hand , at who hand we may obtain some supply of our want . and thus continue our course for the azore , sometime with calm , and sometime with very scarce wind , on the fifteen of September the wind come south southeast , and blow so exceed , that we be force to lie atry all that day . at this time by account we judge our self to be about twenty league to the west of Cuervo and Flores , but about night the storm cease , and fair weather ensue . on Thursday the seventeenth we see Cuervo and Flores , but we can not come to anchor that night , by reason the wind shift . the next morning be the eighteenth , stand in again with Cuervo , we escry a sail ahead we , to who we give chase : but when we come near he , we know he to be a Spaniard , and hope to make sure purchase of he : but we understand at our speak with he , that he be a prize , and of the Domingo fleet already take by the John our consort , in the Indies . we learn also of this prize , that our vice-admiral and pinnace have fight with the rest of the Domingo fleet , and have force they with their admiral to flee unto Jamaica under the fort for succour , and some of they run themselves aground , whereof one of they they bring away , and take out of some other so much as the time will permit . and further we understand of they , that in their return from Jamaica about the organ near cape saint Anthony , our vice-admiral meet with two ship of the main land , come from Mexico , bind for Havana , with who he fight : in which fight our viceadmirals lieutenant be slay , 420 and the captain right arm strike off , with four other of his man slay , and sixteen hurt . but in the end he enter , and take one of the spanish ship , which be so sore shoot by we under water , that before they can take out her treasure she sink ; so that we lose thirteen pipe of silver which sink with she , 13 - Pfa* °f beside much other rich merchandise . and in the stlver ’ mean time the other spanish ship be pierce with nine shot under water , get away ; who our vice-admiral intend to pursue : but some of their man in the top make certain rock , which they see above water near the shore , to be galley of Havana and Cartagena , come from Havana to rescue the two ship ; wherefore they give over their chase , and go for England . after this intelligence be give we by this our prize , he depart from we , and go for England . on Saturday the 19 of September we come to a anchor near a small village on the north side of Flores , where we find ride 5. English man of war , of who we understand that our vice-admiral and prize be go thence for England . one of these five be the moonlight our consort , who upon the first sight of our come into Flores , set sail and go for England , not take any leave of we . on Sunday the 20. the mary rose , admiral of the queen fleet , wherein be generali sir John Hawkins , stand in with flores , and diverse other of the queen ship , namely the hope , the Nonpareilia , the rainbow , the swift-sure , the foresight , with many other good merchant ship of war , as the Edward Bonaventure , the merchant royal , the amity , the eagle , the dainty of sir John Hawkins , and many other good ship and pinnace , all attend to meet with the king of Spain fleet , come from terra firma of the west Indies . the 22. of September we go aboard the rainbow , and towards night we speak with the swift-sure , and give he 3. piece . the captain desire our 421 company ; wherefore we willing attend on they : who at this time with io . other ship stand for faial . but the generali with the rest of the fleet be separate from we , make two fleet , for the sure meeting with the spanish fleet . on Wednesday the 23. we see gratiosa , where the admiral and the rest of the queen fleet be come together . the admiral put forth a flag of counsel , in which be determine that the whole fleet shall go for the main , and spread themselves on the coast of Spain and Portugal , so far as convenient they may , for the sure meeting of the spanish fleet in those part . the 26. we come to faial , where the admiral with some other of the fleet anchor , othersome ply up and down between that and the Pico until midnight , at which time the Antony shoot off a piece and weigh , show his light : after who the whole fleet stand to the east , the wind at Northeast by east . on Sunday the 27. towards evening we take our [ three . 295. ] leave of the admiral and the whole fleet , who stand to the east . but our ship accompany with a flyboat stand in again with saint George , where we purpose to take in more fresh water , and some other fresh victual . on Wednesday the 30. of September , see the wind hang so northerly , that we can not attain the hand of S. George , we give over our purpose to water there , and the next day frame our due course for England . October . the 2. of October in the morning we see saint Michael hand on our star board quarter . the 23. at 10. of the clock afore noon , we see Ushant in Britaigne . on Saturday the 24. we come in safety , God be thank , to a anchor at Plymmouth . certain voyage to Florida , and the late and more perfect discovery thereof , to wit , of all the seacoast , river , bay , haven , isle , and main land far up into the country , and a report of some colony and fort there plant and displant , with a description of the government , disposition and quality of the naturali inhabitant , and a declaration of the temperature of the climate , and of the manifold good commodity find in those region . to the most christian king of France , Francis the first . the relation of John de Verrazzano a florentine , of the land by he discover in the name of his majesty . write in diepe the eight of July , 1524. write not to your majesty , most christian king , since the time we suffer the tempest in the north part , of the success of the four ship , which your majesty send forth to discover new land by the ocean , think your majesty have be already due inform thereof . now by these present i will give your majesty to understand , how by the violence of the wind we be force with the two ship , the norman and the dolphin ( in such evil case as they be ) to land in Britain . where after we have repaired they in all point as be needful , and arm they very well , we take our course along by the coast of Spain , which your majesty shall understand by the profit that we receive thereby . afterwards with the dolphin alone we determine to make dis-423 [ three . 296. ] the english voyage coverie of new country , to prosecute the navigation we have already begin , which i purpose at this present to recount unto your majesty to make manifest the whole proceed of the matter . the 17. of January the year 1524. by the grace of God we depart from the dishabit rock by the isle of Madera , appertain to the king of Portugal , with 50. man , with victual , weapon , and other shipmunition very well provide and furnish for 8. month : and sail westwards with a fair easterly wind , in 25. day we run 500 league , and the 20. of February we be overtake with as sharp and terrible a tempest as ever any sailor suffer : whereof with the divine help and merciful assistance of almighty God , and the goodness of our ship , accompany with the good hap of her fortunate name , we be deliver , and with a prosperous wind follow our course west and by north . and in other 25. day we make above 400. league more , where we discover a new land , never before see of any man either ancient or modern , and at the first sight it seem somewhat low , but be within a quarter of a league of it , we perceive by the great fire that we see by the sea coast , that it be inhabit : and see that the land stretch to the southward . in seek some convenient Harboro ugh wherein to anchor and to have knowledge of the place , we sail fifty league in vain , and see the land to run ne still to the southward , we resolve to return back again towards the north , where we find our self trouble with the like difficulty . at length be in despair to find any port , we cast anchor upon the coast , and send our boat to shore , where we see great store of people which come to the sea side ; and see we approach , they flee away , and sometime will stand still and look back , behold we with great admiration : but afterward be animate and assure with sign that we make they , some of they come hard to the sea 424 side , seem to rejoice very much at the sight of we , and marvel great at our apparel , shape and whiteness , show we by sundry sign where we may most command odious come aland with our boat , offer we also of their victual to eat . now i will brief declare to your majesty their life and manner , as far as we can have notice thereof : these people go altogether naked , except only that they cover their privy part with certain skin of beast like unto martern , which they fasten unto a narrow girdle make of grass very artificial wrought , hang about with tail of diverse other beast , which round about their body hang dangle down to their knee . some of they wear garland of bird feather . the people be of colour russet , and not much unlike the Saracen : their hair black , thick and not very long , which they tie together in a knot behind and wear it like a little tail . they be well feature in their limb , of mean stature , and common somewhat big than we : broad breast , strong arm , their leg and other part of their body well fashion , and they be disfigure in nothing , save that they have somewhat broad visage , and yet not all of they : for we see many of they well favour , have black and great eye , with a cheerful and steady look , not strong of body , yet sharp witted , nimble and exceed great runner , as far as we can learn by experience , and in those two last quality they be like to the people of the east part of the world , and especial to they of the uttermost part of China . we can not learn of this people their manner of live , nor their particular custom , by reason of the short abode we make on the shore , our company be but small , and our ship ride far off in the sea and not far from these we find another people , who live we think to be like unto they ; ( as hereafter i will declare unto your majesty ) show at this present the situation and nature of the foresay land . the shore 425 A.D. i524 - be all cover with small sand , and so ascend upward for the space of 15. foot , rise in form of little hill about 50. pace broad . And sail forward , we find certain small river and arm of the sea , that fall down by certain creek , wash the shore on both side as the coast lie . and beyond this we see the open country rise in height above the sandy shore with many fair field and plain , full of mighty great wood , some very thick , and some thin , replenish with diverse sort of tree , as pleasant and delectable to behold , as be possible to imagine . and your majesty may not think that these be like the wood of Hercynia or the wild desert of Tartary , and the northern coast full of ffuitlesse tree : but they be full of palm tree , bay tree , and high cypress tree , and many other sort of tree unknown in Europe , which yield most sweet savour far from the shore , the property whereof we can not learn for the cause aforesaid , and not for any difficulty to pass through the wood , see they be not so thick but that a man may pass through they . neither do we think that they partake of the east world round about they , be altogether void of drug or spicery , and other riches of gold , see the colour of the land do so much argue it . and the land be full of many beast , as stag , deer and hare , and likewise of lake and pool of fresh water , with great plenty of fowl , convenient for all kind of pleasant game . this land be in latitude 34. degree , with good and wholesome air , temperate , between hot and cold , no vehement wind do blow in those region , and those that do common reign in those coast , be then northwest and west wind in tlje summer season , ( in the beginning whereof we be there ) the sky clear and filire with very little rain : and if at any time the air be cloudy and misty with the southern wind , immediate it be dissolve and wax clear and fair again . the sea be calm , not 426 boisterous , the wave gentle : and although all the shore be somewhat shall and without harbour , yet be it not dangerous to the sailor , be free from rock and deep , so that within 4 or 5. foot of the shore , there be 20. foot deep of water without ebb or flood , the depth still increase in such uniform proportion . there be very good ride at sea : for any ship be shake in a tempest , can never perish there by break of her cable , which we have prove by experience . for in the begin of march ( as it be usual in all region ) be in the sea oppress with northern wind , and ride there , we find our anchor break before the earth fail or move at all . we depart from this place , still run along the the coast coast , which we find to trend towards the east , and we t0 the see every where very great fire , by reason of the j^-eesof multitude of the inhabitant . while we ride on that latitude . coast , partly because it have no harbour , and for that we want water , we send our boat ashore with 25. man : where by reason of great and continual wave that beat against the shore , be a open coast , without succour , none of our man can possible go ashore without loose our boat . we see there many people which come unto the shore , make diverse courteous and sign of friendship , and show that they be content we shall come aland , and by trial we find they to be very courteous and gentle , as your majesty shall understand by the success . to the intent we may send they of our thing , which the Indians common [ three . 297. ] desire and esteem , as sheet of paper , glass , bell , and such like trifle ; we send a young man one of our mariner ashore , who swim towards they , and be within 3. or 4. yard of the shore , not trust they , cast the thing upon the shore : but seek afterward to return , he be with such violence of the wave beat upon the shore , that he be so bruise that he lie there almost dead : which the Indians perceive , run to catch he , and draw he out , they 427 carry he a iide way off from the sea . the young man perceive they carry he , be at the first dismayed , begin then great to fear , and cry out piteous : likewise do the indian which do accompany he , go about to cheer he and to give he courage , and then set he on the ground at the foot of a little hill against the sun , they begin to behold he with great admiration , marvel at the whiteness of his flesh : and put off his clothes , they make he warm at a great fire , not without our great fear which remain in the boat , that they will have roast he at that fire , and have eat he . the young man have recover his strength , and have stay a while with they , show they by sign that he be desirous to return to the ship : and they with great love clap he fast about with many embrace , accompany he unto the sea , and to put he in more assurance , leave he alone , go unto a high ground and stand there , behold he until he be enter into the boat . this young man observe , as we do also , that these be of colour incline to black as the other be , with their flesh very shine , of mean stature , handsome visage , and delicate limb , and of very little strength , but of prompt wit : far we observe not .. depart from hence , follow the shore which trend somewhat towards the north , in 50. league space we come to another land which show much more fair and full of wood , be very great , where we ride at anchor : and that we may have some knowledge thereof , we . send 20. man aland , which enter into the country about 2. league , and they find that the people be flee to the wood for fear . they see only one old woman with a young maid of 18. or 20. year old , which see our company , hide themselves in the grass for fear : the old woman carry two infant on her shoulder , and behind her neck a child of 8. year old . the young woman be lade 428 likewise with as many : but when our man come unto they , the woman cry out : the old woman make sign that the man be flee unto the wood . assoon as they see we to quiet they and to win their favour , our man give they such victual as they have with they , to eat , which the old woman receive thankful : but the young woman disdain they all , and throw they disdainful on the ground . they take a child from the old woman to bring into France , and go about to take the young woman which be very beautiful and of tall stature , they can not possible , for the great outcry that she make , bring she to the sea : and especial have great wood to pass through , and be far from the ship , we purpose to leave she behind , bear away the child only . we find those folk to be more white than those that we find before , be clad with certain leaf that hang on bough of tree , which they few together with thread of wild hemp : their head be truss up wild after the same manner as the former be : their ordinary food be of pulse , whereof they have great store , differ in colour and taste from we ; of good and pleasant taste . Moreover they live by fish and fowl , which they take with begin , and bow make of hard wood , the arrow of cane , be head with the bone of fish , and other beast . the beast in these part be much wild than in our Europe , by reason they be continual chase and hunt . we see many of their boat make of one tree 20. foot long , and 4. foot broad , which be not make with iron or stone , or any other kind of metal ( because that in all this country for the space of 200. league which we run , tty run we never see one stone of any sort : ) they help alon& coast themselves with fire , burn so much of the tree as be make sufficient for the hollowness of the boat , ; then like hollow their they do in make the stern and the forepart , until it canoas with be fit to sail upon the sea . the land be in situation re‘ goodness and fairness like the other : it have wood 429 100 league sayrng . a mighty river . the english voyage like the other , thin and full of diverse sort of tree : but not so sweet , because the country be more northerly and cold . we see in this country many vine grow natural , which grow up , take hold of the tree as they do in Lombardie , which if by husbandman they be dress in good order , without all doubt they will yield excellent wine : for have oftentimes see the fruit thereof dry , which be sweet and pleasant , and not differ from we , we think that they do esteem the same , because that in every place where they grow , they take away the under branch grow round about , that the fruit thereof may ripen the better . we find also rose , violet , lily , and many sort of herb , and sweet and odoriferous flower different from we . we know not their dwelling , because they be far up in the land , and we judge by many sign that we see , that they be of wood and of tree frame together . we do believe also by many conjecture and sign , that many of they sleep in the field , have no other covert than the open sky . further knowledge have we not of they : we think that all the rest who country we pass , live all after one manner . have make our abode three day in this country , and riding on the coast for want of harborough , we conclude to depart from thence , trending along the shore between the north and the east , sail dne in the daytime , and ride at anchor by night . in the space of 100 league sail we find a very pleasant place situate among certain little steep hill : from amid the which hill there run down into the sea a exceed great stream of water , which wlin the mouth be very deep , and from the sea to the mouth of the same with you tide which we find to rise 8. foot , any great ship lade may pass up . but because we ride at anchor in a place well fence 43° from the wind , we will not venture our self without knowledge of the place : and we pass up with our boat only into the say river , and see the country very well people . the people be almost like unto the other , and be clad with the feather of fowl of diverse colour : they come towards we very cheerful , make great shout of admiration ; show we where we may come to land most safe with our boat . we enter up the say river into the land about half a league , where it make a most pleasant lake about 3. league in compass : on the which they row from the one side to the other to the number of 30. of their small boat , wherein be many people which pass from one shore to the other to come and see we . and behold upon the sudden ( as it be wont to fall out in sail ) a contrary flaw of wind come from the sea , we be enforce to return to our ship , leave this land to our great discontentment , for the great commodity and pleasantness thereof , which we suppose be not without some riches , all the hill show minerali matter in they . we weigh anchor , and sail towards the east , for so the coast trend , and so always for 50. league be in the sight thereof , we discover a hand in form of a triangle , distant from the main land 10. league , about the bigness of the hand of the Rhodes : it be full of hill cover with tree , well people , for we see fire all along the coast : we give it the name of your majesty mother , not stay there by reason of the weather be contrary . and we come to another land be 15. league distant from the hand , where we find a pass good haven , wherein be enter , we find about 20. small boat of the people , which with diverse cry and wondering come about our ship , come no near than 50. pace towards we : they stay and behold the artificialness of our ship , our shape and apparel : than they all make a loud shout together , 431 people clad with feather of diverse colour . the pleasantness and riches of the land . the coast trend to the east . the descrip-tionofclaudia hand , ten league from the may ne . Claudia be mother of king Francis . a pass good haven . declare that they rejoice . when we have something animate they , use their gesture , they come so near we , that we cast they certain bell and glass , and many toy , which when they have receive , they look on they with laugh , and come without fear aboard our ship . there be among these people 2. king of so goodly stature and shape as be possible to declare : the elder be about 40. year of age , the second be a young man of 20. year old . their apparel be on this manner : the elder have upon his naked body a heart skin wrought artificial with diverse branch like damask : his head be bare with the hair tie up behind with diverse knot : about his neck he have a large chain , garnish with diverse stone of sundry colour : the young man be almost apparel after you same manner . this be the goodly people , and of the fair condition that we have find in this our voyage . they exceed we in bigness : they be of the colour of brass , some of they incline more to whiteness : other be of yellow colour , of comely visage , with long and black hair , which they be very careful to trim and deck up : they be black and quick eye , and of sweet and pleasant countenance , imitate much the old fashion . i write not to your majesty of the other part of their body , have all such proportion as appertain to any handsome man . the woman be of the like conformity and beauty : very handsome and well favour , of pleasant countenance , and comely to behold : they be as well manner and continent as any woman , and of good education : they be all naked save their privy part , which they cover with a dear skin branch or embroider as the man use : there be also of they which be on their arm very rich skin of Luzernes : they adorn their head with diverse ornament make of their own hair , which hang down before on both side their breast : other use other kind of dress themselves like unto 432 the woman of Egypt and Syria , these be of the elder sort : and when they be marry , they be diverse toy , accord to the usage of the people of the east , aswell man as woman . among who we see many plate of wrought copper , which they esteem more than gold , which for the colour they make no account of , for that among all other it be count the base : they make most account of azure and Red. the thing that they esteem most of all those which we give they , be bell , crystal of azure colour , and other toy to hang at their ear or about their neck . they do not desire cloth of silk or of gold , much less of any other sort , neither care they for thing make of steel and iron , which we often show they in our armour which they make no wonder at , and in behold they they only ask the art of make they : the like they do at our glass , which when they behold , they sudden laugh and give they we again . they be very liberali , for they give that which they have : we become great friend with these , and one day we enter into the haven with our ship , whereas before we ride a league off at sea by reason of the contrary weather . they come in great company of their small boat unto the ship with their face all bepaint with diverse colour , show we that it be a sign of joy , bring we of their victual , they make sign unto we where we may safe ride in the haven for the safeguard of our ship keep still our company : and after we be come to a anchor , we bestow 15 day in provide our self many necessary thing , whither every day the people repair to see our ship bring their wife with they , whereof they be very jealous : and they themselves enter aboard the ship and stay there a good space , cause their wife to stay in their boat , and for all the intreaty we can make , offer to give they diverse thing , we can never obtain that Viii 1524. copper more esteem than guide . [ Iii . 299. ] 433 2 e they will suffer they to come aboard our ship . and oftentimes one of the two king come with his queen , and many gentleman for their pleasure to see we , they all stay on the shore 200 pace from we , send a small boat to give we intelligence of their come , say they will come to see our ship : this they do in token of safety , and assoon as they have answer from we , they come immediate , and have stay a while to behold it , they wonder at hear the cry and noise of the mariner . the queen and her maid stay in a very light boat , at a hand a quarter of a league off , while the king abide a long space in our ship utter diverse conceit with gesture , view with great admiration all the furniture of the ship , demand the property of every thing particular . he take likewise great pleasure in behold our apparel , and in taste our meat , and so courteous take his leave depart . and sometime our man stay 2 or 3 day on a little hand near the ship for diverse necessary ( as it be the use of seaman ) he return with 7 or 8 of his gentleman to see what we do , and ask of we oftentimes if we mean to make any long abode there , offer we of their provision : then the king draw his bow and run up and down with his gentleman , make much sport to gratify our man : we be oftentimes within the land 5 or 6 league , which we find as pleasant as be possible to declare , very apt for any kind of husbandry of corn , wine and oil : for that there be plain 25 or 30 league broad , open and without any impediment , of tree of such fruitfulness , that any seed be sow therein , will bring forth most excellent fruit . we enter afterward into the wood , which we find so great and thick , that any army be it never so great may have hide it self therein , the tree whereof be oak , cypress tree , and other sort unknown in Europe . we find Pomi appii , damson tree , and nut tree , and 434 many other sort of fruit differ from we : there be beast in great abundance , as heart , dear , luzern , and other kind which they take with their net and bow which be their chief weapon : the arrow which they use be make with great cunning , and in stead of iron , they head they with flint , with jasper stone and hard marble and other sharp stone which they use in stead of iron to cut tree , and to make their boat of one whole piece of wood , make it hollow with great and wonderful art , wherein io . or 12. man may sit commodious : their oar be short and broad at the end , and they use they in the sea without any danger , and by main force of arm , with as great speediness as they listen themselves . we see their house make in circular or round form io the fashion of or 12 pace in compass , make with half circle of their houses-timber , separate one from another without any order of building , cover with mat of straw wrought cunning together , which save they from the wind and rain : and if they have the order of building and perfect skill of workmanship as we have , there be no doubt but that they will also make eftsoons great and stately building . for all the sea coast be full of clear and glister stone , and alabaster , and therefore it be full of good haven and the coast full harborough for ship . they move the foresay house from one place to another accord to the commodity of the place and season wherein they will make their abode , and only take off the mat , they have other house bud incontinent . the father and the whole family dwell together in one house in great number : in some of they we see 25 or 30 person . they feed as the other doe aforesaid of pulse which grow in that country with better order of husbandry then in the other . they observe in their sow the course of the moon and the rise of certain star , and diverse other custom speak of by antiquity . Moreover they live by 435 their cure with tobacco and perfume . [ in . 300. ] ^ . degree and 2. tierce . the description of a notable haven in 41. deg . and 2. tierce . 150 league . a show of minerail . the english voyage hunt and fish . they live long , and be seidome sick , and if they chance to fall sick at any time , they heal themselves with fire without any physician , and they say that they die for very age . they be very pitiful and charitable towards their neighbour , they make great lamentation in their adversity : and in their misery , the kindred reckon up all their felicity . at their departure out of life , they use mourning mix with sing , which continue for a long space . this be as as we can learn of they . this land be situate in the Paralele of Rome , in 41. degree and 2 terce : but somewhat more cold by accidentali cause and not of nature , ( as i will declare unto your highness elsewhere ) describe at this present the situation of the foresay country , which lie east and west , i say that the mouth of the haven lie open to the south half a league broad , and be enter within it between the east and the north , it stretch twelve league : where it wax broad and broad , and make a gulf about 20. league in compass , wherein be five small island very fruitful and pleasant , full of hie and broad tree , among the which island any great navy may ride safe without any fear of tempest or other danger . afterwards turn towards the south in the enter into the haven on both side there be most pleasant hill , with many river of most clear water fall into the sea in the midst of this entrance there be a rock of free stone grow by nature apt to build any castle or fortress there , for the keep of the haven . the five of May be furnish with all thing necessary , we depart from the say coast keep along in the sight thereof , and we sail 150. league find it always after one manner : but the land somewhat high with certain mountain , all which bear a show of minerail matter , we seek not to land there in any place , because the weather serve our turn for sail : but we suppose that it be like the former , the coast 436 the coast runningeastward 50. league . here the people be^n to be more savage . run eastward for the space of fifty league . and trending afterward to the north , we find another land high full of thick wood , the tree whereof be firre , cipress and such like as be wont to grow in cold country . the people differ much from the other , and look how much the former seem to be courteous and gentle : so much be these full of rudeness and ill manner , and so barbarous that by no sign that ever we can make , we can have any kind of traffic with they . they cloth themselves with bear skin and luzerne and seal and other beast skin . their food , as far as we can perceive , repair often unto their dwelling , we suppose to be by hunt and fish , and of certain fruit , which be a kind of root which the earth yield of her own accord . they have no grain , neither saw we any kind or sign of tillage , neither be the land , for the barrenness thereof , apt to bear fruit or seed . if at any time we desire by exchange to have any of their commodity , they use to come to the sea shore upon certain craggy rock , and we stand in our boat , they let down with a rope what it please they to give we , cry continual that we shall not approach to the land , demand immediate the exchange , take nothing but knife , fishooke , and tool to cut withal , neither do they make any account of our courtesy . and when we have nothing leave to exchange with they , when we depart from they , the people show all sign of discourtesy and disdain , as be possible for any creature to invent . we be in despite of they 2 or 3 league within the land , be in number 25 arm man of we : and when we go on shore they shoot at we with their bow make great outcry , and afterward flee into the wood . we find not in this land any thing notable , or of importance , save very great wood and certain hill , they may have some minerali matter in they , because we see many of they bead of have beadstone of copper hang at their ear . we copper . 437 the english voyage depart from thence keep our course Northeast along the coast , which we find more pleasant champion and without wood , with high mountain within the land continue direct along the coast for the space of fifty league , we discover 32 island lie all near the land , be small and pleasant to the view , high and have many turn and wind between they , make many fair harborough and channel as they do in the gulf of Venice in Sclavonia , and Dalmatia , we have no knowledge or acquaintance with the people : we suppose they be of the same manner and nature as the other be . sail Northeast for the space of 150. league we approach to the land that in time past be discover by the briton , which be in fifty degree . have now spend all our provision and victual , and have discover about 700 league and more of new country , and be furnish with water and wood , we conclude to return into France . touch the religion of this people , which we have find , for want of their language we can not understand neither by sign nor gesture that they have any religion or law at all , or that they do acknowledge any first cause or mover , neither that they worship the heaven or star the sun or moon or other planet , and much less whither they be idolater , neither can we learn whither that they use any kind of sacrifice or other adoration , neither in their village have they any temple or house of prayer . we suppose that they have no religion at all , and that they live at their own liberty . and that all this proceed of ignorance , for that they be very easy to be persuade : and all that they see we christian do in our divine service , they do the same with the like imitation as they see we to do it . the description of the west Indies in generail , but chief and particular of Florida . America unknown to all antiquity . hat part of the earth which at this day we call the four part of the world , or America , or rather the west India , be unknown unto our ancestor by reason of the great distance thereof . in like manner all the western island and fortunate isle be not discover but by those of our age . howbeit there have be some which have say that they be discover in the 448 time of Augustus Caesar , and that Virgil have make mention thereof in the sixth book of his TEneidos , when he say , there be a land beyond the star , and the course of the year and of the sun , where Atlas the porter of heaven sustain the pole upon [ three . 305. ] his shoulder : nevertheless it be easy to judge that he mean not to speak of this land , whereof no man be find to have write before his time , colon or counterfeit - lumbe . neither yet above a thousand year after . Christopher Christopher Colon do first light upon this land in the year 1592. and five year after Americus go thither by the Americus ves-commandement of the king of Castille , and give unto puciusofwhom it his own name , whereupon afterward it be call ' ’ ' America . this man be very well see in the art of navigation and in astronomic : whereby he discover in his time many land unknown unto the ancient geographer . this country be name by some , the land of bresill , and the land of parrot . it stretch it self , accord unto Postell , from the America take the name . thefirst generail part of America . Cabota in the year 1597 have discover .. - . — .. .. all this tract one pole to the other , save at the strait of Magelan , for the crown whereunto it reach 53. degree beyond the equator , of England . i will divide it for the better understanding into three principali part . that which be towards the pole arcticke on the north be call new France , because that in the year 1524. John Verrazzano a florentine be send by king Francis the first , and by madam the regent his mother unto these new region , where he go on land , and discover all the coast which be from the Tropic of Cancer , to wit , from the eight and twenty unto the fifty degree , and father unto the north . he plant in this country the ensign and arm of the king of France : so that the Spaniard themselves which be there afterward , have name this country terra Francesca . the same then extend itself in latitude from the 25. degree unto the 54. towards the north : and in longitude from 210. unto 330. the eastern part thereof be call by the late writer the land of Norumbega , which begin at the bay of Gama , viii 449 2 f the second generali part of America . the three generali part of America . viuegaignon . Florida with a ample description thereof . the english voyage which separate it from the isle of Canada , whither Jaques Carthier sail the year 1535 - about the which there be many hand , among which be that which be name terra de Labrador stretch toward Greenland . in the western part there be many know country , as the region of Quivira , Civola , Astatlan , and Terlichichimici . the southern part be call Florida , because it be discover on Palme-sunday , which the Spaniard call Pascha Florida . the northern part be altogether unknown . the second part of all America be call new Spain . it extend from the Tropic of Cancer in twenty three degree and a half , unto the nine degree . in the same be situate the city of Themistitan , and it have many region , and many island adjoin unto it , which be call the Antilles , whereof the most famous and renown be Hispaniola and Isabel , with a infinite number of other . all this land , together with the bay of Mexico , and all the hand aforesaid , have not in longitude past seventie degree , to wit , from the two hundred and forty , unto three hundred and ten : it be also long and narrow as Italy . the three part of America be call Peru , it be very great , and extend it self in latitude from the ten degree unto the three and fifty beyond the equator , to wit , as i have say before , unto the strait of Magelan . it be make in fashion like to a egg , and be very well know upon all side . the part where it be large have threescore degree , and from thence it wax narrow and narrow towards both the end . in one part of this land villegaignon plant right under the Tropic of Capricorn , and he call it France antarctic , because it draw towards the pole antarctic , as our France do towards the arctic . new France be almost as great as all our Europe . howbeit the most know and inhabit part thereof be Florida , whither many Frenchmen have make diverse voyage at sundry time , insomuch that now it be the 45° best know country which be in all this part of new France . the cape thereof be as it be a long head of land stretch out into the sea a hundred league , and run direct toward the south : it have right over against it five and twenty league distant the isle of Cuba otherwise call Isabel , towards the east the isle of Bahama and Lucaya , and towards the west the bay of Mexico . the country be flat , and divide with diverse river , and therefore moist , and be sandy towards the sea shore . there grow in those part great quantity of pinetree , which have no kernel in the the tree of apple which they bear . their wood be full of oak , Florida , Walnuttrees , black cherrietree , mulberry tree , lentisks , and chestnut tree , which be more wild than those in France . there be great store of cedar , cypress , bay , palm tree , holly , and wild vine , which climb up along the tree and bear good grape . there be there a kind of meddler , the fruit whereof be better these be per-then that of France , and big . there be also plumtree , which bear very fair fruit , but such as be not gavage call very good . there be raspass , and a little berry which Tunas . we call among we blue , which be very good to eat . there grow in that country a kind of root which they call in their language hasez , whereof in necessity they make bread . there be also there the tree call Esquine , which be very good against the pock and other contagious disease . the beast best know in this the beast of country be stag , hind , goat , deer , leopard , Tlonda . ounce , lusern , diverse sort of wolf , wild dog , [ three . 306. ] hare , cony , and a certain kind of beast that diflrer-eth little from the lion of Africa . the fowl be Thefouk oj turkeycock , partridge , parrot , pigeon , ringdove , Florida . turtle , blackbirde , crow , tarcel , falcon , lay nerd , herons , crane , stork , wild goose , malards , cormorant , hernshawe , white , red , black and grey , and a infinite sort of all wild foul . there be such abundance of crocodile , that oftentimes in swim man crocodile . be assail by they ; of serpent there be many sort . 451 the mountains of appalatcy . store of die and colour . the disposition and manor of the floridians . the wear of their hair . their exercise and pastime . run for game . shoot . play at the ball . the english voyage there be find among the savage good quantity of gold and silver , which be get out of the ship that be lose upon the coast , as i have understand by the savage themselves . they use traffic thereof one with another . and that which make i the rather believe it , be , that on the coast toward the cape , where common the ship be cast away , there be more store of silver then towards the north . nevertheless they say , that in the mountain of appalatcy there be mine of copper , which i think to be gold . there be also in this country great store of grain and herb , whereof may be make excellent good die and painting of all kind of colour .my lord admiral of Chastillon , a noble man more desirous of the public then of his private benefit , understand the pleasure of the king his prince , which be to discover new and strange country , cause vessel fit for this purpose to be make ready with all diligence , and man to be levy meet for such a enterprise : among who he choose captain John Ribault , a man in truth expert in sea cause : which have receive his charge , set himself to sea the year 1562. the eighteenth of February , accompany only with two of the king ship , but so well furnish with gentleman , ( of who number i my self be one ) and with old soldier , that he have mean to achieve some notable thing and worthy of eternal memory . have therefore sail two month , never hold the usual course of the Spaniard , he arrive in Florida , land near a cape or promontory , which be no high land , because the coast be all flat , but only rise by reason of the high wood , which at his arrival he call cape Francois in honour of our France . this cape be distant from the equator about thirty degree . coast from this place towards the north , he discover a very fair and great river , which give he occasion to cast anchor that he may search the same the next day very early in the morning : which be do by the break of day , accompany with captain Fiquinville and diverse other soldier of his ship , he be no soon arrive on the brink of the shore , but straight he perceive many indian man and woman , which come of purpose to that place to receive the Frenchman with all gentleness and amity , as they well declare by the oration which their king make , and the present of chamois skin wherewith he honour our captain , which the day follow cause a pillar of hard stone to be plant within the say river , and not far from the mouth of the same upon a little sandy knap , in which pillar the 457 A.D. 1587. [ he . 308. ] the first voyage of John ri-baulttoflorida 1562. the course of the Spaniard not altogether necessary . cape Francois in 30. degree . apillar setup . Armes of France be carve and engrave . This be do he embark himself again , to the end always to discover the coast towards the north which be his chief desire . after he have sail a certain time he cross over to the other side of the river , and then in the presence of certain Indians , which of purpose do attend he , he command his man prayer and to make their prayer , to give thanks to God , for thankestogod . tjjat of grace he have conduct the french nation unto these strange place without any danger at all . the prayer be end , the Indians which be very attentive to hearken unto they , think in my judgement , that we worship tbe sun , because we always have our eye lift up towards heaven , rise all up and come to salute the captain John Ribault , promise to show he their king , which rise not up as they do , but remain still sit upon green leaf of bay and palmetree : towards who the captain go and sit down by he , and hear he make a long discourse , but with no great pleasure , because he can not understand his language , and present give much less his meaning . the king give our captain to Ribault . at h-s departure a plume or fan of hernshawes feather die in red , and a basket make of pa { me-boughe after the indian fashion , and wrought very artificial , and a great skin paint and draw throughout with the picture of diverse wild beast so lively draw and portray , that nothing lack but life . the captain to show himself not unthankful , give he pretty tin bracelet , a cut hook , a look glass , and certain knife : whereupon the king show himself to be very glad and full content . have spend the most part of the day with these Indians , the captain embark himself to pass over to the north side of the river , whereat the king seem to be very sorry . nevertheless be not able to stay we , he command that with all diligence they shall take fish for we : which they do 458 with all speed . for be enter into their wear their fish-or enclosure make of reed and frame in the fashion of a labirynth or maze , they load we with trout , great mullet , Plaise , turbut , and marvelous store of other sort of fish altogether different from we . this do , we enter into our boat and go they pass towards the other shore . but before we come to the shore , we be salute with a number of other Indians , which enter into the water to their armpit , bring we many little basket full of Maiz , and goodly mui - goodly mulberry both red and white : other offer themselves to bear we on shore , where be land our per - ’ ceive their king sit upon a place dress with bough , and under a little arbour of cedar and bay tree somewhat distant from the water side . he be accompany with two of his son which be exceed fair and strong , and with a troop of Indians who have all their bow and arrow in marvelous good order . his two son receive our captain very gracious : but the king their father , represent i wot not what kind of gravity , do nothing but shake his head a little : then the captain go forward to salute he , and without any other move of himself he retain so constant a kind of gravity , that he make it seem unto we that by good and lawful right he bear the title of a king . our captain know not what to judge of this man behaviour , though he be jealous because we go first unto the other king , or else that he be not well please with the pillar or column which he have plant . while thus he know not what hereof to [ three . 309. ] think , our captain show he by sign , that he be come from a far country to seek he , to let he understand the amity which he be desirous to have with he : for the better confirmation whereof , he draw out of a budget certain trifle , as certain bracelet cover as it be with silver and guilt , which he present he withal , and give his son certain 459 other trifle . whereupon the king begin very love to entreat both our captain and we . and after these gentle entertainment , we go our self into the wood , hope there to discover some singularity : where be great store of mulberry tree white and red , great store of on the top whereof there be a infinite number of silkworm . sjlkeworme . follow our way we discover a fair and great meadow , divide notwithstanding with diverse marsh , which constrain we by reason of the water , which environ it about , to return back again toward the river side . find not the king there , which by this time be go home to his house , we enter into our boat and sail toward our ship : the river of where after we arrive , we call this river the river of May , because we discover it the first day of the say month . soon after we return to our ship , we weigh our anchor and hoist our sail to discover the coast far forward , along the which we discover another fair river , which the captain himself be mind to search out , and have search it out with the king and the river of inhabitant thereof , he name it Seine , because it be very ke unto the river of Seine in France . from this river we retire towards our ship , where be arrive , we trim our sail to sail further towards the north , and to descry the singularity of the coast . but we have not sail any great way before we discover another very fair river , which cause we to cast anchor over against it , and to trim out two boat to go to search it out . we find there an he the river of anJ a king no less affable than the rest , afterward we r name this river Somme . from thence we sail about six league , after we discover another river , the river of which after we have view be name by we by the cherente , name of Loire . and consequent we there discover Grande $ve ot^ers : whereof the first be name Cherente , the belle ’ second Garonne , the three Gironde , the four Belle , the Grande . five Grande : which be very well discover with such 460 thing as be in they , by this time in less than the space of threescore league we have find out many singularity along nine river . nevertheless not full satisfy we say lead yet further to ward the north , follow the course that may bring we to the river of Jordan one of the fair river of the north , and hold our wont course , great fog and tempest come upon we , which constrain we to leave the coast to bear towards the main sea , which be the cause that we lose the sight of our pinnace a whole day and a night until the next day in the morning , what time the weather wax fair and the sea calm , we discover a river which we call bellei a veoir . after we have . sail three or four league , we begin to espy our a veoir . pinnace which come straight towards we , and at their arrival they report to the captain , that while the foul weather and fog endure , they harbour themselves in a mighty river which in bigness and beauty exceed the former : wherewithal ! the captain be exceed joyful , for his chief desire be to find out a haven to harbour his ship , and there to refresh our self for a while . thus make thitherward we arrive athwart the say river , ( which because of the fairness and largeness thereof we name port royal ) river °f we strike our sail and cast anchor at ten fathom of water : for the depth be such , namely when the sea ° begin to flow , that the great ship of France , yea , the arguze of Venice may enter in there . have cast anchor , the captain with his soldier go on shore , and he himself go first on land : where we find the place as pleasant as be possible , for it be all cover over with mighty high oak and infinite store of cedar , and with lentisk grow underneath they , smell so sweet , that the very fragrant odour only make the place to seem exceed pleasant . as we pass through these wood we see nothing but , , turkeycock fly in the forest , partridge grey and porridges* ' red , little different from we , but chief in bigness . grey and red . 461 we hear also within the wood the voice of stag , of bear , off luserne , of leopard , and diverse other sort of beast unknown unto we . be delight with this place , we set our self to fish with net , and fish in abun - we catch such a number of fish , that it be wonderful ! . dance . and among other we take a certain kind of fish which we call Sallicoques , which be no less than crevice , so that two draught of the net be sufficient to feed all the company of our two ship for a whole the river 3. day . the river at the mouth thereof from cape to leaguesat cape be no less than 3. French league broad ; it be m°u ’ divide into two great arm , whereof the one run towards the west , the other towards the north : and i believe in my judgement that the arm which stretch . toward the north run up into the country as a passage by far as the river Jordan , the other arm run into a river into g as be know anj understand by those of [ three . 310 ] our company , which be leave behind to dwell in this place . Theise two arm be two great league broad : and in the midst of they there be a he , which be point towards the open of the great river , in which hand there be infinite number of all sort of store of rare strange beast . there be simple grow there of so simples . rare property ) anJ in so great quantity , that it be a excellent thing to behold they . on every side there be nothing to be see but palmetree , and other sort of tree bear blossom and fruit of very rare shape and very good smell . but see the evening approach , and that the captain determine to return unto the ship , we pray he to suffer we to pass the night in this place . in our absence the pilot and chief mariner advertise the captain that it be needful to bring the ship further up within the river , to avoid the danger of the wind which may annoy we , by reason of our be so near to the mouth of the river : and for this cause the captain send for we . be come to our ship , we sail three league further up within the river , and there we cast anchor . a little while 462 after , John Ribault accompany with a good number Gibault sall of soldier embark himself , desirous to sail further • * i th a RtVfgf up into the arm that run towards the west , and to ' search the commodity of the place . Having sail twelve league at the least , we perceive a troop of Indians , which assoon as ever they espy the pinnace , be so afraid that they flee into the wood leave behind they a young Lucerne which they be a turn upon a spit : for which cause the place be call cape cape Lucerne . Lucerne : proceed forth on our way , we find another arm of the river , which run towards the east , up which the captain determine to sail and to leave the great current . a little while after they begin to espy diverse other Indians both man and woman half hide within the wood : who know not that we be such as desire their friendship , be dismay at the first , but soon after be embolden , for the captain cause store of merchandise to be show they open whereby they know that we mean nothing but well unto they : and then they make a sign that we shall come on land , which we will not refuse . at our come on shore diverse of they come to salute our generali accord to their barbarous fashion . some of they give he skin of chamois , other little basket make of chamois . palm leave , some present he with pearl , but no pearl . great number . afterwards they go about to make a arbour to defend we in that place from the parch heat of the sun . but we will not stay as then . wherefore the captain thank they much for their good will , and give present to each of they : wherewith he please they so well before he go thence , that his sudden departure be nothing pleasant unto they . for know he to be so liberali , they will have wish he to have stay a little long , seek by all mean to give he occasion to stay , show he by sign that he shall stay but that day only , and that they desire to advertise a great indian lord which have toreofpeary pearl in great abundance , and silver also , all which and silver . 463 thing shall be give unto he at the king arrival : say further that in the mean time while that this great lord come thither , they will lead he to their house , and show he there a thousand pleasure in shoot , and see the stag kill , therefore they pray he not to deny they their request . notwithstanding we return to our ship , where after we have be but one night , the captain in the morning command to put into the pinnace a pillar of hard stone fashion like a column , wherein the arm of the king of France be grave , to plant the same in the fair place that he can find . this do , we embark our self , and sail three league towards the west : where we discover a little river , up which we sail so long , that in the end we find it return into the great current , and in his return to make a little hand separate from the firm land , where we go on shore : and by commandment of the captain , because it be exceed fair and pleasant , there we plant they a pillar of pillar upon a hillock open round about to the view , and free stone environ with a lake half a fathom deep of very good arm of and sweet water . in which hand we see two stag France be of exceed bigness , in respect of those which we have grave , set up see before , which we may easy have kill with our he^lvertf11 harquebuss , if the captain have not forbid we , port Royal. move with the singular fairness and bigness of they . but before our departure we name the little river which the river of environ . this he , the river of Liborne . afterwards 1 orne - embark our self to search another he not far distant from the former : wherein after we have go a land , we find nothing but tall cedar , the fair that the lie of be see in this country . for this cause we call cedar . it jie of ceciar : so we return into our pinnace to go towards our ship . a few day afterward John Ribault determine to return once again towards the Indians which inhabit that arm of the river which run towards the west , and to carry with he good store of soldier . for 464 his meaning be to take two Indians of this place to bring they into France , as the queen have command he . with this deliberation again we take our former course so far forth , that at the last we come to the self same place where at the first we find the indian , from thence we take two Indians by the permission of the king , which think that they be more favour [ three . 311. ] than the rest , think themselves very happy to stay with we . but these two Indians see we make no two Indians show at all that we will go on land , but rather that take awa^ we follow the midst of the current , begin to be somewhat offend , and will by force have leap into the water , for they be so good swimmer that immediate they will have get into the forest . nevertheless be acquaint with their humour , we watch they narrow and seek by all mean to appease they : which we can not by any mean do for that time , though we offer they thing which they much esteem , which thing they disdain to take , and give back again whatsoever be give they , think that such gift shall have altogether bind they , and that in restore they they shall be restore unto their liberty . in fine , perceive that all that they do avail they nothing , they pray we to give they those thing which they have restore , which we do incontinent : than they approach one towards the other and begin to sing , the doleful agree so sweet together , that in hear their song it seem that they lament the absence of their friend . it they continue their song all night without cease : all which time we be constrain to lie at anchor by reason of the tide that be against we , but we hoist sail the next day very early in the morning , and return to our ship . assoon as we be come to our ship , every one seek to gratify these 2 Indians , and to show they the best countenance that be possible : to the intent that by such courtesy they may perceive the good desire and affection which we have to remain their friend in time to come . than we offer they meat to eat , but they vin 465 2 g the Indians eat not before the sun be set . Laudonniers put down in write the word and phrase of the indian speech . the feast of Toya . This seem to be la grand Gopal , the english voyage refuse it , and make we understand that they be accustom to wash their face and to stay until the sun be set before they do eat , which be a ceremony common to all the Indians of new France . nevertheless in the end they be constrain to forget their superstition , and to apply themselves to our nature , which be somewhat strange unto they at the first . they become therefore more jocunde , every hour make we a 1000 discourse , be merveilous sorry that we can not understand they . a few day after they begin to bear so good will towards i , that , as i think , they will rather have perish with hunger and thirst , then have take their refection at any man hand but i . see this their good will , i seek to learn some indian word , and begin to ask they question , show they the thing whereof i desire to know the name , how they call it . they be very glad to tell it i , and know the desire that i have to learn their language , they encourage i afterward to ask they every thing . so that put down in write the word and phrase of the indian speech , i be able to understand the great part of their discourse . Every day they do nothing but speak unto i of the desire that they have to use i well , if we return unto their house , and cause i to receive all the pleasure that they can devise , aswell in hunt as in see their very strange and superstitious ceremony at a certain feast which they call Toya . which feast they observe as straight as we observe the Sunday . they give i to understand , that they will bring i to see the great lord of this country which they call Chiquola , which exceed they in height ( as they tell i ) a good foot and a half . they say unto i that he dwell within the land in a very large place and enclose exceed high , but i can not learn wherewith . and as far as i can judge , this place whereof they speak unto i , be a very fair city . for they say unto i that within the enclosure there be great store of house which be build very high , wherein there be a infinite number of man like 466 unto themselves , which make none account of gold , of silver , nor of pearl , see they have thereof in abundance . i begin then to show they all the part of heaven , to the intent to learn in which quarter they dwell . and straightway one of they stretch out his hand show i y‘ they dwell towards the north , which make i think that it be the river of Jordan . and now i remember , that in the reign of the emperor Charles the five , certain Spaniards inhabitant of saint Domingo ( which make a voyage to get certain slave to work in their mine ) steal away by subtlety the inhabitant of this river , to the number of 40 , think to carry they into their new Spain . but they lose their labour : for in despite they die all for hunger , save one that be bring to the emperor , which a little while after he cause to be baptise , and give he his own name and call he Charles of Chiquola , because he speak so much of this lord of Chiquola who subject he be . also , he report continual , that Chiquola make his abode within a very great enclose city . beside this proof , those which be leave in the first voyage have certify i , that the Indians show they by evident sign , that far within the land towards the north , there be a great enclosure or city , where Chiquola dwell . after they have stay a while in our ship , they begin to be sorry , and still demand of i when they shall return . i make they understand that the captain will be to send they home again , but that first he will bestow apparel of they , which few day after be deliver unto they . but see he will not give they licence to depart , they resolve with themselves to [ three . 312. ] steal away by night , and to get a little boat which we have , and by die help of the tide to sail home towards their dwelling , and by this mean to save themselves . which thing they fail not to do , and put their enter - than 2 Indians prize in execution , yet leave behind they the apparel escafe awa3-which the captain have give they , and carry away nothing but that which be their own , show well 467 hereby that they be not void of reason . the captain care not great for their departure , consider they have not be use otherwise then well : and that therefore they will not estrange themselves from the Frenchman . captain Ribault therefore know the singular fairness of this river , desire by all mean to encourage some of his man to dwell there , well foresee that this thing may be of great importance for the king service , and the relief of the common wealth of France . therefore proceed on with his intent , he command the anchor to be weigh and to set thing in order to return unto the open of the river , to the end that if the wind come fair he may pass out to accomplish the rest of his meaning . when therefore we be come to the mouth of the river , he make they cast anchor , whereupon we stay without discover any thing all the rest of the day . the next day he command that all the man of his ship shall come up upon the deck , say that he have somewhat to say unto they . they all come up , and immediate the captain begin to speak unto they in this manner . i think there be none of you that be ignorant of how his compete ° great consequence this our enterprise be , and also how acceptable it be unto our young king . therefore my friend ( as one desire your honour and benefit ) i will not fail to advertise you all of the exceed good hap which shall fall to they , which , as man of valour and worthy courage , will make trial in this our first discovery of the benefit and commodity of this new land : which shall be , as i assure my self , the great occasion that ever can happen unto they , to arise unto the title and degree of honour . and for this cause i be desirous to propose unto you and set down before your eye the eternal memory which of right they deserve , which forget both their parent and their country have have the courage to enterprise a thing of such importance , which even king themselves understand to be man aspire to so high degree of 468 magnanimity and increase of their majesty , do not disdain so well to regard , that afterward employ they in matter of weight and of high enterprise , they make their name immortali for ever . howbeit , i will not have you persuade your self , as many do , that you shall never have such good fortune , as not be know neither to the king nor the prince of the realm , and beside descend of so poor a stock , that few or none of your parent , have ever make profession of arm , have be know unto the great estate . for albeit that from my tender year i my self have apply all my industry to follow they , and have hazard my life in so many danger for the service of my prince , yet can i never attain thereunto ( not that i do not deserve this title and degree of government ) as i have see it happen to many other , only because they descend of a noble race , since more regard be have of their birth then of their virtue . for well i know that if virtue be regard , there will moor be find worthy to deserve the title , and by good right to be name noble and valiant . i will therefore make sufficient answer to such proposition and such thing as you may object against i , lay before you the infinite example which we have of the roman ; which concern the point of honour be the first that triumph over the world . for how many find we among they , which for their so valiant enterprize , not for the greatness of their parentage , have obtain the honour to triumph ? if we have recourse unto their ancestor , we shall find that their parent be of so mean condition , that by labour with their hand they live very base . as the father of / Elius - ^Rus Perti-Pertinax , which be a poor artisan , his grandfather nfx^scend-likewise be a bond man , as the historiographer do parentage witness : and nevertheless , be move with a valiant become em-courage , • he be nothing dismay for all this , but perour of rather desirous to aspire unto high thing , he begin rome-with a brave stomach to learn feat of arm , and 469 Rusten Bassha of a herdsmans son through his valour become the great Turk son in law . Agathocles a potters son become king of sicibe . the english voyage profit so well therein , that from step to step he become at length to be emperor of the roman . for all this dignity he despise not his parent : but contrariwise , and in remembrance of they , he cause his father shop to be cover with a fine wrought marble , to serve for a example to man descend of base and poor lineage , to give they occasion to aspire unto high thing notwithstanding the meanness of their ancestor . i will not pass over in silence the excellency and prowess of the valiant and renown Agathocles the son of a simple potter , and yet forget the contemptible estate of his father , he so apply himself to virtue in his tender year , that by the favour of arm he come to be king of Sicily : and for all this title he refuse not to be count the son of a potter . but the more to eternize the memory of his parent and to make his name renown , he command that he shall be serve at the table in vessel of gold and silver and other of earth : declare thereby that the dignity wherein he be place come not unto he by his parent , but by his own virtue only . if i shall speak of our time , i will lay before you only Rusten Bassha , which may be a sufficient example to all man : which though he be the son of a poor herdsman , do so apply his youth in all virtue , that be bring up in the service of the great Turk , he seem to aspire to great and high matter , in such sort that grow in year he increase also in courage , so far forth , that in fine for his excellent virtue he marry the daughter of the great Turk his prince . Howe much then ought so many worthy example to move you to plant here ? consider also that hereby you shall|be registered for ever as the first that inhabit this strange country . i pray you therefore all to advise your self thereof , and to declare your mind free unto i , protest that i will so well imprint your name in the king ear , and the other prince , that your re - 470 1587-nowme shall hereafter shine unquenchable through our realm of France . he have scarce end his oration , but the great part of our soldier reply : that a soldier great pleasure can never betide they , perceive ^eretori-well the acceptable service which by this mean they shall do unto their prince : beside that this thing shall be for the increase of their honour : therefore they beseech the captain , before he depart out of the place , to begin to build they a fort , which they hope afterward to finish , and to leave they munition necessary for their defence , show as it seem that they be displease , that it be so long in do . whereupon John Ribault be as glad as may be to see his man so well willing , determine the next day to search the most fit and convenient place to be inhabit . wherefore he embark himself very early in the morning and command they to follow he that be desirous to inhabit there , to the intent that they may like the better of the place . Having sail up the great river on the north side , in coast a isle which end with a sharp point towards the mouth of the river , have sail a while , he discover a small river , which enter into the island , which he will not fail to search out . which do , and find the same deep enough to harbour therein galley and galliot in good number , proceed further , he find a very open place , join upon the brink thereof , where he go on land , and see the place fit to build a fortress in , and commodious for they that be willing to plant there , he resolve incontinent to cause the bigness of the fortification to be measure out . And consider that there stay but six and twenty there , he cause the fort to be make in length but the length and sixteen fathom , and thirteen in breadth , with flank p^ak^by accord to the proportion thereof . the measure be Laudonnier ? take by " i and captain Salles , we send unto they and captain ship for man , and to bring shovel , pickax and other instrument necessary to make the fortification . 471 a fort build we travail so diligent , that in a short space the fort in port royal be make in some sort defenciable . in which mean by Ribault . time john Ribault cause victual and warlike munition to be bring for the defence of the place . after he have furnish they with all such thing as they have need of , he determine to take his leave of they . but before his departure he use this speech unto captain Albert , which he leave in this place . ribaults captain Albert , i have to request you in the speech to cap - presence of a ] these man , that you will quit your tame ere|it . se | pe so w | sejy your charge , and govern so modest your small company which i leave you , which with so good cheer remain under your obedience , that i never have occasion but to commend you , and to recount unto the king ( as i be desirous ) the faithful service which before we all you undertake to do he in his new France : and you companion , ( quoth he to the soldier ) i beseech you also to esteem of captain Albert as if he be my self that stay here with you , yield he that obedience which a true soldier owe unto his generali and captain , live as brethren one with another , without all dissension : and in so do god will assist you and bless your enterprise . have end his exhortation , we take our leaf of each of they , and sail towards our ship , call the fort by the name of charles-fort , and the river by the name Chenonceau . the next day we determine to depart from this place be as well content as be possible that we have so happy end our business , with good hope , if occasion will permit , to discover perfect the river of Jordan . for this cause we hoist our sail about ten of the clock in the morning : after we be ready to depart captain Ribault command to shoot off our ordinance to give a farewell unto our Frenchman , which fail not to do the like on their part . This be do we sail towards the north : and then we name this river porte royal , because of the largeness and excellent 472 then aforesaid fort be call charles-fort . port royal . fairness of the same . after that we have sail about 15 league from thence , we espy a river , whereupon we send our pinnace thither to discover it . at their return they bring we word that they find not past ward of port half a fathom water in the mouth thereof . which royal . when we understand , without do any thing else , we continue our way , and call it the base or shallow river . as we still go on sound we find not shallow water . past five or six fathom water , although we be six P^ ' good league from the shore : at length we find not past three fathom , which give we occasion great to muse . and without make any far way we strike our sail , partly because we want water , and partly because the night approach : during which time captain John Ribault bethink with himself whether it be best for he to pass any far , because of the eminent danger which every hour we see before our eye : or whither he shall content himself with that which he have certain discover , and also leave man to inhabit the country . be not able for that time to resolve with himself , he refer it until the next day . the morning be come he propose to all the company what be best to be do , to the end that with good advisement every man may deliver his opinion . some make answer , that accord to their judgement he have occasion full to content himself , consider he can do no more : lay before his eye , that he have discover more in six week , than the Spaniard have do in two year in the conquest of their new Spain : and that he shall do the king very great service , if he do bring he news in so short a time of his happy discovery . other show unto he the loss and spoil of his victual , and on the other side the inconvenience that may happen by the shallow water that they find continual along the coast . which thing be well and at large debate we resolve to leave the coast , forsake the north , to take our way towards the east , which be the right way and course to our 473 their arrwall France , where we happy arrive the twenty day of in France July , the year 1562. 1562. ^20 7 7 i of my . the state and condition of those which be leave behind in charles-fort . KingAudusta . note . Mayon . Hoya . Touppa . stalame . our man after our departure never rest , but night and day do fortify themselves , be in good hope that after their fort be finish , they will begin to discover far up within the river . it happen one day , as certain of they be in cut of root in the grove , that they espy on the sudden a indian that hunt the deer , which find himself so near upon they , be much dismay , but our man begin to draw near unto he and to use he so courteous , that he become assure and follow they to charles-fort , where every man seek to do he pleasure . captain Albert be very joyful of his come , which after he have give he a shirt and some other trifle , he ask he of his dwell : the indian answer he that it be far up within the river , and that he be vassal of king Audusta : he also show he with his hand the limit of his habitation . after much other talk the indian desire leave to depart , because it draw towards night , which captain Albert grant he very willing . certain day after the captain determine to sail towards Audusta , where be arrive , by reason of the honest entertainment which he have give to the indian , he be so courteous receive , that the king talk with he of nothing else but of the desire which he have to become his friend : give he beside to understand that he be his friend and ally , he shall have the amity of four other king , which in might and authority be able to do much for his sake : beside all this , in his necessity they may be able to succour he with victual . one of these king be call Mayon , another Hoya , the three Touppo , and the four stalame . he tell he moreover , that they will be very glad , when they shall understand the news of his come , and 474 therefore he pray he to vouchsafe to visit they . the captain willing consent unto he , for the desire that he have to purchase friend in that place . therefore they depart the next morning very early , and first arrive at the house of king Touppa , and afterward go into the other king house , except the house of king stalame . he receive of each of they all the amiable courtesy that may be : they show themselves to be as affection friend unto he as be possible , and offer unto he a thousand small present . after that he have remain by the space of certain day with these strange king , he determine to take his leave : and be come back to the house of Audusta , he command all his man to go aboard their pinnace : for he be mind to go towards the country of king stalame , the country which dwell towards the north the distance of 15 great league from charles-fort . therefore as they sail up kagfus north-the river they enter into a great current , which they ward of it follow so far till they come at the last to the house of charles-fort . stalame : which bring he into his lodging , where he seek to make they the best cheer he can devise . he present immediate unto captain Albert his bow and arrow , which be a sign and confirmation of alliance between they . he present he with chamoy chamoy skin . the captain see the best part of the day s^nnes-was now past , take his leave of king stalame to return to charles-fort , where he arrive the day follow . by this time the friendship be grow so great between our man and king Audusta , that in a manner all thing be common between he and they : in such sort that this good indian king do nothing of importance , but he call our man thereunto . for when the time draw the feast of near of the celebrate their feast of Toya , which be ceremony most strange to recite , he send ambassador pjj j to our man to request they on his behalf to be there present . whereunto they agree most willing for the desire that they have to understand what this may be . they embark themselves therefore and sail towards 475 The Indians trim of themselves with rich feather . the english voyage the king house , which be already come forth on the way towards they , to receive they courteous , to bid they welcome and bring they to his house , where he seek to entreat they the best he may . in the mean while the indian prepare themselves to celebrate the feast the morrow after , and the king bring they to see the place , wherein the feast shall be keep : where they see many woman round about , which labour by all mean to make the place clean and neat . this place be a great circuit of ground with open prospect and round in figure . on the morrow therefore early in the morning , all they which be choose to celebrate the feast , be paint and trim with rich feather of diverse colour , put themselves on the way to go from the king house towards the place of Toya : whereunto when they be come they set themselves in order , and follow three Indians , which in paint and in gesture be differ from the rest : each of they bear a Tabret in their hand , dance and sing in a lamentable tune , when they begin to enter into the midst of the round circuit , be follow of other which answer they again . after that they have sing , dance , and turn 3 time , they fall on run like unbridle horse , through the midst of the thick wood . and then the indian woman continue all the rest of the day in tear as sad and woeful as be possible : and in such rage they cut the arm of the young girl , which they lance so cruel with sharp shell of muscle that the blood follow which they fling into the air , cry out three time , he Toya . the king Audusta have gather all our man into his house , while the feast be celebrate , and be exceed offend when he see they laugh . this he do , because the Indians be very angry when they be see in their ceremony . notwithstanding one of our man make such shift that by subtle mean he get out of the house of Audusta , and secret go and hide himself behind a very thick bush , where at his pleasure , he may easy descry the ceremony of the feast . they three that begin 476 1587-the feast be name Jawas : and they be as it be three Jawas be priest of the indian law : to who they give credit and their rtestes-beliefe partly because that by kindred they be ordain to be over their sacrifice , and partly also because they be so subtle magician that any thing that be lose be Maidans . straightway recover by their mean . again they be position . not only reverence for these thing , but also because they heal disease by i wot not what kind of knowledge and skill they have . those that run so through the wood return two day after : after their return they begin to dance with a cheerful courage in the midst of the fair place , and to cheer up their good old indian father , which either by reason of their too great age , or by reason of their naturali indisposition and feebleness be not call to the feast . when all these dance be end , they fall on eat with such a greediness , that they seem rather to devour their meat then to eat it , for they have neither eat nor drink the day of the feast , nor the two day follow . our man be not forget at this good cheer , for the indian send for they all thither , show themselves very glad of their presence . while they remain certain time with the Indians , a man of we get a young boy for certain trifle , and inquire of he , what the Indians do in the wood during their absence : which boy make he understand by sign , that the Jawas have make invocation to Toya , and that by magical character invocation of they have make he come that they may speak with the Jawas or he and demand diverse strange thing of he , which for unt° fear of the Jawas he dare not utter . they have also y ’ many other ceremony , which i will not here rehearse for fear of molest the reader with a matter of so small importance . when the feast therefore be finish our man return unto charles-fort : where have remain but a while their victual begin to wax short , which force they their victual to have recourse unto their neighbour , and to pray they fail they . to succour they in their necessity : which give they 477 the indian manner of live in the winter time of mast and root . king Covexis mighty and renown . king ovade . king Maccou . [ he . 316. ] ovade country in the river Belle . the english voyage part of all the victual which they have , and keep no more unto themselves then will serve to sow their field . they tell they far that for this cause it be needful for they to retire themselves into the wood , to live of mast and root until the time of harvest , be as sorry as may be that they be not able any far to aid they . they give they also counsel to go towards the country of king Covexis a man of might and renown in this province , which make his abode towards the south abound at all season and replenish with such quantity of mill , corn , and bean that by his only succour they may be able to live a very long time . but before they shall come into his territory , they be to repair unto a king call ovade the brother of Covexis , which in mill , bean , and corn be no less wealthy , and withal be very liberali , and which will be very joy full if he may but once see they . our man perceive the good relation which the Indians make they of those two king resolve to go thither ; for they feel already the necessity which oppress they . therefore they make request unto king Maccou , that it will please he to give they one of his subject to guide they the right way thither : whereupon he condescend very willing , know that without his favour they shall have much ado to bring their interprize to pass . wherefore after they have give order for all thing necessary for the voyage , they put themselves to sea , and sail so far that in the end they come into the country of ovade , which they find to be in the river Belle . be there arrive they perceive a company of Indians , which assoon as they know of their be there come before they . assoon as they be come near they , their guide show they by sign that ovade be in this company , wherefore our man set forward to salute he . and then two of his son which be with he , be goodly and strong man salute they again in very good sort , and use very friendly entertainment on their part . the king immediate begin to make a oration in his indian language of the great pleasure and contentment which he have to see they in that place , protest that he will become so loyal a friend of they hereafter , that he will be their faithful defendor against all they that will offer to be their enemy . after these speech he lead they towards his house , where he seek to entreat they very courteous . his house be hang about with tapestry of feather of diverse colour the height of a tapistrieof pike . Moreover the place where the king take his rest be cover with white coverlette embroider ietsedgedwlth with devise of very witty and fine workmanship , and red fringe . fringe round about with a fringe die in the colour of scarlet . they advertise the king by one of the guide which they bring with they , how that ( have hear of his great liberality ) they have put to the sea to come to beseech he to succour they with victual in their great want and necessity : and that in so do , he shall bind they all hereafter to remain his faithful friend and loyal defender against all his enemy . this good indian assoon ready to do they pleasure , as they be to demand it , command his subject that they shall fill our pinnace with will and bean . afterwards he thehberahtie cause they to bring he six piece of his tapestry ofkingqvade . make like little coverlet , and give they to lour man with so liberal a mind , as they easy perceive the desire which he have to become their friend . in recompense of all these gift our man give he two cut hook and certain other trifle , wherewith he hold himself great satisfy . This be do , our man take their leave of the king , which for their farewell , say nothing else but that they shall return if they want victual , and that they may assure themselves of he , that they shall qvade coun-neve want any thing that be in his power . wherefore trey twenty-they embark themselves , and sail towards charles-fort , which from this place may be some five and f^m^charles tcn&alCf league distant . but as soon as our man first . 479 the fort set on fire by casualty . the fort reedify by the savage in the space of sz hour . the english voyage think themselves at their ease , and free from the danger whereunto they have expose themselves night and day in gather together of victual here and there : lo , even as they be asleep , the fire catch in their lodging with such fury , be increase by the wind , that the room that be build for they before our man departure , be consume in a instant , without be able to save any thing , save a little of their victual . whereupon our man be far from all succour , find themselves in such extremity , that without the aid of almighty God , the only searcher of the heart and thought of man , which never forsake those that seek he in their affliction , they have be quite and clean out of all hope . for the next day betimes in the morning the king Audusta and king Maccou come thither , accompany with a very good company of Indians , which know the misfortune , be very sorry for it . and then they utter unto their subject the speedy diligence which they be to use in build another house , show unto they that the Frenchman be their love friend , and that they have make it evident unto they by the gift and present which they have receive : protest that whosoever put not his help hand unto the work with all his might , shall be esteem as unprofitable , and as one that have no good part in he , which the savage fear above all thing . this be the occasion that every man begin to endeavour himself in such sort , that in less than 12 hour , they have begin and finish a house which be very near as great as the former . which be end , they return home full content with a few cut hook , and hatchet , which they receive of our man . within a small while after this mischance , their victual begin to wax short : and after our man have take good deliberation , think and bethink themselves again , they find that there be no better way for they then to return again to the king ovade and Covexis his brother . wherefore they resolve to send thither some of their company the 480 next day follow : which with a indian Canoa sail up into the country about io league : afterward they find a very fair and great river of fresh water , which they fail not to search out : they find therein a great number of crocodile , which in greatness pass those of crocodile . the river Nilus : moreover , all along the bank thereof , there grow mighty high cypress . after they have cypress . stay a small while in this place , they purpose to follow sec^he their journey , help themselves so well with the tide , countrey0of ‘ that without put themselves in danger of the continual ! ovade . peril of the sea , they come into the country of ovade : of who they be most courteous receive . they advertise he of the occasion wherefore they come [ three . 317. ] again to visit he , and tell he of the mischance , which happen unto they since their last voyage : how they have not only lose their household stuff by casualty of fire , but also their victual which he have give they so bountiful : that for this cause they be so bold as to come once again unto he , to beseech he to vouchsafe to succour they in such need and necessity . after that the king have understand their case , he send messenger unto his brother Covexis , to request he upon his behalf to send he some of his mill and bean , which thing he do : and the next morning , they be come again with victual , which the king cause to be bear into their Canoa . our man will have take their leave of he , find themselves more then satisfy with this liberality . but for that day he will not suffer they , but retain they , and seek to make they the best cheer he can devise . the next day very early in the morning , he take they with he to show they the place where his corn grow , and say unto they that they shall not want as long as all that will do last . afterwards he give . they a certain number of exceed fair pearl , and two stone of fine crystal , and certain silver oar . our yne man forget not to give he certain trifle in recom - silver ore , vin 481 2 h the flace where crystal gp-oweth in very good quantity ten day journey from the river Belle . note . mutiny against the captain , and the cause thereof . the english voyage penny of these present , and require of he the place whence the silver oar and the crystal come . he make they answer , that it come ten day journey from his habitation up within the country : and that the inhabitant of the country do dig the same at the foot of certain high mountain , where they find of it in very good quantity . be joyful to understand so good news , and to have come to the knowledge of that which they most desire , they take their leave of the king , and return by the same see , by which they come . behold therefore how our man behave themselves very well hitherto , although they have endure many great mishap . but misfortune or rather the just judgement of God will have it , that those which can not be overcome by fire nor water , shall be undo by their own self . this be the common fashion of man , which can continue in one state , and have rather to overthrow themselves , than not to attempt some new thing daily . we have infinite example in the ancient history , especial of the roman , unto which number this little handful of man , be far from their country and absent from their countryman , have also add this present example . they enter therefore into partiality and dissension , which begin about a soldier name Guernache , which be a drummer of the french band : which , as it be tell i , be very cruel hang by his own captain , and for a small fault : which captain also use to threathen the rest of his soldier which stay behind under his obedience , and peradventure ( as it be to be presume ) be not so obedient to he as they shall have be , be the cause that they fall into a mutiny , because that many time he put his threaten in execution : whereupon they so chase he , that at the last they put he to death . and the principali occasion that move they thereunto be , because he degrade another soldier name la cheer ( which he have banish ) and because he have not perform his 482 • .. 15871 promise : for he have promise to send he victual , from 8 day to 8 day , which thing he do not , but say on the contrary , that he will be glad to hear of his death . he say moreover , that he will chastise other also , and use so evil sound speech , that honesty forbid i to repeat they . the soldier captain . see his madness to increase from day to day , and Albert slay rear to rail into the danger or the other , resolve to soul < liar . kill he . have execute their purpose , they go to seek the soldier that be banish , which be in a small island distant from charles-fort about 3 league , where they find he almost half dead for hunger . when they be come home again , they assemble themselves together to choose one to be governor over they who name be Nicolas bar a man worthy of commendation , Nicolas and one which know so well to quite himself of his bar . > c ! t0 ! en charge , that all rancour and dissension cease among ca^tain ' they , and they live peaceable one with another . during this time , they begin to build a small pinnace , with hope to return into France , if no succour come unto they , as they expect from day to day . and though there be no man among they that have any skill , notwithstanding necessity , which be the mistress of all science , teach they the way to build it . after that it be finish , they think of nothing else save how to furnish it with all thing necessary to undertake the voyage . but they want those thing that of all other be most needful , as cordage and sail , without which the enterprise can not come to effect . have no mean to recover these thing , they be in worse case than at the first , and almost ready to fall into despair . but that good God , which never forsake the afflict , do succour they in their necessity . as they be in these perplexity king Audusta and Maccou come to they , accompany with two hundred [ three . 318. ] Indians at the least , who our Frenchman go forth to meet withal , and show the king in what need of cordage they stand : who promise they to return 483 cordage for tackle . they put to the sea without sufficient victual . the english voyage within two day , and to bring so much as shall suffice to furnish the pinnace with tackle . our man be please with these good news and promise , bestow upon they certain cut hook and shirt . after their departure our man seek all mean to recover rosin in the wood , wherein they cut the pine tree round about , out of which they draw sufficient reasonable quantity to bray the vessel . also they gather a kind of moss which grow on the tree of this country , to serve to calk the same withal . there now want nothing but sail , which they make of their own shirt and of their sheet . within few day after the indian king return to Charles fort with so good store of cordage , that there be find sufficient for tackle of the small pinnace . our man as glad as may be , use great liberality towards they , and at their leave of the country , leave they all the merchandise that remain , leave they thereby so full satisfy , that they depart from they with all the contentation of the world . they go forward therefore to finish the brigandine , and use so speedy diligence , that within . a short time afterward they make it ready furnish with all thing . in the mean season the wind come so fit for their purpose that it seem to invite they to put to the sea : which they do without delay , after they have set all their thing in order . but before they depart they embark their artillery , their forge , and other munition of war're which captain Ribault have leave they , and then as much mill as they can gather together . but be drunken with the too excessive joy , which they have conceive for their return into France , or rather deprive of all foresight and consideration , without regard the inconstancy of the wind , which change in a moment , they put themselves to sea , and with so slender victual , that the end of their enterprise become unlucky and fortunate . for after they have sail the three part ot their way , they be surprise with calm which do so much hinder they , that in three week they sail not above 484 five and twenty league . during this ti’me their victual consume , and become so short , that every man be their victual constrain to eat not past twelve grain of mill by the utterh con day , which may be in value as much as twelve peason . fume ' yea , and this felici tie last not long : for their victual fail they altogether at once : and they have nothing for their moor assure refuge but their shoe and leather jerkin which they do eat . touch their beverage , some of they drink the sea water , other do drink their they drink own urine : and they remain in such desperate necessity a very long space , during the which part of water 0 they die for hunger . beside this extreme famine , which do so grievous oppress they , they fall every minute of a hour out of all hope ever to see France again , insomuch that they be constrain to cast the water continual out , that on all side enter into their bark . the four voyage of the Frenchman into Florida , under the conduct of captain Gourgues , in the year , 1567. aptaine Gourgues a gentleman bear in the country near unto Bourdeaux incite with a desire of revenge , to repair the honour of his nation , borrowed of his friend and sell part of his own good to set forth and furnish three ship of indifferent burden with all thing necessary , have in they a hundred and fifty soldier , and fourscore choose mariner under captain Cazenove his lieutenant , and Francis Bourdelois master over the mariner . he set forth the 22 of August 1567. and have endure contrary wind and storm for a season , at length he arrive and go 100 on shore in the isle of Cuba . from thence he pass to the cape of saint Antony at the end of they he of Cuba , about two hundred league distant from Florida , where the captain disclose unto they his intention which hitherto he have conceal from they , pray and exhort they not to leave he be so near the enemy , so well furnish , and in such a cause : which they all swear unto he , and that with such courage that they will not stay the full moon to pass the channel of Bahama , but speedy discover Florida , channel of where the Spaniard salute they with two canon Bahama be-shot from their fort , suppose that they have be of n^the hie* their nation , and Gourgues salute they again to enter - ofLucayos . take they in this error , that he may surprise they at more advantage , yet sail by they , and make as though he go to some other place until he have sail out of sight of the place , so that about evening , he land 15 league from the fort , at the mouth of the the TrenchRiver Tacatacouru , which the Frenchman call Seine , because they think it to be like Seine in France . afterwards perceive the shore to be cover with savage with their bow and arrow , ( beside the sign [ three . 357. ] of peace and amity which he make they from his ship ) he send his trumpeter , to assure they , that they be come thither for none other end but to renew the amity and ancient league of the french with they . the trumpeter do his message so well ( by reason he have be there before under Laudonniere ) that he bring back from king Satourioua , the great of all the other king , a kid and other meat to refresh we , beside the offer of his friendship and amity . afterwards they retire dance in sign of joy , to advertise all the king satouriouaes kinsman to repair thither the next day to make a league of amity with the Frenchman . whereupon in the mean space our generali go about to sound the chanel of the river to bring in his ship , and the better to traffic and deal with the savage , of who the chief the next day in the morning IOI complaint of the savage against the Spaniard . two chain of silver give to Gourgues . the english voyage present themselves , namely the great king Satourioua , tacatacourou , halmacanir , athore , harpaha , Helmacape , Helicopil6 , Molloua , and other his kinsman and ally , with their accustom weapon . then send they to entreat the french general to come on shore , which he cause his man to do with their sword and harquebusy , which he make they leave behind they , in token of mutual assurance , leave his man but their sword only , after that the savage complain thereof have leave and likewise send away their weapon at the request of Gourgues . this do satourioua go to meet he , cause he to sit on his right hand in a seat of wood of lentisque cover with moss make of purpose like unto his own . than two of the elder of the company pull up the bramble and other weed which be before they , and after they have make the place very clean , they all sit round about they on the ground . afterwards Gourgues be about to speak , Satourioua prevent he , declare at large unto he the incredible wrong , and continual outrage that all the savage , their wife and child have receive of the Spaniard since their come into the country and massacre of the Frenchman , with their continual desire if we will assist they thorough to revenge so shameful a treason , aswell as their own particular grief , for the firm good will they always have bear unto the Frenchman . whereupon Gourgues give they his faith , and make a league between they and he with a oath give they certain present of dagger , knife , look glass , hatchet , ring , bell , and such other thing , trifle unto we , but precious unto these king : which moreover , see his great liberality , demand each one a shirt of he to wear only on their festival day , and to be bury in at their death . which thing after that they have receive , and Satourioua have give in recompense to captain Gourgues two chain of silver grain which hang about his neck , and each of the king certain dear skin dress after their manner , they retire 102 themselves dance and very jocund , with promise to keep all thing secret , and to bring unto the say place good company of their subject all well arm to be avenge thorough on the Spaniard . in the mean space Gourgues very narrow examine Peter de Br^ Peter de Bri bear in Newhaven , which be but a young stripling escape out ot the tort into the wood while the span - yeera yard murder the rest of the french , and be afterward Satourioua . bring up with Satourioua , which at that time bestow he on our generali , who advice stand he in great stead : whereupon he send to discover the fort and the estate of the enemy by certain of his man , be guide by Olotacara satouriouaes nephew which he have give he for this purpose and for assurance of estampe a gentleman of Cominges , and other which he send to descry the state of the enemy . Moreover he give he three fledge a son of his stark naked as all of they be , and his wife which he love best of all the rest , of eighteen satoi^ioua . year old , apparel with the moss of tree , which for 3 day space be in the ship , until our man return from descry the state of the enemy , and the king have furnish their preparation at their rendezvous . their march be conclude , and the savage rendezvous be appoint they beyond the river Salinacani , of our man call Somme , they all drink the river of with great solemnity their drink call Cassine , make of the juice of certain herb ( as they be wont to do , fa French when they go to any place of danger , ) which have such force , that it take from they hunger and thirst for 24 hour , and Gourgues be fain to make as though he drink thereof for company . afterwards they lift up their hand and swear all that they will never forsake he . Olotocara follow he with pike in hand . be all meet at the river of Sarauahi , not without great the river of trouble , by reason of the rain and place full of water Sarauahi . which they must needs pass , which hinder their passage , they be distress with famine find nothing by the way to eat , their bark of provision be not arrive , 103 the estate of the Spaniard in Florida . [ he . 358. ] the river of saracary , or Sarauahi . the english voyage which be to come unto he from the ship , the oversight and charge whereof he have leave unto Burdelois with the rest of the mariner . now he have learn that the Spaniard be four hundred strong , divide into three fort build and flank , and well fortify upon the river of May , the great fort especial begin by the french , and afterward repair by they : upon the most dangerous and principali land place whereof , two league low and near toward the river mouth , they have make two small fort , which be defend , the river pass between they , with six score soldier , good store of artillery and other munition , which they have in the same . from saracary unto these small fort be two league space , which he find very painful , because of the bad way and continual rain . after - ward he depart from the river Catacouru with 10 , shot , to view the first fort , and to assault it the next day in the morning by the break of day , which he can not do , because of the foul weather , and darkness of the night . king helicopile see he out of quiet in that he have fail of his purpose there , assure he to guide he a more easy way , though it be far about . insomuch as lead he through the wood , he bring he within sight of the fort , where he discern one quarter which be but begin to be entrench . thus after he have sound the small river that fall down thereby , he stay until ten of the clock in the morning for a ebb water , that his man may pass over there , unto a place where he have see a little grove between the river and the fort ( that he may not be see to pass and set his soldier in array ) cause they to fasten their flask to their morion , and to hold up their sword and kaliver in their hand , for fear least the water , which reach up to their girdle , shall not wet they : where they find such abundance of great oyster , and shell which be so sharp , that many have their leg cut with they , and many other lose their shoe . notwithstanding assoon as 104 they be pass over , with a french courage they prepare themselves to the assault on the Sunday eve next after easter day , in April 1568. insomuch that Gourgues to employ the ardent heat of this good affection , give twenty shot to his lieutenant Cazenove , and ten mariner lade with pot and ball of wild fire to burn the gate : and then he assault the fort assault on another side , after he have make a short speech unto ^ " f^ his man of the strange treason which the Spaniard ' have play their companion . but be descry as they come hold down their head within two hundred pace from the fort , the gunner be upon the terrace of the fort , after he have cry , be i , arm , these be French man , discharge twice upon they a colverine , whereon the arm of France be grave , which have be take from Laudonniere . but as he go about to charge it the three time , Olotocara , which have not va^ure of learned to keep his rank , or rather move with rage , ot < , cara-lept on the platform , and thrust he through the body with his pike and slay he . whereupon Gourgues advance forward , and after he have hear Cazenove cry , that the Spaniard which issue out arm at the cry of the alarm , be flee , he draw to that part , and so hem they in between he and his lieutenant , that of threescore there escape not a man , save only fifteen reserve unto the same death which they have put the french unto . the Spaniard of the other fort in the meanwhile cease not to play with their ordinance , which much annoy the assailant : although to answer they they have by this place and oftentimes point the four piece find in the first fort where - the assault upon Gourgues be accompany with fourscore shot go aboard the bark which meet he there to good ' purpose to pass into the wood near unto the fort , out of which he suppose the Spaniard will issue to save themselves through the benefit of the wood in the great fort , which be not pass one league distant from you same . afterwards the Savages not stay for the return of Io5 the Spaniards of the second fort allslaine . note . a notable spanish subtlety . [ he . 359-j the english voyage the bark , leap all into the water hold up their bow and arrow in one hand , and swim with the other , so that the Spaniard sing both the shore cover with so great a number of man , think to flee towards the wood : but be charge by the french , and afterward repulse by the savage , towards who they will have retire , they be soon than they will bereave of their life . to conclude they all there end their day save 15 of those which be reserve to be execute for the example of other . whereupon captain Gourgues have cause all that he find in the second fort to be transport unto the first , where he mean to strengthen himself to take resolution against the great fort , the state whereof he do not understand : in fine a sergeant of a band one of the prisoner assure he that they may be there very near 300 well furnish under a brave governor , which have fortify there , attend far succour . thus have obtain of he the platform , the height , the fortification and passage unto it , and have prepare eight good lather , and raise all the country against the Spaniard , that he neither may have news , nor succour , nor retract on any side , he determine to march forward . in the mean while the governor send a Spaniard disguise like a savage to spy out the state of the french . and though he be discover by olotocara , yet he use all the cunning he can possible to persuade they that he be one of the second fort , out of which have escape , and see none but savage on every side , he hope more in you frenchmens than their mercy , unto who he come to yield himself disguise like a savage , for fear lest if he shall have be know , he shall have be massacre by those barbarian : but the spy be bring face to face with the sergeant of the band , and convict to be one of the great fort , be reserve until a other time : after that he have assure Gourgues that the bruit be that he have 2000 Frenchman with he for fear of who the 200 and 106 threescore Spaniard which remain in the great fort , be great astonish . whereupon Gourgues be resolve to set upon they , while they be thus amaze , and leave his standard-bearer and a captain with fifteen shot to keep the fort , and the entry of the river , he cause the savage to depart by night to lie in ambush within the wood on both side of the river , than he depart in the morning , lead the sergeant and the spy fast bind along with he , to show he that in deed , which they have only make he understand before in paint . as they march Olotocara a resolute savage which never leave the captain , say unto he , that he have serve he faithful , and do whatsoever he have command he , that he be assure to dye in the conflict at the great fort , wherein nevertheless he will not fade , though it be to save his life : but he pray he to give that unto his wife , if he escape not , which he have mean to bestow on he , that she may bury the same with he , that thereby he the cause why may be better welcome unto the village of the soul F^^ , ans or spirit depart . to who captain Gourgues swith answer , after he have commend his faithful valour , they . the love towards his wife , and his noble care of immortal ! honour , that he desire rather to honour he alive then dead , and that by god help he will bring he home again with victory . after the discovery of the fort , the Spaniard be not niggard of their canon shoot , nor of two double colverine , which be mount upon a bulwark , command all along the river , which make captain Gourgues to get to the hill cover with wood , at the foot whereof the fort begin , and note . the forest or wood continue and stretch forth beyond it : so that he have sufficient coverture to approach thereunto without offence . he purpose also to remain there until the morning , wherein he be resolve to assault the Spaniard by scale their wall on the side towards the hill , where the trench seem not sufficient flank for the defence of the curtain , and from 107 whence part of his man may draw they that be besiege , which shall show themselves to defend the rampart while the rest be come up . but the governor hasten his unhappy destiny , cause threescore shot to sally forth , which pass through the trench , advance forward to descry the number and valour of the french , whereof twenty under the conduct of Cazenove , get between the fort and they which now be issue forth , cut off their repassage , while Gourgues command the rest to charge they in the front , but not to discharge but near at hand , and so that they may be sure to hit they , that afterward with more ease they may cut they in piece with their sword . so that turn their back assoon as they be charge and compass in by his lieutenant , they they slaughter remain all slay upon the place . whereat the rest °iardsofth at be besiege be so astonish , that they know none hird fort other mean to save their life , but by flee into the wood adjoin , where nevertheless be encountered again by the arrow of the savage which lie in wait there for they ( whereof one run through the target and body of a Spaniard , which therewithal ! fell down stark dead ) some be constrain to turn back , choose rather to dye by the hand of the french , which pursue they : assure themselves , that none of they can find any favour neither with the one nor the other nation , who they have alike and so out of measure cruel entreat , save those which be reserve to be a example for the time to come . the take of the fort when it be take , be find well provide the three fort of a | j necessary ; namely of five double colverine , and four minion , with diverse other small piece of all sort , and eighteen gross cake of gunnepowder , all sort of weapon , which Gourgues cause with speed to be embark , save the powder and other moveable , by reason it be all consume with fire through the negligence of a savage , which in seethe of his fish , set fire on a train of powder which be make and hide by 108 the Spaniard , to have feast the french at the first assault , thus blow up the store house , and the other house build of pine tree . the rest of the Spaniard be lead away prisoner with the other , after that the generali have show they the wrong which they have do without occasion to all the french nation , be all hang on the bough of the same tree , whereon the french hang : of which number five be hang by one Spaniard , which perceive himself in the like miserable estate , confess his fault , and the just judgement which God have bring upon he . but in stead of the writing which Pedro Melendes have hang over they , import these word in spanish , i do not this as unto french man , but as unto lutheran , Gourgues cause to be imprint with a sear iron in a table of Firrewood , i do not this as unto Spaniard , nor as unto mariner , but as unto traitor , robber , and murderer . afterwards consider he have not man enough to keep his fort which he have win , much less to store they , fear also lest the Spaniard which have dominion near adjoin shall renew his force , or the savage shall prevail against the french man , unless his majesty will send thither , he resolve to raze they . and indeed , after he have assemble , and in the end persuade all the savage king so to do , they cause their subject to run thither with such affection , that they overthrow all the three fort flat even with the ground in one day . this do by Gourgues , that he may return to his ship which be leave in the river of Seyne call Tacatacourou , fifteen league distant from thence , he send Cazenove and the artillery by water : afterward with fourscore harquebusier , arm with corslet , and match light , follow with forty mariner bear pike , by reason of the small confidence he be to have in so many savage , he march by land always in battle ray , find the way cover with savage , which come to honour he with present and praise , as the deliverer of all the country round about adjoin . 109 A.D. 1568. the write hang over the french and Spaniards slay in Florida . [ he . 360. ] the three fort raze . great honour do by the savage to Gourgues . a old woman among the rest say unto he , that now she care not any more to dye , since she have see the Frenchman once again in Florida , and the Spaniard chase out . brief be arrive , and find his ship set in order , and every thing ready to set sail , he counsel the king to continue in the amity and ancient league which they have make with the king of France , which will defend they against all nation : which they all promise , shed tear because of his departure . Olocotara especial : for appease of who he promise they to return within twelve moon , ( so they count the year ) and that his king will send knife in they a army , and store of knife for present , and all great estima - other thing necessary . so that after he have take his tun ’ leave of they , and assemble his man , he thank God of all his success since his set forth , and pray to the three of he for a happy return . the three of May 1568 , all thing be make ready , the rendezvous appoint , and the anchor weigh to set sail so prosperous , that in seventeen day they run eleven hundred the arrival league : continue which course they arrive at rochel °fg°ufg ! fsat the sixth of June , the four and thirty day after their sixth of June , departure from the river or may , have lose but a small pinnace and eight man in it , with a few gentleman and other which be slay in the assault of the fort . after the cheer and good entertainment which he receive of those of rochel , he sail to Bordeaux to inform monsieur Monluc of the thing above mention , albeit he be advertise of eighteen pinnace , and a great ship of two hundred ton full of Spaniard , which be assure of the defeat in Florida , and that che-de Bois , he be at rochel , come as far as che-de Bois , the same day that he depart thence , and follow he as far as Blay ( but he be get already to Bourdeaux ) to make he yield another account of his voyage , then that , wherewith he make many Frenchman right glad . the catholic king be afterward inform that Gourgues can not easy be take , offer a great sum of iio money to he that can bring he his head , pray moreover king Charles to do justice on he as of the author of so bloody a act contrary to their alliance and good league of friendship . in so much as come to Paris to present himself unto the king , to signify unto he the success of his voyage , and the mean which he have to subdue this whole country unto his obedience , ( wherein he offer to employ his life , and all his good ) he find his entertainment and answer so contrary to his expectation , that in fine he be constrain to hide himself a long space in the court of Roan , about the year 1570. and without the assistance of precedent Marigny , in who house he remain certain day , and of the receiver of vacquieulx , which always be his faithful friend , he have be in great danger . which grieve not a little Dominique de Gourgues , consider the service which he have do aswell unto he as to his predecessor king of France . he be the birth , bear in mount Marsan in Guyenne , and employ for lifiand death the service of the most christian king in all the army make since these twenty five or thirty year : at last he have the charge and honour of a captain , which in a place near unto see , with thirty soldier sustain the brunt of a part of the spanish army , by which be take in the assault , and have all his man cut in piece , he be put into a galley in token of the good war and singular favour which the Spaniard be wont to show we . but as the galley be go towards Sicillie , be take by the Turk , lead away to Rhodes , and thence to Constantinople , it be short afterward recover by Romeguas , commander over the army of Malta . by this mean return home , he make a voyage on the coast of Africa , whence he take his course to Bresil , and to the south sea at length be desirous to rapayre the honour of France , he set upon Florida with such success as you have hear . so that be become by his continual warlike action both by land and sea no less valiant captain then skilful mariner , he have the english voyage make himself fear of the Spaniard , and acceptable unto the queen of England for the desert of his virtue . to conclude , he die in the year 1582 , to the great grief of such as know he . the relation of Nicholas Burgoignon , alias holy , who sir Francis Drake bring from saint Augustine also in Florida , where he have remained six year , in i and master heriot hear . his Nicholas Burgoignon say , that between saint Augustine and S. Helen there be a casique who name be Casicola , which be lord of ten thousand Indians , and another casique who name be Dicasca , and another call Touppekyn towards the north , and a four name Potanou towards the south , and another call Moscita towards the south likewise . beside these he acknowledge Oristou , Ahoia , ahoiaue , isamacon , allege by the Spaniard . he further affirm , that there be a city northwestward from S. helenes in the mountain , which the Spaniard call la grand Copal , and be very great and rich , and that in these mountain there be great store of crystal , gold , and ruby , and diamond : and that a Spaniard bring from thence a diamond which be worth five thousand crown , which Pedro Melendes ix i13 h the english voyage the mark nephew to old Pedro Melendes that slay Ribault , and be now governor of Florida , wear . he say also , that to make passage unto these mountains , it be needful to have store of hatchet to give unto the Indians , and store of pickax to break the mountain , which shine so bright in the day in some place , that they can behold they , and therefore they travel unto they by night . also corslet of cotton , which the Spaniard call Zecopitz , be necessary to be have against the arrow of the savage . he say far , that a tun of the sassafras of Florida be sell in Spain for sixty ducat : and that they have there great store of turquoise cock , of bean , of peason , and that there be great store of pearl . the thing , as he report , that the floridians make most account of , be red cloth , or red cotton to make baldric or girdle : copper , and hatchet to cut withal . the Spaniard have all demand leave at their own cost , to discover these mountain , which the king deny , for fear lest the english or French will enter into the same action , once know . all the Spaniard will pass up by the river of saint Helena unto the mountain of gold and crystal . the Spaniard enter 50. league up saint Helena , find Indians wear gold ring at their nostril and ear . they find also ox , but less than we . six league from saint Helena towards the north , there be a point that run far into the sea , which be the mark to the seaman to find saint Helena and Waterin . Waterin be a river forty league distant northward from saint Helena , where any fleet of great ship may ride safe . i take this river to be that which we call waren in Virginia , whither at Christmas last 1585. the Spaniard send a bark with forty man to discover where we be seat : in which bark be Nicholas Burgoignon the reporter of all these thing . 114 the Spaniard of S. Augustine have slay three hundred of the subject of Potanou . one Potassi be neighbour to Potanou . Oratina be he which the french history call Olata Outina . Calauai be another casique which they know . sundry voyage make from Nueva Galicia , and Nueva Viscaia in new Spain , to the 15. province of new Mexico , and to Quivira and Cibola , all situate on the backside of Guastecan , Florida , and Virginia , as far as 37. degree of northerly latitude : with a description of the river , lake , city , town , nation , fertile soil , and temperate air in those part ; and most certain notice of many exceed rich silver mine , and other principali commodity . a extract of a letter of captain Francis Vasques de Coronado , write to a secretary of the right noble don Antonio de Mendosa , viceroy of Nueva Espanna . Dated in culiacan , the 8. of march 1539 he say that Frier Marcus de Ni$a arrive in the province of Topira , where he find all the Indians flee unto the mountain for fear of the christian , and that for his sake they come all down to see he , with great joy and boldness . they be man of good make , and white than other , and their woman be more beautiful than other of the neighbourprovince . there be no great city there , yet be the house build of stone , and be very good , and in they store of gold , they have great store of gold , which be as it be silver , and [ often } because they know not what use to put it to . ^intopira^5 the people wear emerald and other precious jewel [ three . 363. ] upon their body : they be valiant , have very strong armour make of silver , fashion after diverse shape 116 of beast . they worship for their god such thing as they have in their house , as namely herb , and bird , and sing song unto they in their language , which differ but little from that of culiacan . they tell the friar that they be willing to become Christians , and the emperor subject , for they be without a governor ; with condition that no man shall hurt they : and that they will change their gold for such thing as they want . commandment be give , that they shall be receive without do they any displeasure . near unto this country there be another province heretofore discover by our man , where the people go naked without any thing before they : they be very hardly reduce to Christianity , and they be valiant and stout . their house be cover with straw : they seek no other riches but to feed cattle . they go at certain season to their sacrifice into a valley situate in that province , which be inhabit with people , esteem by those of the country as saint and priest , who they call Chichimecas , which dwell in the wood without house : and they eat such thing as they of the country give they of alm . they go naked , and be tan in the smoke , and tie their privy member with a string unto their knee , and the woman likewise go stark naked . they have certain temple cover with straw , with small round window full of the skull of dead man ; before their temple be a great round ditch , the brim whereof be compass with the figure of a serpent make of gold and silver , and with another mixture of unknown metal : and this serpent hold his tail in his mouth . they of this valley from time to time cast lot , who luck it shall be to be sacrifice , and they make he great cheer , on who the lot fall , and with great joy they crown he with flower upon a bed prepare in the say ditch all full of flower and sweet herb , on which they lie he along , and lie great store of dry wood on both side of he , and set it on fire on either part , and so 117 he die . where he continue so quiet without be bind , as though he do something , wherein he take great pleasure . and they say that he be a saint , and do worship he for that year , and sing praise , and hymn unto he , and afterward set up his head with the rest in order within those window . also they sacrifice their prisoner , who they burn in another deep ditch , and not with the foresay ceremony . the Spaniard which be in Xalisco write , that have good assistance , they hope that those people will become Christians . the country be very good and fruitful , and have great store of good and wholesome water . the second voyage unto Florida , make and write by captain Laudonniere , which fortify and inhabit there two summer and one whole winter . Fter our arrival at diepe , at our come home , from our first voyage ( which be the twenty of July 1562 ) we find the civil war begin , which be in part the cause why our man be not succour , as captain John Ribault have promise they : whereof it follow that the civil war the cause why the Frenchman be not sup - captain Albert be kill by his soldier , and the phed , which country abandon , as heretofore we have sufficient ^re , ty* discourse , and as it may more at large be understand j^rst voyase by those man which be there in person . after the peace be make in France , my lord admiral de chastillon show unto the king , that he hear no news at all of the man which captain John Ribault have leave in Florida , and that it be pity to suffer they to perish . in which respect , the king be content he shall cause 3 ship to be furnish , the one of six score ton , the other of 100 , and the three of 60 , to seek they out , and to succour they . my lord admiral therefore be well inform of the faithful service which i have do , aswell unto his majesty as to his predecessor king of France , advertise the king how able i be to do he service in this voyage , which be the cause that he make i chief captain over these 3 ship , and charge i to ix laudonnier second voyage to Florida , with three ship the 22 of April 1564. the isle of Teneriffa , or the pike . the english voyage depart with diligence to perform his commandment , which for my own part i will not gainsay , but rather think my self happy to have be choose out among such a infinite number of other , which in my judgement be very well able to have quit themselves in this charge , i embark my self at new haven the 22 of April 1564 , and sail so , that we fall near unto the coast of England : and then i turn towards the south , to sail direct to the fortunate island , at this present call the canary , one of which call the isle savage ( because as i think it be altogether without inhabitant ) be the first that our ship pass . sail therefore on forward , we land the next day in the isle of Teneriffa , otherwise call the pike , because that in the midst thereof there be a exceed high mountain , near as high as that of Aetna , which rise up like a pike , into the top whereof no man can go up but from the midst of may until the midst of August , by reason of the over great cold which be there all the year : which be a wonderful strange thing , consider that it be not past 27 degree and a half distant from the equator . we see it all cover over with snow , although it be then but the five of May . the inhabitant in this isle be heretofore pursue by the Spaniard , retire themselves into this mountain , where for a space they make war with they , and will not submit themselves to their obedience , neither by foul nor fair mean , they disdain so much the loss of their island . for those which go thither on the Spaniard behalf , leave their carcase there , so that not so much as one of they return home to bring news . notwithstanding in the end , the inhabitant not able to live in that place accord to their nature , or for want of such thing as be necessary for the commodity of their livelihood , do all die there . after i have furnish my self with some fresh water , very good and excellent , which .. 15640 spring out of a rock at the foot of this mountain , i continue my course towards the west , wherein the wind favour i so well , that 15 day after our ship arrive safe and sound at the Antilles : and go on land at the isle of Martinino , one of they the e 0 °f first of they , the next day we arrive at Dominica , mat-ttnino . twelve league distant from the former . island . Dominica be one of the fair island of the west , full of hill , and of very good smell . who singularity desire to know as we pass , and seek also to refresh our self with fresh water , i make the mariner cast anchor , after we have sail about half along the coast thereof . as soon as we have cast anchor , two Indians ( inhabitant of that place ) sail towards we in two canoas full of a fruit of great excellency which they call Ananas . as they Ananas a approach unto our bark , there be one of they fruit of great which be in some misdoubt of we , go back eme enae ' again on land , and flee his way with as much speed as he can possible . which our man perceive and [ three . 320. ] enter with diligence into the other Canoa , wherein they catch the poor indian , and bring he unto i . but the poor fellow become so astonish in behold we , that he know not which way to behave himself , because that ( as afterward i understand ) he fear that he be fall into the Spaniard hand , of who he have be take once before , and which , as he show we , have cut of his stone . at length this poor Indian be secure of we , and discourse unto we of many thing , whereof we receive very small pleasure , because we understand not his mind but by his sign . than he desire i to give he leave to depart , and promise i that he will bring i a thousand present , whereunto i agree on condition that he will have patience until the next day , when i purpose to go on land , where i suffer he to depart after i have give he a shirt , and certain small trifle , wherewith he depart very well content from we . the place where we go on shore be hard by a very high rock , out of which there run a little river of sweet and excellent good water : by which river we stay certain day to discover the thing which be worthy to be see , and traffic daily with the Indians : which above all thing beseech we that none of our man shall come near their lodging nor their garden , otherwise that we shall give they great cause of jealousy , and that in so do , we shall not want of their fruit which they call Ananas , whereof they offer we very liberal , receive in recompense certain thing of small value . this notwithstanding , it happen on a day that certain of our man desirous to see some new thing in these strange country , walk through the wood : and follow still the little river side , they spy two serpent of exceed bigness , which go side by side overthwart the way . my soldier go before they think to let they from go into the wood : but the serpent nothing at all astonish at these gesture glance into the bush with fearful hyssing : yet for all that , my man draw their sword and kill they , and find they afterward 9 great foot long , and as big as a man leg . during this combat , certain other more undiscreet go and gather their ananas in the indian garden , trample through they without any discretion : and not therewithal ! content they go towards their dwelling ; whereat the Indians be so much offend , that without regard any thing they rush upon they and discharge their shot , so that they hit one of my man name Martine chaveau , which remain behind . we can not know whether he be kill on the place , or whether he be take prisoner : for those of his company have enough to do to save themselves without think of their companion . whereof Monsieur de Ottigni my lieutenant be advertise , send unto i to know whether i think good that he shall lay a ambush for the Indians which have either take or kill our man , or whether he shall go direct to their dwelling to know the truth . i send unto he after good deliberation hereupon , that he shall not attempt any thing , and that for diverse occasion : but contrariwise that he shall embark himself with all diligence , and consequent all they that be on land : which he do with speed . but as he sail towards our ship he perceive along the shore a great number of Indians which begin to charge they with their arrow : he for his part discharge store of shot against they , yet be not able to hurt they , or by any mean to surprise they : for which cause he quite forsake they , and come unto our ship . where stay until the next day morning we set sail follow our wont course , and keep the same , we discover diverse isle conquer by the Spaniard , as the isle of S. Christopher , and of the saint , of Monserrate , and la Redonda : afterwards we pass between Anguilla and Anegada , sail towards new France . where we arrive 15 day after , to wit , on Thursday the 22 of June about 3 of the clock in the afternoon , and land near a little river which be 30 degree distant from the equator , and 10 lague above cape Francois draw towards the south , and about thirty league above the river of May . after we have strike sail and cast anchor athwart the river , i determine to go on shore to discover the same . therefore be accompany with monsieur Ottigni , with monsieur de Arlac my ensign , and a certain number of gentleman and soldier , i embark my self about 3 or 4 of the clock in the evening . And be arrive at the mouth of the river , i cause the channel to be sound , which be find to be very shallow , although that far within the same the water be there find reasonable deep , which separate it self into two great arm , whereof one run towards the south , and the other his arrival in Florida the zz of June 1564. cape Francois be between the river of dolphin and the river of May , make that the distance 30 league about , which be but 10 league over land . towards the north . have thus search the river , i go on land to speak with the Indians which wait for we upon the shore , which at our come on land , come before we , cry with a loud voice in their indian language , Antipola Bonassou , which be as much to say , as brother , friend , or some such like [ three . 321. ] thing . after they have make very much of we , they show we their Paracoussy , that be to say , their king and governor , to who i present certain toy , wherewith he be well please . and for my own the great love part , i praise God continual , for the great love andc^eof which i have find in these savage , which be sorry t e on tans . nothing , but that the night approach , and make we retire unto our ship . for though they endeavour by all mean to make we tarry with they , and show by sign the desire that they have to present we with some rare thing , yet nevertheless for many just and reasonable occasion i will not stay on shore all night : but excuse my self for all their offer , i embark my self again and return towards my ship . howbeit , before my then river of departure , i name this river , the river of dolphin , dolphin , because that at my arrival , i see there a great the savage , number or dolphin , which be play in the mouth thereof . the next day the 23 of this month ( because that towards the south i have not find any commodious place for we to inhabit , and to build a fort ) i give commandment to weigh anchor , and to hoist our sail to sail towards the river of May , their arrival where we arrive two day after , and cast anchor . at the river of afterwards go on land , with some number of ay ' Gentlemen and soldier to know for a certainty the singularity of this place , we espy the Paracoussy of the country , which come towards we ( this be the very same that we see in the voyage of captain John Ribault ) which have espy we , cry very far off , Antipola , Antipola : and be so joyful that he can not contain himself , he come to meet we , accompany then .... i564 ' with two of his son , as fair and mighty person as may be find in all the world , which have nothing in their mouth but this word , Amy , Amy : that be to say , friend , friend : yea , and know those which be there in the first voyage , they go principal to they to use this speech unto they . there be in their train a great number of man and woman , which still make very much of we , and by evident sign make we understand how glad they be of our arrival . this good entertainment past , the Paracoussy pray i to go see the pillar which we have erect in the voyage of John Ribault ( as we have declare heretofore ) as a thing which they make great account of . have yield unto he and be come to the place the f^ar set where it be set up , we find the same crown with crown of bay , and at the foot thereof many little crownedwith basket full of mill which they call in their language garland of Tapaga Tapola . then when they come thither they Laurelland kiss the same with great reverence and beseech we ironedmth to do the like , which we will not deny they , to the f^rne end we may draw they to be more in friendship worshipped'by with we . this do , the Paracoussy take i by the the savage . hand , as if he have desire to make i understand some great secret , and by sign show i very well up within the river the limit of his dominion , and say that he be call Paracoussy Satourioua , which be as much as king Paracoussy Satourioua . his child have the self same title of Satourioua . Paracoussy : the elder be name athore , a man , i dare say , perfect in beauty , wisdom , and honest sobriety , show by his modest gravity that he deserve the name which he bear , beside that he be gentle and tractable . after we have sojourn a certain space with they , the Paracoussy pray one of his son to present unto i a wedge of silver , which he do and that wedge oj with a good will : in recompense whereof i give he a silver-cutting hook and some other better present : wherewith he seem to be very well please . afterwards we take our leave of they , because the night approach , and then return to lodge in our ship . be allure with this good entertainment i fail not the next day to embark my self again with my lieutenant Ottigni and a number of soldier to return towards the Paracoussy of the river of May , which of purpose wait for we in the same place , where the day before we confer with he . we find he under the shadow of a arbour accompany with fourscore Indians at the least , and apparel at that time after the indian fashion , to wit , with a great heart skin dress like chamois , and paint with device of strange and diverse colour , but of so lively a portraiture , and represent antiquity , with rule so just compass , that there be no painter so exquisite that can find fault therewith : the naturali disposition of this strange people be so perfect and well guide that without any aid and favour of art , they be able by the help of nature only to content the eye of artisan , yea even of those which by their industry be able to aspire unto thing most absolute . than i advertise Paracoussy Satourioua , that my desire be to discover far up into the river , but that this shall be with such diligence that i will come again unto he very speedy : wherewith he be content , promise to stay for i in the place where he be : and for a earnest of his promise , he offer i his goodly skin , which i refuse then , and promise to receive it of he at my return . for my part i give he certain small trifle , to the intent to retain he in our friendship . [ Iii . 322. ] depart from thence , i have not sail three league up the river , still be follow by the Indians , which coast i a long the river , cry still , Amy , Amy , that be to say friend , friend : but i discover a hill of mean height , near which i go on land , hard by the field that be sow with will , at one corner whereof there be a house build for their lodging , which keep and guard the mill : for there be such number of cor-gnsses . nish chough in this country , which continual devour .. 15641 and spoil the mill , that the Indians be constrain to keep and watch it , otherwise they shall be deceive of their harvest . 1 rest my self in this place for certain hour , and command Monsieur de Ottigni , and monsieur de my sergeant to enter into the wood to search out the dwelling of the Indians : where after they have go awhile , they come unto a marish of reed , where find their way to be stop , they rest under the shadow of a mighty bay tree to refresh themselves a little and to resolve which way to take . than they discover , as it be on the sudden , five Indians half hide in the wood , which seem somewhat to distrust our man , until they say unto they in the indian language Antipola Bonassou , to the end that understand their speech they may come unto we more bold , which they do incontinent . but because they see , that the four that go last , bear up the train of the skin wherewith he that go foremost be apparel our man imagine that the foremost must needs be some man of great quality than the rest , see that withal they call he Paracoussy , Paracoussy , wherefore , some of our company go towards he , and use he courteous show he , monsieur de Ottigni , their lieutenant , for who they have make a harbour with bay and palm bough after the indian fashion , to the end that by such sign the savage may think the Frenchman have compain with such as they at other time . the indian Paracoussy draw near to the french , and courtesy begin to make he a long oration , which tend to no other end , but that he beseech the Frenchman very earnest to come and see his dwell and his parent , which they grant he , and straight for pledge of better amity , he give unto my lieutenant Ottigni , the very skin that he be clad with . than he take he by the hand , lead he right towards the marsh , over which the Paracoussy , monsieur Ottigni , and certain other of our man be bear upon the indian shoulder : and the rest which can not pass because of the mire and reed , go through the wood , and follow a narrow path which lead they forth until they come unto the paracoussyes dwelling ; out of which there come about fifty Indians to receive our man gallant , and to feast they after their manner . after which they bring at their entrance a great vessel of earth , make after a strange fashion full of fountain water clear and very excellent . this vessel be bear by a indian , and there be another young which bear of this water in another little vessel of wood , and present thereof to every one to drink , observe in do the same , a certain order and reverence , which he make to each of they , to who he give drink . our thirst well quench by this mean , and our man be sufficient refresh , the Paracoussy bring they to his father lodging , one of the old man that live upon the earth . our man regard his age , begin to make much of he , use this speech , Amy , Amy , that be to say , friend , friend , whereat the old sire show himself very glad . afterwards they question with he concern the course of his age : whereunto he make answer , show that he be the first living originali , from whence five generation be descend , as he show unto they by another old man that sit direct over against he , man of ex - which far exceed he in age . and this man be his ceedmg old father ? which seem to be rather a dead carkei than a live body : for his sinew , his vein , his artier , his bone , and other part , appear so clear through his skin , that a man may easy tell they , and discern they one from another . also his age be so great , that the good man have lose his sight , and can not speak one only word but with exceed great pain . monsieur de Ottigni have see so strange a thing , turn to the young of these two old man , pray he to vouchsafe to answer he to that which he demand touch - savage in Florida of 250. year old . eagles in Florida . Rene Laudonniere a.d. 1564. king his age . then the old man call a company of Indians , and strike twice upon his thigh , and lay his hand upon two of they , he show he by sign , that these two be his son : again smite upon their thigh , he show he other not so old , which be the child of the two first , which he continue in the same manner until the five generation . but though this old man have his father alive more old than himself , and that both of they do wear their hair very long , and as white as be possible , yet it be tell they , [ he . 323. ] that they may yet live thirty or forty year more by the course of nature : although the young of they both be not less than two hundred and fifty year old . after he have end his communication , he commanded two young eagles to be give to our man , which he have breed up for his pleasure in his house . he cause also little panier make of palm leave full of gourd red and blow to be deliver unto they . for recompense of which present he be satisfy with french toy . Theise two old man cause our man to be guide back again to the place from whence they come , by the young Paracoussy which have bring they thither . and have take leave of the Paracoussy , they come and seek i out in the place where i stay , and rehearse unto i all that they have see , pray i also that i will reward their guide , which so frank and hearty have receive they into his house , which i will not fail to do by any mean . now be i determine to search out the quality of the hill . therefore i go right to the top thereof , where we find nothing else but cedar , palm , and baytree of so sovereign odour , that balm smell nothing like in comparison . the tree be environ round about with vine bear grape in such quantity , that the number will suffice to make the place habitable . beside this fertility of the soil for vine , a man may see Esquine wreathe about the shrub in 11 cedar , palm , bay exceed sweet . abundance of grape . Esquine a drug excellent against the pocket . silver certain day journey up within the river of May . thimogoamor-tall enemy to Satourioua . the english voyage great quantity . touch the pleasure of the place , the sea may be see plain and open from it , and more than six great league off , near the river Belle , a man may behold the meadow divide asunder into isle and islet interlace one another : brief the place be so pleasant , that those which be melancholic will be enforce to change their humour . after i have stay there a while , i embark again my people to sail towards the mouth of the river , where we find the Paracoussy , which accord to his promise wait for we . wherefore to content he , we go on shore , and do he that reverence that on our part be requisite . than he give i the skin so rich paint , and i recompense he with somewhat of our merchandise . i forget not to demand of he the place whence the wedge of silver come which he have give i before : whereunto he make i a very sudden answer , which notwithstanding i understand not , which he well perceive . and then he show i by evident sign that all of it come from a place more within the river by certain day journey from this place , and declare unto we that all that which they have thereof , they get it by force of arm of the inhabitant of this place , name by they Thimogoa , their most ancient and naturali enemy , as he large declare . whereupon when i see with what affection he speak when he pronounce Thimogoa , i understand what he will say . and to bring my self more into his favour , i promise he to accompany he with all my force , if he will fight against they : which thing please he in such sort , that from thenceforth he promise himself the victory of they , and assure i that he will make a voyage thither within a short space , will cause store of mill to be prepare , and will command his man to make ready their bow , and furnish themselves with such store of arrow , that nothing shall be want to give battle to Thimogoa . in fine he pray i very earnest not to fail of my promise , and in so do , he hope to procure i gold and silver in such good quantity , that my affair shall take effect accord to my own and his desire . the matter thus full resolve upon , i take my leave of he to return unto my ship , where after we have rest our self all the night follow , we hoist sail the next day very early in the morning , and sail toward the river of Seine , distant from they the river of river of May about four league : and there continue - seine-ing our course toward the north , we arrive at the mouth of Somme , which be not past six league the river of distant from the river of Seine : where we cast anchor , somme-and go on shore to discover that place as we have do the rest . there we be gracious and cour - the courtesy teous receive of the Paracoussy of the country , °^the which be one or the tall man and best proportion river of that may be find . his wife sit by he , which Somme . beside her indian beauty , wherewith she be great endue , have so virtuous a countenance and modest gravity , that there be not one among we but do great commend she ; she have in her train five of her daughter of so good grace and so well bring up , that i easy persuade my self that their mother be their mistress , and have teach they well and straight to preserve their honesty . after that the Paracoussy have receive we as i have say , he command his wife to present i with a certain number of bullet of silver , [ three . 324. ] for his own part he present i with his bow and his arrow , as he have do unto captain John Ribault in our first voyage , which be a sign of a perpetuali amity and alliance with those which they honour with such a kind of present . in our discourse with one another , we enter into speech as touch the exercise of arm . then the Paracoussy cause a corselet to be set on end , and pray i to make a proof of our harquebuss and their bow : but this proof please he very little ; for assoon as he know that our harquebuss do easy 13 pierce that which all the force of their bow can not hurt , he seem to be sorry , muse with himself how this thing may be do . nevertheless go about to dissemble in his mind that which his countenance can not do by any mean , he begin to fall into another matter , and pray we very earnest to stay with he that night in his house or lodging , affirm that no great happiness can come unto he then our long abode , which he desire to recompense with a thousand present . nevertheless we can not grant he this point , but take our leave of he to return to our ship : laudonnleres where soon after i cause all my company to be consultation assemble , with the master and pilot of my ship , anywlureit to consult together of the place whereof we shall might be best make choice to plant our habitation . first i let they fir they to understand , how none of they be ignorant , that the part which be toward the cape of Florida , be altogether a marish country , and therefore unprofitable for our inhabitation : a thing which can yield neither profit to the king , nor any contentment or pleasure to we , if peradventure we will inhabit there . on the other side if we pass further towards the north to seek out port royal , it will be neither very profitable nor convenient : at the least if we shall give credit to the report of they which remain there a long time , although the haven be one of the fair of the west Indies : but that in this case the question be not so much of the beauty of the place , as of thing necessary to sustain life . and that for our inhabit it be much more needful for we to plant in place plentiful of victuali , then in goodly haven , fair , deep and pleasant to the view . in consideration whereof that i be of opinion , if it seem good unto they , to gold and sil - seat our self about the river of May : see also that in our first v°yase we f°und the same only among rtver of ajj the rest tQ abqun ( je jn mafz anj cornc ) besije the ' gold and silver that be find there : a thing that 14 put i in hope of some happy discovery in time to come . after i have propose these thing , every one give his opinion thereof : and in fine all resolve , namely those which have be with i in the first voyage , that it be expedient to seat themselves rather on the river of may then on any other , until they may hear news out of France . this point be thus agree upon , we sail towards the river , and use such diligence , that with the favour of the wind we arrive there the morrow after about the break of day , which be on Thursday the 29. of the month of June . have - June the 29. king cast anchor , i embark all my stuff and the soldier of my company , to sail right towards the open of the river : wherein we enter a good way up , and find a creek of a reasonable bigness , which invite we to refresh our self a little , while we repose our self there . afterwards we go on shore to seek out a place plain without tree , which we perceive from the creek . but because we find it not very commodious for we to inhabit there : we determine to return unto the place which we have discover before , when we have ace be join to a be more fit and come - modious to build a fortress , then that where we be last . therefore we take our way towards the forest be guide therein by the young Paracoussy which have lead we before to his father lodging . afterwards we find a large plain cover with high pinetree distant a little from the other : under which we perceive a infinite number of stag which bray amid the plain , athwart the which we pass : than we discover a little hill adjoin unto a great vale very green and in form flat : wherein be the fair meadow of the world , and grass to feed cattle . Moreover it be environ with a great number of brook of fresh water , and high wood , which make the vale J5 sail up the river . This pl mountain , and it seem unto 1 more delectable to the eye . after i have take the view thereof at my ease , i name it at the request of our then vale of soldier , the vale of Laudonniere . thus we go Laudonniere . forwar ( £ anon have go a little forward , we meet a indian woman of tall stature , which also be a an Herma - hermaphrodite , who come before we with a great ves-phrodite . sep of c | ere fountain water , wherewith she great refresh we . for we be exceed faint by reason of the ardent heat which molest we as we pass through those high wood . and i believe that without the succour of that indian hermaphrodite , or rather , if it have not be for the great desire which we have to [ he . 325. ] make we resolute of our self , we have take up our lodging all night in the wood . be therefore refresh by this mean , we gather our spirit together , and march with a cheerful courage , we come to the place which we have choose to make our habitation in : whereupon at that instant near the river brink we strew a number of bough and leaf , to take our rest on they the night follow , which we find exceed sweet , because of the pain which before we have take in our travel . on the morrow about the break of day , i commanded a trumpet to be sound , that be assemble they begin we may give God thanks for our favourable and their plant happy arrival . there we sing a psalm of thankes-mth^ prayer to givjng unto God , beseech he that it will please ' he of his grace to continue his accustom goodness towards we his poor servant , and aid we in all our enterprise , that all may turn to his glory and the advancement of our king . the prayer end , every man begin to take courage . afterwards have measure out a piece of ground in form of a triangle , we endeavour our self of all side , some to bring earth , some to cut faggot , and other to raise and make the rampire , for there be not a man that have not either a shovel , or cut hook , or hatchet , as well to make the ground plain by cut down the 16 1564-tree , as for the build of the fort , which we do hasten w‘ such cheerfulness , that within few day the effect of our diligence be apparent : in which mean space the Paracoussy Satourioua our near neighbour , and on who ground we build our fort , come usual accompanied with his two son and a great number of Indians to offer to do we all courtesy . and i likewise for my part bestow diverse of our trifle frank on he , to the end he may know the good will we bear he , and thereby make he more desirous of our friendship , in such sort , that as the day increase , so our amity and friendship increase also . after that our fort be bring into form , i begin to build a grange to retire my munition and thing necessary for the defence of our fort : pray the Paracoussy to command his subject to make we a cover of palm leave , and this to the end that when that ln Florida be do , i may unfreight my ship , and put under coverture those thing that be in they . sudden the palm Paracoussy command in my presence all the indian leaf . of his company to dress the next day morning so good a number of palm leave , that the grange be cover in less than two day : so that business be finish . for in the space of those two day , the Indians never cease from work , some in fetch palm leave , other in interlace of they : in such sort that their king commandment be execute as he desire . our fort be build in form of a triangle . the side the form of towards the west , which be towards the land , be in - fortcaro-closed with a little trench and raise with trave make in the west side . form of a battlement of nine foot high : the other side which be towards the river , be enclose with a palisado of plank of timber after the manner that gabions be make . on the south side there be a kind of bastion TheSouthside . within which i cause a house for the munition to be build : it be all build with faggot and sand , save about two or three foot high with turf , whereof the battlement be make . in the midst i cause a great ix 17 b Caroline . [ he . 326. ] the first voyage twenty league . court to be make of eighteen pace long and broad , in the midst whereof on the one side draw towards the south i build a corpse de guard , and a house on the other side towards the north , which i cause to be raise somewhat too high : for within a short while after the wind beat it down : and experience teach i , that high building may not build with high stage in this country , be mtlipod fi > r by reason of the wind whereunto it be subject . one ountrey . fl-ia 1 be / ' locxarl my cmirf trrliir’k t morlA of the side that enclose my court , which i make very fair and large , reach unto the grange of my muni tion : and on the other side towards the river be i own lodging , round about which be gallery all cover . the principali door of my lodging be in the midst of the great place , and the other be toward the river . a good distance from the fort i build a oven to avoid the danger against fire , because the house be of palm leave , which will soon be burn after the fire catch hold of they , so that with much ado a man shall have leisure to quench they . Loe here in brief the description of our four tress , which i name Caroline in the honour of our prince king Charles . after we be furnish with that which be most necessary , i will not lose a minute of a hour , without employ of the same in some virtuous exercise : therefore i charge monsieur de Ottigni my lieutenant , a man in truth worthy of all honour for his honesty and virtue , to search up within the river , what this Thimogoa may be , whereof the Paracoussy Satourioua have speak to we so often at our come on shore . for execution hereof the Paracoussy give he two Indians for his guide , which take upon they to lead he in this voyage , seem to go unto a wedding , so desirous they be to fight with their enemy . be embark they hoist sail , and have sail about twenty league , the Indians which still look on this side and that side to espy some of their enemy , discover three canoas . and immediate they begin to 18 cry Thimogoa , Thimogoa , and speak nothing else but to hasten forward to go fight with they : which the captain seem to be willing to do , to content they . when they come to board they , one of the indian get hold of a halbert , another of a cutlass in such a rage , that he will have leap into the water to have fight with they alone . nevertheless Ottigni will not let they do it , for while he defer to board they , he give the other respite to turn the prowess of their canoas towards the shore , and so to escape into the wood . again , the meaning of Ottigni be not to make war upon they of Thimogoa , but rather to make they friend , and to make they thenceforth to live in peace one with another if it be possible , hope by this mean to discover daily some new thing , and especial the certain course of the river . for this purpose he cause the bark to retire , wherein be the two Indians his guide , and go with his man toward the canoas which be on the river side . be come unto they , he put certain trifle into they , and then retire a good way from they , which thing cause the Indians which be flee away to return to their boat , and to understand by this sign , that those of our bark be none of their enemy , but rather come only to traffic with they . wherefore be thus assure of we , they call to our man to come near unto they : which they do incontinent and set foot on land , and speak free unto they , with diverse ceremony over long to recount . in the end Ottigni demand of they by sign if they have any gold or silver among they . but they tell he they have none as then : and that if he will send one of his man with they , they will bring he without danger into a place where they may have some . Ottigni see they so willing , deliver they one of his man which seem very resolute , to undertake this voyage : this fellow stay with they until ten of the clock the next morning , so that captain Ottigny somewhat ten ieague offend with his long stay , sail ten great league further . mayrraak rich in gold and silver . the second voyage . KingMolloua . Olata ouae utina a great king . the english voyage further up the river : although he know not which way he shall go , yet he go so far up that he espy the boat wherein his soldier be : which report unto he , that the Indians will have carry he three great day journey further , and tell he that a king name Mayrra rich in gold and silver , dwell in those quarter , and that for small quantity of merchandise enough may be have of he : yet that he will not hazard himself without his leave , and that he bring but a very little gold . This be do , our man return towards our fort Caroline , after they have leave the soldier with the Indians to inform himself more and more of such thing as he may discover more at leisure . fifteen day after this voyage to Thimogoa , i dispatch captain Vasseur and my sergeant also to return again into this country , and to seek out the soldier which remain there in the former voyage . be therefore embark , they sail two whole day : and before they come to the dwell of the Indians , they find two of they on the river side , which be express send unto that place to descry whether any of their enemy be come to that part , with intention to surprise they , as they do usual . when they perceive captain Vasseur , they know incontinent that he be none of their enemy , and therefore make no difficulty to come near unto the bark , and show he by sign that the soldier which they seek be not in that place , but be at that present in the house of king Molloua which be vassal unto another great king name by they Olata ouae utina : and that if the captain will sail thitherward , he shall come thither very quick : wherewith he be content , and cause his man to row to that part which the Indians show he : whereat they be so glad , that they run quick before by land to declare his arrival , which be at the lodging of king Molloua , after he have row not past half a league . while king Molloua have end entertain captain Vasseur and his man , the soldier come in with five or six pound weight of silver which he have truck five or stxe and traffic with Indians . ofluver^ this king cause bread to be make , and fish to be ’ dress after the indian fashion to feast our man : to who , while they be at meat , he make a discourse of diverse other king his friend and ally , reckon up to the number of nine of they by name , to wit , Cadecha , Chilili , Eclauou , Enacappe , Calany , Anacharaqua , omit-taqua , Aequara , moquoso : all which with he to the number of more than forty , he assure we to be the vassal of the most renown Olata ouae utina . ^uthia t0 this do , he go about likewise to discover the [ m . 327. ] enemy of ouae utina , in which number he place as the first the Paracoussy Satourioua monarch of the confine of the river of May , which have under his obeisance thirty other paracoussy , whereof there be ten which be all his brethren , and that therefore he be great esteem in those part : than he name three other not less puissant than Satourioua , whereof the first dwell two day journey from his lord Olata ouae utina , and ordinary make war upon he , who name be Potanou , a man cruel in war , but pitiful in the king Potanou . execution of his fury . for he take the prisoner to mercy , be content to mark they on the left arm with a great mark like unto a seal , and so imprint as if it have be touch with a hot iron , than he let they go without any more hurt . the two other be name Onatheaqua , and Houstaqua , be great lord , and abound in riches , and principal Onatheaqua , which dwell near unto the high mountains , wherein there be abundance of many rare thing , exceed and infinite quantity of a kind of slate stone , wherewith they make wedge to cleave their wood . the occasion which ( as he say ) move Potanou to wage war against Olata ouae utina , be the fear that he have , lest he and his companion shall get of that hard some paint their face with black , and some with red . the english voyage stone in his country , wherewith they head their arrow , and can not get it in any near place . beside all this , Molloua recite to captain Vasseur , that the king ally the vassal of the great Olata , arm their breast , arm , thigh , leg and forehead with large plate of gold and silver : and that by this mean the arrow that be discharge upon they can do they no manner of hurt at all , but rather be break against they . hereupon captain Vasseur inquire whether the king Onetheaqua and Houstaqua be like unto we . for by the description that they make of they , he begin to doubt whether they be Spaniards or no : but Molloua tell he that they be not , but that they be Indians like the rest , save that they paint their face with black , and that the rest as Molloua , paint they with red . than my lieutenant Vasseur , and my sergeant promise he , that one day i shall march with my force into those country , and that join my self with his lord Olata , i will subdue the inhabitant of the high of those mountain . he be very glad of this speech , and answer that the least of these king which he have name , shall present unto the generali of these succour the height of two foot of gold and silver , which by force of arm they have already get of those two king , Onatheaqua , and Houstaqua . the good cheer be do , and the discourse end , my man embark themselves again , with intention to bring i those good news unto the fort Caroline . but after they have sail a very long while down the river , and be come within three league of we , the tide be so strong against they , that they be constrain to go on land , and to retire themselves because of the night , unto the dwell of a certain Paracoussy name Molona , which show himself very glad of their arrival : for he desire to know some news of Thimogoa , and think that the french man go thither for none other occasion but for to invade ... i564 ' they . which captain Vasseur perceive , dissemble so well , that he make he believe that he go to Thimogoa with none other intention , but to subdue they , and to destroy they with the edge of the sword without mercy , but that their purpose have not such success as they desire , because that the people of Thimogoa be advertise of this enterprise , retire into the wood , and save themselves by flight : that nevertheless they have take some as they be flee away , which carry no news thereof unto their fellow . the Paracoussy be so glad of this relation , that he interrupt he , and ask Vasseur of the beginning and manner of his execution , and pray he that he will show he by sign how all thing pass . immediate Francis la caille the sergeant of my band take his sword in his hand , say , that with the point thereof he have thrust through two Indians which run into the wood , and that his companion have do no less for their part . and that if fortune have so favour they , that they have not be discover by the man of Thimogoa , they have have a victory most glorious and worthy of eternal memory . hereupon the Paracoussy show himself so well satisfy , that he can not devise how to gratify our man , which he cause to come into his house to feast they more honourable : and have make captain Vasseur to sit next he , and in his own chair ( which the Indians esteem for the chief honour ) and then underneath he two of his son , goodly and mighty fellow , he command all the rest to place themselves as they think good . this do , the Indians come accord to their good custom , to present their drink Cassine to the Paracoussy , and then to certain of his chief friend , and the Frenchman . than he which bring it set the cup aside , and [ three . 328. ] draw out a little dagger stick up in the roof of the house , and like a mad man he lift his head aloft , and run apace , and go and smite a indian which sit alone in one of the corner of the hall , cry with a loud voice , hyou , the poor indian stir not at all for the blow , which he seem to endure patient . he which hold the dagger go quick to put the same in his former place , and begin again to give we drink as he do before : but he have not long continue , and have scarce give three or four thereof , but he leave his bowl again , take the dagger in his hand , and quick return unto he which he have strocken before , to who he give a very sore blow on the side , cry Hyou , as he have do before : and then he go to put the dagger in his place , and set himself down among the rest . a little while after he that have be strike fall down backward , stretch out his arm and leg , as if he have be ready to yield up the latter gasp . and then the young son of the Paracoussy apparel in a long white skin , fall down at the foot of he that be fall backward , weep bitter half a quarter of a hour : after , two other of his brethren clad in like apparel , come about he that be so strike , and begin to sigh pitiful . their mother bear a little infant in her arm come from another part , and go to the place where her son be , at the first she use infinite number of outcry , than one while lift up her eye to heaven , another while fall down unto the ground , she cry so doleful , that her lamentable mourning will have move the most hard and stony heart in the world with pity . yet this suffice not , for there come in a company of young girl , which do never leave weep for a long while in the place where the indian be fall down , who afterward they take , and with the sad gesture they can devise , carry he away into another house a little way off from the great hall of the Paracoussy , and continue their weep and mourn by the space of two long hour : in which mean while the indian cease not to drink Cassine , but with such silence that one word be not hear in the parlour . Vasseur be grieve that he understand not these ceremony , demand of the Paracoussy what these thing mean : which answer he slow , Thimogoa , Thimogoa , without say any more . be more displease than he be before with so slight a answer , he turn unto another Indian the paracoussyes brother , who be a Paracoussy as well as his brother , call Malica , which make he a like answer as he do at the KlngMalica . first , pray he to ask no more of these matter , and to have patience for that time . the subtle old Paracoussy pray he within a while after , to show he his sword , which he will not deny he , think that he will have behold the fashion of his weapon : but he soon perceive that it be to another end : for the old man hold it in his hand , behold it a long while on every place , to see if he can find any blood upon it , which may show that any of their enemy have be kill : for the Indians be wont to bring their weapon wherewith their enemy have be defeat , with some blood upon they , for a token of their victory . but see no sign thereof upon it , he be upon the point to say unto he , that he have kill none of the man of Thimogoa : when as Vasseur prevent that which he may object , declare and show unto he by sign , the manner of his enterprise , add , that by reason of the two indian which he have slay , his sword be so bloody , that he be enforce to wash and make it clean a long while in the river : which the old man believe to be like to be true , and make no manner of reply thereunto . Vasseur , la caille , and their other companion go out of the hall to go into the room whither they have carry the indian : there they find the Paracoussy sit upon tapestry make of small reed , which be tapistrymade at meat after the indian fashion , and the indian that qfsmailreeds-was smite hard by he , lie upon the self same tapestry , about who stand the wife of the Paracoussy , with all the young damsel which before bewail he in they lap the hall ; which do nothing else but warm a great deal moss about of moss instead of napkin to rub the indian side . their wound tt i j t* • r and use it in hereupon our man ask the Paracoussy again for stead of nap - what occasion the indian be so persecute in his kin . presence : he answer , that this be nothing else but a ceremony a kind of ceremony , whereby they will call to mind death'of death and persecution of the paracoussy their their ancestor ancestor execute by their enemy Thimogoa : allege slalne by their moreover , that as often as he himself , or any of his enemy . friend and ally return from the country , without they bring the head of their enemy , or without bring home some prisoner , he use for a perpetuali memory of all his predecessor , to beat the best belove of all his child with the self same weapon wherewith they have be kill in time past : to the end that by renew of the wound their death shall be lament afresh . now when they be thus inform of those ceremony , they thank the Paracoussy for their good intertai nement which they have receive , and so set sail come to i unto the fort : [ he . 329. ] where they declare all unto i as i have recite it the return of heretofore . the eight and twenty of July our ^ardfrance s^tpes depart to return into France . and within a the 28. of while , about two month after our arrival in Florida , July . the Paracoussy Satourioua send certain Indians unto i to know whether i will stand to my promise which i have make he at my first arrival in that country , which be that i will show my self friend to his friend , and enemy unto his - enemy , and also to accompany he with a good number of harquebuss , when he shall see it expedient , and shall find a fit occasion to go to war . now see he rest upon this promise , he pray i not to defer the same : see also that make account thereof , he have take such good order for the execution of his enterprise , that he be ready , and be furnish with all thing that be necessary for the voyage : i make he answer , that for his amity i will not purchase the enmity of the other , and that albeit i will , yet notwithstanding i want mean to do it . for it behoove i at that present to make provision of victual and munition for the defence of my fort on the other side , that my bark be nothing ready , and that this enterprise will require time : moreover , that the Paracoussy Satourioua may hold himself ready to depart within two month , and that then i will think of fulfil my promise to he . the indian carry this answer to their Paracoussy , which be little please with it , because he can not defer his execution or expedition , aswell because all his victual be ready , as also because ten other paracoussy be assemble with he for the performance of this enterprise . the ceremony which this savage use before he embark his army deserve not to be forget . for when he be set down by the river side , be compass about with ten other paracoussy , he command water to be bring he speedy . this do , look up into heaven , he fall to discourse of diverse thing with gesture that show he to be in exceed great choler , which make he one while shake his head hither and thither , and by and by with i wot not what fury to turn his face towards the country of his enemy , and to threaten to kill they . he oftentimes look upon the sun , pray he to grant he a glorious victory of his enemy . which when he have do by the space of half a hour , he sprinkle with his hand a little of the water which he hold in a vessel A.D. i564 . the ceremony which they use before they go to war . upon the head of the paracoussy , and cast the rest as it be in a rage and despite into a fire which be there prepare for the purpose . this do , he cry out thrice , he Thimogoa , and be follow with five hundred Satourioua fol-indians at the least , which be there assemble , which low with cry all with one voice , he Thimogoa . this ceremony , as a certain indian tell i familiar , signify nothing else , but that Satourioua beseech the sun to grant unto he so happy a victory , that he may shed his enemy blood , as he have shed that water at his pleasure . Moreover , that the paracoussy which be sprinkle with a part of that water , may return with the head of their enemy , which be the only and chief triumph of their victory . the Paracoussy Satourioua have no soon end his ceremony and have take a view of all his company , but he embark himself , and use such diligence with his Almadies or boat , that the next day two hour before the sun set , he arrive on the territory of his enemy about eight or ten league from their village . consultation afterwards cause they all to go on land , he assemble ^ { saulnheir counse^ > wherein it be agree that five of the paraenemy , coussy shall sail up the river with half of the troop , and by the break of the day shall approach unto the dwell of their enemy : for his own part , that he will take his journey through the wood and forest as secret as he can : that when they be come thither , as well they that go by water as he which go by land shall not fail by the break of the day to enter into the village , and cut they all in piece , except the woman and little child . how they use these thing which be thus agree upon , be ^hch^the^ execute with as great fury as be possible : which when take in war they have do , they take the head of their enemy which they have slay , and cut off their hair round about with a piece of their skull : they take also four and twenty prisoner , which they lead away , and retire themselves immediate unto their boat which wait for they . be come thither , they begin to singe praise unto the sun , to who they attribute their victory . and afterward they put the skin of those head on the end of their javelin , and go altogether towards the king Omoloa . territory of Paracoussy Omoloa , one of they which be in the company . be come thither , they divide their prisoner equal to each of the paracoussy , and leave thirteen of they to Satourioua , which straightway dispatch a indian his subject , to carry news before of the victory to they which stay at home to guard their 28 ... i564 ' house , which immediate begin to weep . but assoon as night be come , they never leave dance and play a thousand gambol in honour of the feast . the next day the Paracoussy Satourioua come home , who before he enter into his lodging cause all the [ three . 330. ] hairy skull of his enemy to be set up before his door , and crown they with branch of laurel , show by this glorious spectacle the triumph of the victory which °f triumfh-hee have obtain . straightway begin lamentation and mourning , which assoon as the night begin be turn into pleasure and dance . after that i be advertise of these thing , i send a soldier unto Satourioua , pray he to send i two of his prisoner : which he deny i , say that he be nothing behold unto i , and that i have break my promise , against the oath which i have swear unto he at my arrival . which when i understand by my soldier , which be come back with speed , i devise how i may be revenge of this savage , and to make he know how dear this bold bravado of he shall cost he : therefore i command my sergeant to provide i twenty soldier to go with i to the house of Satourioua : where after i be come and enter into the hall without any manner of salutation , i go and sit i down by he , and stay a long while without speak any word unto he , or show he any sign of friendship , which thing put he deep in his dump : beside that certain soldier remain at the gate , to who i have give express commandment to suffer no indian to go forth : have stand still about half a hour with this countenance , at length i demanded where the prisoner be which he have take at Thimogoa , and command they present to be bring unto i . whereunto the Paracoussy angry at the heart , and astonish wonderful , stand a long while without make any answer , notwithstanding at last he answer i very stout , that be afraid to see we come the english voyage thither in such warlike manner they flee into the wood , and that not know which way they be go , they be not able by any mean to bring they again ; then i seem to make as though i understand not what he say , and ask for his prisoner again , and for some of he principali ally . then Satourioua command his son athore to seek out the prisoner , and to cause they to be bring into that place , which thing he do within a hour after . after they be come to the lodging of the Paracoussy , they humble salute i , and lift up their hand before i , they will have fall down prostrate as it be at my foot : but i will not suffer they , and soon after lead they away with i unto my own fort the Paracoussy be wonderful offend with this bravado , bethink himself by all mean how he may be revenge of we . but to give we no suspicion thereof , and the better to cover his intention , he send his messenger oftentimes unto we bring always with they some kind of present . among other one day he send three Indians , which bring we two basket full of great pumpion , much more excellent than those which we have in France , and promise i in their king behalf , that during my abode in that country , i shall never want victual : i thank they for their king good will , and signify unto they the great desire which i have , aswell for the benefit of Satourioua , as for the quiet of his subject , to make a peace between he and those of Thimogoa : which thing can not choose but turn to their great benefit , see that be ally with the king of those part , he have a open passage against onatheaqua his ancient enemy , which otherwise he can not set upon . Moreover that Olata ouae utina be so mighty a Paracoussy , that Satourioua be not able to withstand his force : but be agree together they may easy overthrow all their enemy , and may pass the confine of the far river that be towards the south . the messenger pray i to have patience until the morrow , 30 at what time they will come again unto i to certify i of their lord inclination : which they fail not to do , advertise i that Paracoussy Satourioua be the glad man in the world to treat of this accord ( although indeed he be quite contrary ) and that he beseech i to be diligent therein , promise to observe and perform whatsoever i shall agree upon with those of Thimogoa : which thing the messenger also rehearse unto the prisoner which i have lead away . after they be depart , i resolve within two day to send back again the prisoner to Olata ouae utina , who subject they be : but before i embark they , i give they certain small trifle , which be little knife or tablet of glass , wherein the image of king Charles the nine be draw very lively , for which they give i very great thanks , as also for the honest entertainment which be give they at the fort Caroline . after this they embark themselves , with captain Vasseur , and with monsieur de Arlac my ensign , which i have send of purpose to remain a certain time with ouae utina , hope that the favour of this great Paracoussy will serve my turn great to make my discovery in time to come . i send with he also one of my sergeant , and six gallant soldier . thus thing pass on this manner , and the hatred of Paracoussy Satourioua against i do still continue , until that on the nine and twenty of August a lightning [ he . 331. i from heaven fall within half a league of our fort , - awanderfm more worthy i believe to be wonder at , and to be ofjugut put in writing , than all the strange sign which have be see in time past , and whereof the history have never write . for although the meadow be at that season all green , and half cover over with water , nevertheless the lightning in one instant consume above five hundred acre therewith , and burn with the ardent heat thereof all the fowl which take their pastime in the meadow , which thing continue for three day space , which cause we not a little to muse , not be able to judge whereof this fire proceed : for one while we think that the Indians have burn their house , and abandon their place for fear of we : another while we think that they have discover some ship in the sea , and that accord to their custom they have kindle many fire here and there , to signify that their country be inhabit : nevertheless be not assure , KingSar - i determine to send to Paracoussy Serrany to know ranay . the truth thereof . but even as i be upon the point to send one by boat to discover the matter , six Indians king Allima - come unto i from Paracoussy Allimacany , which at can3 ' their first entry make unto i a long discourse , and a very large and ample oration ( after they have present i with certain basket full of Maiz , of pompion and of grape ) of the love amity which Allimacany desire to continue with i , and that he look from day to day when it will please i to employ he in my service . therefore consider the serviceable affection that he bear unto i , he find it very strange , that i the savage thus discharge my ordinance against his dwell , ‘ lightning to be and burn up a infinite sight of green meadow , discharge of and consume even down unto the bottom of the the christian water , and come so near unto his mansion , that he ordinance . think he see the fire in his house : wherefore he beseech i most humble to command my man that they will not shoot any more towards his lodging , otherwise that hereafter he shall be constrain to abandon his country , and to retire himself into some place further off from we . have understand the foolish opinion of this man , which notwithstanding can not choose but be very profitable for we , i dissemble what i think thereof for that time , and answer the indian with a cheerful countenance , that the relation which they make unto i of the obedience of their Paracoussy do please i right well , because that before he have not behave himself in such sort towards i , especial when i summon he to send i the prisoner of great Olata ouae utina which he detain , whereof notwithstanding he make no great account , which be the principali cause wherefore i have discharge my ordinance against he : not that i mean to reach unto his house ( as i may have do easy , if it have please i ) but that i be content to shoot the half way to make he know my force : assure he furthermore , that on condition that Laudonniere he will continue in his good affection , no more ordinance shall be discharge against he hereafter : and ^ “ profit beside that i will become his faithful protector against his great enemy . the indian content with my answer return to assure their Paracoussy , which notwithstanding the assurance withdraw himself from his dwelling twenty or five and twenty league off and that for the space of more than two month . after that three day be expire , the fire be quite extinguish . but for two day after there follow such a excessive heat in the air , that a wonderfuu the river near unto which we plant our habitation , heate-became so hot , that i think it be almost ready to see . for there die so great abundance of fish , and that of so many diverse sort , that in the mouth of the river only there be find dead enough to have load fifty fifty cart load cart , whereof there issue a putrefaction in the air , deadph which breed many dangerous disease among we , insomuch that most of my man fall sick , and almost ready to end their day . yet notwithstanding it please our merciful God so to provide by his providence , that all our man recover their health without the loss of any one of they . monsieur de Arlac , captain Vasseur , and one of my then third sergeant be embark with their ten soldier voyage they about the ten of September , to carry back the prisoner unto utina , sail so far up the river , that they do - e^um er ' cover a place call Mayarqua distant from our fort Mayarqua a about fourscore league , where the Indians give they fa* 8o-good entertainment , and in many other village which ^ “ ersgfmay they find . from this place they row to the dwell - ix 33 c ling of Paracoussy utina , which after he have feast they accord to his ability and power , pray monsieur de Arlac and all his soldier to stay a while with he , to aid and assist he in battle against one of his KingPatanou . enemy call Potanou , whereunto Monsieur de Arlac consent willing . and because he know not how long he may have occasion to stay in these part , he send i captain Vasseur and the bark back again , which bring home only five soldier with he . the Indians now because the custom of the Indians be always to manner of war . wage war by surprise , utina resolve to take his enemy [ he . 332. ] Potanou in the morning by the break of the day : to bring this to pass , he make his man to travail all the two hundred night , which may be in number two hundred person , Indians . so wep advise , that they pray our french-shot to be in the forefront , to the end ( as they say ) that the noise of their piece may astonish their enemy : notwithstanding they can not march so secret , but that those of the village of Potanou , distant from the dwell of utina about five and twenty league , be ware of they : which sudden employ and bestow a village in - all their endeavour to defend their village enclose all dose with with tree , and issue out in great company : but ' find themselves charge with shot , ( a thing where - with they never have be acquaint ) also behold the captain of their band fall down dead in the begin of their skirmish , with a shot of a harquebus which strike he in the forehead , discharge by the hand of monsieur de Arlac , they leave the place : and the Indians of utina gate into the village , take utina get man , woman , and child prisoner . thus Paracoussy the victory of utina obtain the victory by the aid of our man , ^imofth^ which slay many of his enemy , and lose in this conflict trench . one their companion , wherewith utina be very much grieve . eight or ten day after , i send captain Vasseur back again with a bark to fetch home Monsieur de Arlac and his soldier , which at their return bring i certain present from utina , as some silver , a small quantity of gold , paint skin , silver , and and other thing , with a thousand thanks , which the geld , and Paracoussy give i , which promise that if in any enterprise of importance i shall have need of his sister tnne ' man , he will furnish i with three hundred and above .a letter of Francis Vazquez de Coronado , governor of Nueva Galicia , to the lord don Antonio de Mendosa , viceroy of Nueva Espanna . Dated in saint Michael of culiacan the 8. of march , 1539 of the hard passage from saint Michael of culiacan to Topira . the description of that province , and of another near unto the same , very rich in gold and precious stone . the number of the people which Vazquez carry with he in his journey thither ; and how great friar Marcus of Ni^a be honour by the Indians of Petatlan . y the help of God i mean to set forward from this city of saint Michael of culiacan towards Topira the 10. of April : neither can i any soon set forward , because the powder and match which your lordship send i , can be bring thither before that time , and i think it be now in Compostella . beside this , i be to pass many league over mighty high mountain , which reach up to the sky , and over a river , which at this present be so big and swell , that it can in no place be wade over . 118 and if i depart at the time aforesaid , they say we may wade over it . they tell i that from hence to Topira be not above 50. league ; and i have learn since that it be above four score league . i do not remember that i have write to your lordship the information which i have of Topira : and though i have write thereof unto Topira . you , yet because that since that time i have learn something moor , i think it meet to signify the same unto your lordship in these my letter . it may please your honour therefore to understand , that they tell i , that Topira be a very populous province , lie between two river , and that there be above 50. inhabit town therein . and that beyond the same there be another - another country great than it , the name whereof the Indians Sreater can not tell i , wherein there be great store or victual of Maiz , french peason , Axi or Pepper , Melon , and gourd , and great store of hen of the country . the people wear on their body gold , emerald , and other precious stone , and be serve common in gold and silver , wherewith they cover their house : and the chief man wear great chain of gold well wrought , about their neck , and be apparel with paint garment , and have store of wild cow ; and they say they enter not into their country , because themselves have no great store of people : those Indians be many in number , and very valiant . that which here i say , i learn by two other relation of Indians dwell near unto they . i mean to set forward at the time before mention , and i carry with i 150. horseman , and twelve spare horse , and 200. footman , crossebowman , and gunner . i take also with i live hog , sheep , and all such thing as i can get for money : assure your lordship that i mean not to return to Mexico , until i be able to inform your honour more perfect , what the state of that place be : and if i find aught that we may do good in , i will stay there , until i have advertise your lordship , that you may command what you will have do : and if it fall out so unlucky , 119 [ three . 364. i these may seem to be the pintado mention by Frier Marco de Niza in his 2. Chap. the english voyage A.D. J539 - that there be nothing of importance , i will seek to discover too . league far , wherein ( i hope in God ) there will be something find in which your lordship may employ all these gentleman , and those which shall come hither hereafter . i think i can choose but stay there : and the water , the season , and disposition of the country , and other accident will direct i what be best to be do . Frier Marco de Ni^a enter a good way into the country , accompany with Stephan Dorantez , the 7. of February last pass : when i depart from they , i leave they with above 100 Indians of Petatlan , and from the time of their come thither they great honour the father , show he all the courtesy they can possible . i can send you , nor describe unto you his entrance among they better than i have do in all my relation which i write in my letter from Compostella , and i signify unto you all thing to the full from the city of saint Michael : and though there be but the ten part of those thing , it be a great matter . herewithal i have send your lordship a letter , which i receive from the say father : the Indians tell i , that all the people of the country do great reverence he : and i believe he may travel many league far in that sort . he say , that if he find any good country , he will write to i thereof : i will not go thither without inform your lordship of my journey . i hope in God , that by one way or other we shall discover some good thing . a letter write by the most honourable lord don Antonio de Mendosa , viceroy of Nueva Espanna , to the emperor majesty . of certain nobleman which seek to discover the end of the firm land of Nueva Espanna towards the north . the arrival of Vazquez de Coronado with Frier Marco at S. Michael of culiacan , with commission to the governor of those part , to pacific the Indians , and not to make they slave any more . n the ship that go last from hence ( whereof Michael de Usnago be admiral ) i write unto your majesty , how i have send two franciscan friar to discover the end of this firm land , which stretch to the north . and because their journey fall out to great purpose then be look for , i will declare the whole matter from the beginning . it may please your majesty to call to mind how often i write unto your highness , that i desire to know the end of this province of Nueva Espanna , because it be so great a country , and that we have yet no knowledge thereof . neither have i only this desire ; for Nunno de Guzman depart out of this city of Mexico with 400. horseman , and 14000. Indians footman bear in these India , be the best man , and the best furnish , which have be see in these part : and he do so little with they , that the most part of they be consume in the enterprise , and can not enter nor discover any more than already be discover . after this the say Nunno Guzman be governor of Nueva Galicia , send captains and horseman forth diverse time , which speed no better than he have do . likewise the mark de valle Hernando Cortes send a captain with 2. ship to discover the coast : which 2. ship and the captain perish . after that he send again 2. other ship , one of the which 121 this be the port of Santa Cruz , in the isle of California . [ HL 365 - ] the english voyage be divide from her consort , and the master and certain mariner slay the captain , and usurp over the ship . after this they come to a island , where the master with certain mariner go on land , the Indians of the country slay they , and take their boat : and the ship with those that be in it , return to the coast of Nueva Galicia , where it run on ground . by the man which come home in this ship , the mark have knowledge of the country which they have discover : and then , either for the discontentment which he have with the bishop of saint Domingo , and with the judge of this royal audience in Mexico , or rather because of he so prosperous success in all thing here in Nueva Espanna , without seek any far intelligence of the state of that island , he set forward on that voyage with 3. ship , and with certain footman and horseman , not thorough furnish with thing necessary ; which fall out so contrary to his expectation , that the most part of the people which he carry with he , die of hunger . and although he have ship , and a country very near he abound with victual , yet can he never find mean to conquer it , but rather it seem , that God miraculous do hide it from he : and so he return home without achieve aught else of moment . after this , have here in my company Andrew Dorantez , which be one of those who be in the voyage of Panphilo Narvaez , i often be in hand with he , suppose that he be able to do your majesty great service , to employ he with forty or fifty horse , to search out the secret of those part : and have provide all thing necessary for his journey , and spend much money in that behalf , the matter be break off , i wot not how , and that enterprise be give over . yet of the thing which be provide for that purpose , i have leave i a negro , which return from the foresay voyage of Narvaez , with Dorantez , and certain slave which i have buy , and certain Indians which i have gather together , who be bear in those north part , who i send with 122 friar Marco de Ni^a , and his companion a franciscan friar , because they have be long travel , and exercise in those part , and have great experience in the affair of the Indies , and be man of good life and conscience , for who i obtain leave of their superior : and so they go with Francis Vazquez de Coronado , governor of Nueva Galicia unto the city of saint Michael of culiacan , which be the last province subdue by the Spaniard toward that quarter , be two hundred league distant from this city of Mexico . assoon as the governor , and the friar be come unto that city , he send certain of those Indians which i have give he , home into their country , to signify , and declare to the people of the same , that they be to understand , that your majesty have command they shall not hereafter be make slave , and that they shall not be afraid any more , but may return unto their house , and live peaceable in they , ( for before that time they have be great trouble by the evil deal which be use towards they ) and that your majesty will cause they to be chasten , which be the cause of their vexation . with these Indians about twenty day after return about 400 man ; which come before the governor say unto he , that they come on the behalf of all their countryman , to tell he , that they desire to see and know those man which do they so great a pleasure as to suffer they to return to their house , and to sow maiz for their sustenance : for by the space of many year they be drive to flee into the mountain , hide themselves like wild beast , for fear lest they shall be make slave , and that they and all the rest of their people be ready to do whatsoever shall be command they . who the governor comfort with good word , and give they victual , and stay they with he three or four day , wherein the friar teach they to make the sign of the cross , and to learn the name of our lord Jesus Christ , and they with great diligence seek to learn 123 A.D. 1539 - valle de lot Corazones mention by Vazquez de Coronado cap . i . the english voyage the same . after these day he send they home again , will they not to be afraid , but to be quiet , give they apparel , bead , knife , and other such like thing , which i have give he for such purpose . the say Indians depart very well please , and say , that whensoever he will send for they , they and many other will come to do whatsoever he will command they . the entrance be thus prepare , friar Marco and his companion , with the negro and other slave , and Indians which i have give he , go forward on their voyage io . or 12. day after . and because i have likewise advertisement of a certain province call Topira situate in the mountain , and have appoint the governor Vazquez de Coronado , that he shall use mean to learn the state thereof ; he suppose this to be a matter of great moment , determine himself to go and search it , have agree with the say friar , that he shall return by that part of the mountain , to meet with he in a certain valley call Valle de los Corazones , be 120. league distant from culiacan . the governor travel into this province ( as i have write in my former letter ) find great scarcity of victual there , and the mountain so craggy , that he can find no way to pass forward , and be enforce to return home to saint Michael : so that aswell in choose of the entrance , as in not be able to find the way , it seem unto all man , that God will shut up the gate to all those , which by strength of humane force have go about to attempt this enterprise , and have reveal it to a poor and barefooted friar . and so the friar begin to enter into the land , who because he find his entrance so well prepare , be very well receive ; and because he write the whole success of his voyage , accord to the instruction which i have give he to undertake the same , i will not write any more at large , but send your majesty this copy of all such thing as he observe in the same . a relation of the reverend father friar Marco [ he . 366. ] de Nifa , touch his discovery of the kingdom of Cevola or Cibola , situate about 30. degree of latitude , to the north of Nueva Espanna . Chap. 1. Frier Marco de ni ? a depart from saint Michael in the province of culiacan , stand in 24. degree of northerly latitude : and come to the town of Petatlan , receive many courtesy of the Indians there . depart from thence , he have information of many island , and of a great country inhabit with civil people ; he come to Vacupa : where during his abode , he hear news of Cevola , and of the state of the 7. city , and of other province , and of the rich island of pearl , which extent northward upon the coast . Frier Marco de ni ? a of the order of saint Francis , for the execution of the instruction of the right honourable lord don Antonio de Mendosa , viceroy and captain generali for the emperor majesty in new Spain , depart from the town of saint Michael in the province of culiacan on Friday the 7. of march , in the year 1539 have for my companion Frier Honoratus , and carry with i Stephan a negro , belong to Andrew Dorantez , and certain of those Indians which the say lord viceroy have make free , and buy for this purpose : who Francis Vazquez de Coronado governor of Nueva Galicia deliver i , and with many other Indians of Petatlan , and of the town call Cuchillo , which be some 50. league from Petatlan , who come to the valley of culiacan , show themselves to bee exceed glad , because they be certify by the i2 the english voyage Indians which have be set free , who the say governor have send before to advertise they of their liberty , that none of they from thenceforth shall be make slave , and that no man shall invade they , nor use they bad ; signify unto they , that the emperor majesty have will and command that it shall be so . with the foresay company i go on my voyage until i come to the town of Petatlan , find all the way great entertainment , and provision of victual , with rose , flower , and other such thing , and bower which they make for i of chalk and bough plait together in all place where there be no house . in this town of Petatlan i rest 3. day , because my companion Honoratus fall so sick , that i be constrain to leave he there behind . then , accord to my say instruction , i follow my journey as the holy ghost do lead i , without any merit of i , have in my company the say Stephan the negro of Dorantez , and certain of the Indians which have be set at liberty , and many of the people of the country , which give i great entertainment and welcome in all place where i come , and make i bower of tree , give i such victual as they have , although they be but small : because ( as they say ) it have not rain there in 3 year , and because the Indians of this country seek mean rather to hide themselves , than to sow corn , for fear of the Christians of the town of S. Michael , which be wont to make inroad even to that place , and to war upon they , and to carry they away captive . in all this way , which may be about 25. or 30. league from that part of Petatlan , i see nothing worthy the note , save that there come to seek i certain Indians from the island , where Fernando Cortes the mark of the valley have be , of who i be inform , that it be a island , and not firm land , as some suppose it to be . they come to you firm land upon certain raft of wood : and from the main to the island be but half a league by sea , little more or less . likewise cer-126 take Indians of another island great than this come a greatisland , to visit i , which island be far off , of who i be inform that there be 30. other small island , which be inhabit , but have small store of victual , save 2. new island of which have Maiz or corn of the country . Theise in - California dian have about their neck many great shell which be rtchmpearle . mother of pearl . i show they pearl which i carry with i for a show , and they tell i that there be in the island great store of they , and those very great : howbeit i see none of they . i follow my voyage through a desert of 4. day journey , have in my company both the Indians of the island , and those of the mountain which i have pass , and at the end of this desert i find other Indians which marvel to see i , because they have no knowledge of any Christians , have no traffic nor conversation with those Indians which i have pass , in regard of the great desert which be worse desert fiure between they . Theise Indians entertain i exceed daiesj°urne^-courteously , and give i great store of victual , and seek to touch my garment , and call i Hayota , which in their language signify a man come from heaven . Theise Indians i advertise by my interpreter , accord to my instruction , in the knowledge of our lord God in heaven , and of the emperor . in these country and in all place else by all way and mean possible , i seek in - [ he . 367. ] formation where any country be of moor city and people of civility and understanding , than those which i have find : and i can hear no news of any such : howbeit they tell i , that four or five day journey within the country , at the foot of the mountain , there be a large and mighty plain , wherein they tell i , ™ s be the that there be many great town , and people clad in Cotton : and when i show they certain metal which i ' carry with i , to learn what rich metal be in the land , they take the minerali of gold and tell i , that thereof be vessel among the people of that plain , and that they carry certain round green stone hang at their nostril , and at their ear , 127 Vacupa a town 40. league from the bay of California . the english voyage and that they have certain thin plate of that gold , wherewith they scrape off their sweat , and that the wall of their temple be cover therewith , and that they use it in all their household vessel . and because this valley be distant from the sea-coast , and my instruction be not to leave the coast , i determine to leave the discovery thereof until my return ; at which time i may do it more commodious . thus i travel three day journey through town inhabit by the say people , of who i be receive as i be of those which i have pass , and come unto a town of reasonable bigness , call Vacupa , where they show i great courtesy , and give i great store of good victual , because the soil be very fruitful , and may be water . this town be forty league distant from the sea and because i be so far from the sea , it be two day before passion Sunday , i determine to stay there until easter , to inform my self of the island , whereof i say before that i have information . and so i send certain Indians to the sea by three several way , who i command to bring i some Indians of the seacoast and of some of those island , that i may receive information of they : and i send Stephan Dorantez the negro another way , who i command to go direct northward fifty or threescore league , to see if by that way he may learn any news of any notable thing which we seek to discover , and i agree with he , that if he find any knowledge of any people and rich country which be of great importance , that he shall go no further , but shall return in person , or shall send i certain Indians with that token which we be agree upon , to wit , that if it be but a mean thing , he shall send i a white cross of one handful long ; and if it be any great matter , one of two handful long ; and if it be a country great and better than Nueva Espanna , he shall send i a great cross . So the 12 say Stephan depart from i on Passion-sunday after dinner : and within four day after the messenger of Stephan return unto i with a great cross as high as a man , and they bring i word from Stephan , that i shall forthwith come away after he , for he have find people which give he information of a very mighty province , and that he have certain Indians in his company , which have be in the say province , and that he have send i one of the say Indians . this indian tell i , that it be thirty day fr°m Vacupa journey from the town where Stephan be , unto the ayes^6 first city of the say province , which be call Cevola . jOumey . he affirm also that there be seven great city in this province , all under one lord , the house whereof be make of lime and stone , and be very great , and the least of they with one loft above head , and some of two and of three loft , and the house of the lord of the province of four , and that all of they join one unto the other in good order , and that in the gate of the principali house there be many turques-stone cunning wrought , whereof he say they have there great plenty : also that the people of this city go very well apparel : and that beyond this there be other province , all which ( he say ) be much great than these seven city . i give credit to his speech , because i find he to be a man of good understanding : but i defer my departure to follow Stephan Dorantes , both because i think he will stay for i , and also to attend the return of my messenger which i have send unto the sea , who return unto i upon easter day , bring with they certain inhabitant of the sea-coast , and of two of the island . of who i understand , that the island above mention be scarce of victual , as i have learn before , and that they be inhabit by people , which be greatpearles shell of pearl upon their forehead , and they say that tmd much gold they have great pearl , and much gold . they in - isk °f form i of four and thirty island , lie one near ichare’^ unto another : they say that the people on the sea-coast in number . ix 129 1 have small store of victual , as also those of the island , and that they traffic one with the other upon raft . this coast stretch northward as be to be see . Theise Indians of the coast bring i certain target make of cow-hydes very well dress , which be so large , that they cover they from the head to the very foot , with a hole in the top of the same to look out before : they be so strong , that a crossbow ( as i suppose ) will not pierce they . [ Iii . 368. ] Chap. 2. he have new information of the seven city by certain Indians call pintado , and of three other kingdom call Marata , Acus , and Totonteac , be country very rich in turquese and hide of cattle . follow his voyage through those country , he take possession thereof for the emperor majesty , and of the Indians be much honour and serve with victual . the same day come three Indians of those which i call pintado , because i see their face , breast and arm paint . Theise dwell far up into the country towards the east , and some of they border upon the seven city , which say they come to see i , because they have hear of i : and among other thing , they give i information of the seven city , and of the other province , which the indian that Stephan send i have tell i of , almost in the very same manner that Stephan have send i word ; and so i send back the people of the sea-coast : and two Indians of the island say they will go with i seven or eight day . so with these and with the three pintado above mention , i depart from Vacupa upon Easter Tuesday , the same way that Stephan go , from who i receive new messenger with a cross of the bigness of the first which he send i : which hasten i forward , 13° and assure i that the land which i seek for , be the great and best country in all those part . the say messenger tell i particular without fail in any one point , all that which the first messenger have tell i , and much more , and give i more plain information thereof . so i travel that day be easter Tuesday , and two day more , the very same way that Stephan have go : at the end of which 3 day they tell i , that from that place a man may travel in thirty day to the city of Cevola , which be the first of the seven . neither do one only tell i thus much , but very many ; who tell i very particular of the greatness of the house , and of the fashion of they , as the first messenger have inform i . also they tell i , that beside these seven city , there be 3. other kingdom which be call Marata , Acus , and Totonteac . i inquire of they wherefore they travel so far from their house ? they say that they go for Turqueses , and hide of cow , and other thing ; and that of all these there be great abundance in this country . likewise i inquire how , and by what mean they obtain these thing ? they tell i , by their service , and by the sweat of their brow , and that they go unto the first city of the province which be call Cevola , and that they serve they in till their ground , and in other business , and that they give they hide of ox , which they have in those place , and turquese for their service , and that the people of this city wear very fine and excellent turquese hang at their ear and at their nostril . they say also , that of these turquese they make fine work upon the principali gate of the house of this city . they tell i , that the apparel which the inhabitant of Cevola wear , be a gown of cotton down to the foot , with a button at the neck , and a long string hang down at the same , and that the sleeve of these gown be as broad beneath as above . they say , they gird themselves with girdle of turquese , and that over these 131 the english voyage coat some be good apparel , other hide of cow very well dress , which they take to be the best apparel of that country , whereof they have there great quantity . likewise the woman go apparel , and cover down to the foot . Theise Indians give i very good entertainment , and curious inquire the day of my departure from Vacupa , that at my return they may provide i of food and lodging . they bring certain sick folk before i , that i may heal they , and seek to touch my apparel , and give i certain cow-hydes so well trim and dress , that by they a man may conjecture that they be wrought by civil people , and all of they affirm , ithat they come from Cevola . the next day i follow my journey , and carry with i the pintado , i come to another village where i be well receive by the people of the same : who likewise seek to touch my garment , and give i as particular knowledge of the land aforesaid , as i have receive of those which meet i before : and also tell i , that from that place certain people be go with Stephan Dorantez four or five day journey . and here i find a great cross , which Stephan have leave i for a sign , that the news of the good country increase , and leave word , that with all haste they shall send i away , and that he will stay for i at the end of the first desert that he meet with . here i set up two cross , and take possession accord to my instruction , because that the country seem better unto i then that which i have pass , and that i think it meet to make a act of possession as far as that place . in this manner i travail five day , always find inhabit place with great hospitality and entertainment , and many turquese , and ox-hides , and the like report concern the country . here i understand , that after two day journey i shall find a desert where there be no food ; but that there be certain go before to 132 build i lodging , and to carry food for i : whereupon i hasten my way , hope to find Stephan at the end thereof , because in that place he have leave word that he will stay for i . before i come to the desert , i meet with a very pleasant town , by a pleasant reason of great store of water convey thither to water the same . here 1 meet with many people both man and woman clothe in cotton , and some cover with oxe-hydes , which general they take for better apparel than that of cotton . all the people of this village go in caconado , that be to say , with Turqueses hang at their nostril and ear : which turquese they call Cacona . among other , the lord of this village come unto i , and two of his brethren very well apparel in cotton , who also be in caconado , each of they have his collar of turquese about his neck : and they present unto i many wild beast , as cony , quail , Maiz , nut of pine tree , and all in great abundance , and ofier i many turquese , and dress oxe-hydes , and very fair vessel to drink in , and other thing : whereof i will receive no whit . and have my garment of grey cloth , which in Spain be call farago^a , the lord of this village , and the other Indians touch my gown with their hand , and tell i , that of such cloth there be great store in Totonteac , and that the store of woolpeople of that country wear the same . whereat i clot^and laugh , and say that it be nothing else but such fofgnteac 0 apparel of cotton as they wear . and they reply : we will have thou think that we understand , that that apparel which thou wear , and that which we wear be of diverse sort . understand thou , that in Cevola all the house be full of that apparel which we wear , but in Totonteac there be certain little beast , from who they take that thing wherewith such apparel as thou wear , be make . i pray they to inform i more plain of this matter . and they tell i that the say beast be about the bigness of the two 133 collar ofturquese two or three time double . the english voyage branch or spaniel which Stephan carry with he , and they say that there be great store of that cattle in Totonteac . Chap. 3. he enter into a desert , and the Indians suffer he to want nothing necessary . follow his voyage , he come into a fertile valley , and have certain knowledge give he ( as he have before ) of the state of Cevola and of Totonteac ; and that the coast of the sea in 35. degree trend much to the westward : and also of the kingdom of Marata and Acus . the next day i enter into the desert , and where i be to dine , i find bower make , and victual in abundance by a river side : and at night i find bower and victual in like sort , and after that manner i find for 4. day travel : all which time the wilderness continue . at the end of these four day , i enter into a valley very well inhabit with people . at the first village there meet i many man and woman with victual , and all of they have turquese hang at their nostril and ear , and some have collar of turquese like those which the lord of the village before i come to the desert , and his two brethren wear : save that they wear they but single about their neck , and these people wear they three or four time double , and go in good apparel , and skin of ox : and the woman wear of the say turquese at their nostril and ear , and very good waistcoat and other garment . here there be as great knowledge of Cevola , as in Nueva Espanna of temis-titan , and in Peru of Cuzco : and they tell we particular the manner of their house , lodging , street and marketplace , as man that have be oftentimes there , and as those which be furnish from thence with thing necessary for the service of their household , as those also have do , which i already have pass . i tell they it be impossible that the house shall be 134 make in such sort as they inform i , and they for my better understanding take earth or ash , and pour water thereupon , and show i how they lay stone upon it , and how the building grow up , as they continue lay stone thereon , until it mount aloft . i ask they whether the man of that country have wing to mount up unto those loft : whereat they laugh , and show i a ladder in as good sort as i my self be able to describe it . than they take a staff and hold it over their head , and say that the loft be so high one above another . likewise here i have information of the woollen cloth [ three . 370. ] of Totonteac , where they say be house like those of Cevola , and better and more in number , and that it be a great province , and have no governor . here i understand that the coast of the sea trended much towards the west : for unto the entrance of this first desert which i pass , the coast still stretch northward : and because the trending of the coast be a thtsgradu-thing of great importance , i be desirous to know and see it : and i see plain , that in 35. degree the e^e^ees'at coast stretch to the west , whereat i rejoice no the least . less , then of the good news within land , and so i return back to proceed on my journey . through the foresay valley i travail five day journey , which be inhabit with goodly people , and so abound with victual , that it suffice to feed above three thousand horseman : it be all well water and like a garden : the burroughs and town be half and a quarter of a league long , and in all these village , i find very ample report of Cevola , whereof they make such particular relation unto i , as people which go yearly thither to earn their live . here i find a man bear in Cevola , who tell i that he come thither , have escape from the governor or lieutenant of the town ; for the lord of these seven city live and abide in one of those town call Ahacus , and in the rest he appoint lieutenant Ahacus . 135 the english voyage under he . this townsman of Cevola be a white man of a good complexion , somewhat well in year , and of far great capacity than the inhabitant of this valley , or then those which i have leave behind i . he say that he will go with i , that i may beg his pardon : and of he i learn many particular : he tell i that Cevola be a great city , inhabit with great store of people , and have many street and marketplace : and that in some part of this city there be certain very great house of five story high , wherein the chief of the city assemble themselves at certain day of the year . he say that the house be of lime and stone , accord as other have tell i before , and that the gate , and small pillar of the principali house be of Turqueses , and all the vessel wherein they be serve , and the other ornament of their house be of gold : and that the other six city be build like unto this , whereof some be big : and that Ahacus be the chief of they . he say that towards the southeast there be a kingdom call Marata , and that there be wont to be many , and those great city , which be all build of house of stone , with diverse loft ; and that these have and do wage war with the lord of the seven city , through which war this kingdom of Marata be for the most part waste , although it yet continue and maintain war against the other . likewise he say , that the kingdom call Totanteac lie towards the west , which he say be a very mighty province , replenish with infinite store of people and riches : and that in the say kingdom they be woollen cloth like that which i wear , and other fine sort of woollen cloth make of the fleece of those beast which they describe before unto i : and that they be a very civil people . Moreover he tell i , that there be another great province and kingdom call Acus ; for there be Acus , and Ahacus with a aspiration , which be the principali of the seven city : and Acus without a aspiration be a kingdom and province of it self . he tell i 136 also , that the apparel which they wear in Cevola be after the same manner as they before have certify i , and that all the inhabitant of the city lie upon bed raise a good height from the ground , with quilt and canopy over they , which cover the say bed : and he tell i that he will go with i to Cevola and far also , if i will take he with i . the like relation be give unto i in this town by many other , but not so particular . i travel three day journey through this valley : the inhabitant whereof make i exceed great cheer and entertainment . in this valley i see above a thousand ox-hides most excellent trim and dress . and here also i see far great store of turquese and chain make thereof , then in all place which i have pass ; and they say , that all come from the city of Cevola , whereof they have great knowledge , as also of the kingdom of Marata , and of the kingdom of Acus and Totonteac . Chap. 4. of a very great beast with one horn upon his forehead ; and of the courtesy which the Indians show Frier Marcus of Niga , in his voyage . also how cruel Stephan Dorantez and his companion be use upon their arrival at Cevola , by the lord thereof . here they show i a hide half as big again mlghtie as the hide of a great ox , and tell i that it be the skin of a beast which have but one horn upon ' he forehead , 8c that this horn bend towards he [ three . 371. ] breast , and that out of the same go a point right forward , wherein he have so great strength , that it will break any thing how strong so ever it be , if he run against it , and that there be great store of these beast in that country . the colour of the hide be of the colour of a great goatskin , and the hair be a finger thick . here i have messenger from Stephan which bring i word , that by this time he be come to 137 the far part of the desert , and that he be very joyful , because the far he go , the more perfect knowledge he have of the greatness of the country , and send i word , that since his departure from i , he never have find the indian in any lie ; for even unto that very place he have find all in such manner as they have inform he , and hope that he shall find the like at his arrival in the valley which he be go unto , as he have find in the village before pass . i set up cross , and use those act and ceremony , which be to be do according to my instruction . the inhabitant request i to stay here three or four day , because that from this place there be four day journey unto the desert , and from the first entrance into the same desert unto the fifteen dale city of Cevola be 15 great day journey more ; also that they will provide victual for i and other the end of they . i r . r t .... , , desert to necessary for that voyage . likewise they tell i , Cevola or that with Stephan the negro be go above 300 Clvola . man to bear he company , and to carry victual after he , and that in like sort many of they will go with i to serve i , because they hope to return home rich . i thank they , and will they to set thing in order with speed , and so i rest there three day , wherein i always inform my self of Cevola , and of as many other thing as i can learn , and call many Indians unto i , and examine they several , and all of they agree in one tale , and tell i of the great multitude of people , and of the order of the street , of the greatness of the house , and of the strength of the gate , agree altogether with that which the rest before have tell i . after three day many assemble themselves to go with i , 30 of the principal of who i take , be very well apparel , and with chain of turquese , which some of they wear five or six time double , and other people to carry thing necessary for they and i , and so set forward on my voyage . 138 thus i enter into the second desert on the 9 of may , the second de-and travel the first day by a very broad and beat way , and we come to dinner unto a water , where the Indians have make provision for i : and at night we come to another water , where i find a house which they have full make up for i , and another house stand mad where Stephan lodge when he pass that way , and many old cottage and many sign of fire which the people have make that travel to Cevola by this way . in this sort i travel 12 day journey be always well provide of twelve day victual , of wild beast , hare , and partridge of the doarney-same colour and taste with those of Spain although they be not so big , for they be somewhat less . here meet we a indian the son of one of the chief man that accompany i , which have go before with Stephan , who come in a great fright , have his face and body all cover with sweat , and show exceed sadness in his countenance ; and he tell i that a day journey before Stephan come to Cevola he send his great mace make of a gourd by his messenger , as he be always wont to send they before he , that he may know in what sort he come unto they , which gourd have a string of bell upon it , and two feather one white and another red , in token that he demand safe conduct , and that he come peaceable . and when they come to Cevola before the magistrate , which the lord of the ci tie have place there for his lieutenant , they deliver he the say great gourd , who take the same in his hand , and after he have spy the bell , in a great rage and fury he cast it to the ground , and will the messenger to get they pack with speed , for he know well enough what people they be , and that they shall will they in no case to enter into the city , for if they do he will put they all to death . the messenger return and tell Stephan how thing have pass , who answer they , that it make no great matter , and will needs proceed on his voyage till he come to 139 the city of Cevola : where he find man that will not let he enter into the town , but shut he into a great house which stand without the city , and straightway take all thing from he which he carry to truck and barter with they , and certain turquese , and other thing which he have receive of the indian by the way , and they keep he there all that night without give he meat or drink , and the next day in the morning this indian be a thirst , and go out of the house to drink at a river that be near at hand , and within a little while after he see Stephan run away , and the people follow he , and slay certain of the Indians which go in his company . and when this indian see these thing , he hide himself on the bank of the river , and afterward cross the high way of the desert . the Indians that go with i hear these news begin incontinent to lament , and i think these heavy and bad news will cost i my life , neither do i fear so much the loss of my own life , as that i shall not be able to return [ three . 372. ] to give information of the greatness of that country , where our lord God may be glorify : and straightway i cut the cord of my budget which i carry with i full of merchandise for traffic , which i will not do till then , nor give any thing to any man , and begin to divide all that i carry with i among the principali man , will they not to be afraid , but to go forward with i , and so they do . And go on our way , within a day journey of Cevola we meet two other Indians of those which go with Stephan , which be bloody and wound in many place : and assoon as they come to we , they which be with i begin to make great lamentation . Theise wound Indians i ask for Stephan , and they agree in all point with the first Indian say , that after they have put he into the foresay great house without give he meat or drink all that day and all that night , they take from Stephan all the thing which he carry with he . the next day when 140 the sun be a lance high , Stephan go out of the house , and some of the chief man with he , and sudden come store of people from the city , who assoon as he see he begin to run away and we likewise , and forthwith they shoot at we and wound we , and certain dead man fall upon we , and so we lay till night and dare not stir , and we hear great rumour in the city , and see many man and woman keep watch and ward upon the wall thereof , and after this we can not see Stephan any more , and we think they have shoot he to death , as they have do all the rest which go with he , so that none be escape but we only . Chap. 5. the situation and greatness of the city of Cevola , and how friar Marcus take possession thereof and of other province , call the same . the new kingdom of saint Francis , and how after his departure from thence be preserve by God in so dangerous a voyage , he arrive at Compostella in Nueva Galicia . have consider the former report of the Indians , and the evil mean which i have to prosecute my voyage as i desire , i think it not good wilful to loose my life as Stephan do : and so i tell they , that God will punish those of Cevola , and that the viceroy when he shall understand what have happen , will send many Christians to chastise they : but they will not believe i , for they say that no man be able to withstand the power of Cevola . and herewithal i leave they , and go aside two or three stone cast , and when i return i find a indian of i which i have bring from Mexico call Marcus , who weep and say unto i : father , these man have consult to kill we , for they say , that through your and Stephans mean their father be slay , and that neither man nor woman of they shall remain unslain . 141 A.D. 1539 - then again i divide among they certain other thing which i have , to appease they , whereupon they be somewhat pacify , albeit they still show great grief for the people which be slay . i request some of they to go to Cevola , to see if any other indian be escape , with intent that they may learn some news of Stephan ; which i can not obtain at their hand . when i see this , i say unto they , that i purpose to see the city of Cevola , whatsoever come of it . they say that none of they will go with i . at the last when they see i resolute , two of the chief of they say they will go with i ; with who and with my Indians and interpreter i follow my way , till i come within sight of Cevola , which be situate on a plain at the foot of a round hill , and make show to be a fair city , and be better seat than any that i have see in these part . the house be build in order , accord as the indian tell i , all make of stone with diverse story , and flat roof , as far as i can discern from a mountain , whither i ascend to view the city . the people be somewhat white , they wear apparel , and lie in bed , their weapon be bow , they have emrald and other jewel , although they esteem none so much as turquese , wherewith they adorn the wall of the porch of their house , and their apparel and vessel , and they use they in stead of money through all the country . their apparel be of cotton and of ox hide , and this be their most commendable and honourable apparel . they use vessel of gold and silver , for they have no other mettle , whereof there be great use and more abundance than in Peru , and they buy the most rich same for turquese in the province of the pintado , where ” and der^n t^iere be say to mine °f great abundance . of other the province of kingdom i can not obtain so particular instruction . the pintado . diverse time i be tempt to go thither , because i know i can but hazard my life , and that i have offer unto God the first day that i begin my journey : in the end i begin to be afraid , consider in what danger i 142 shall put my self , and that if i shall dye , the knowledge of this country shall be lose , which in my judgement be the great and the best that hitherto have be discover : and when i tell the chief man , what a goodly city Cevola seem unto i , they answer i [ three . 373. ] that it be the least of the seven city , and that Toton - Totonteac the teac be the great and best of they all , because it have so many house and people , that there be no end of they . pnv-tnce . have see the disposition and situation of the place , i think good to name that country el Nuevo reyno de san Francisco : in which place i make a great heap of stone by the help of the Indians , and on the top thereof i set up a small slender cross because i want mean to make a great , and say that i set up that cross and heap in the name of the most honourable lord don Antonio de Mendosa viceroy and captain generali of Nueva Espanna , for the emperor our lord , in token of possession , accord to my instruction . which possession i say that i take in that place of all the seven city , 8c of the kingdom of Totonteac , of Acus , and of Marata . thus i return with much more fear than victual , he retume . and go until i find the people which i have leave behind i , with all the speed that i can make , who i overtake in two day travel , and go in their company till i have pass the desert , where i be a desert . not make so much of as before : for both man and woman make great lamentation for the people which be slay at Cevola , and with fear i hasten from the people of this valley , and travel ten league a valley . the first day , and so i go daily eight or ten league , without stay until i have pass the second desert . a second and though i be in fear , yet i determine to go to desert . the great plain , whereof i say before , that i have information , be situate at the foot of the mountain , and in that place i understand , that this plain be inhabit for many day journey towards the east , but i dare not enter into it , consider , that if hereafter ! 43 we shall inhabit this other country of the seven city , and the kingdom before mention , that then i may better discover the same , without put my self in hazard , and leave it for this time , that i may give relation of the thing which i have now see . at the entrance of this plain 1 see but seven town only of a reasonable bigness , which be a far off in a low valley be very green and a most fruitful soil , out of which run many river . i be inform that there be much gold in this valley , and that the inhabitant work it into vessel and thin plate , wherewith they strike and take off their sweat , and that they be people that will not suffer those of the other side of the plain to traffic with they , and they can not tell i the cause thereof . here i set up two cross , and take possession of the plain and valley in like sort and order , as i do at other place before mention . and from thence i return on my voyage with as much haste as 1 can make , until i come to the city of saint Michael in the province of culiacan , think there to have find Francis Vazquez de Coronado governor of Nueva Galicia , and find he not there , i proceed on my journey Compostella in till i come to the city of Compostella , where i find 21. degree of i wr | te not here many other particularity , because latitude . , .. , . r t i i they be impertinent to this matter : 1 only report that which i have see , and which be tell i concern the country through which i travel , and of those which i have information of . the relation of Francis Vazquez de Coronado , captain generail of the people which be send in the name of the emperor majesty to the country of Cibola new discover , which he send to don Antonio de Mendo9a viceroy of Mexico , of such thing as happen in his voyage from the 22. of April in the year 1540 which depart from culiacan forward , and of such thing as he find in the country which he pass . Chap. 1. Francis Vazquez depart with his army from culiacan , and after diverse trouble in his voyage , arrive at the valley of the people call los Caracones , which he find barren of Maiz : for obtain whereof he send to the valley call the valley of the lord : he be inform of the greatness of the valley of the people call Caracones , and of the nature of those people , and of certain island lie along that coast . he 22. of the month of April last pass i depart from the province of culiacan with part of the army , and in such order as 1 mention unto your lordship , and accord to the success i assure my self , by all likelihood that i shall not bring all my army together in this enterprise : because the trouble have be so great and the want of victual , that i think all this year will not be sufficient to perform this enterprise , and if it shall be perform in so short a time , it will be to the great loss of our people . for as i write unto your lordship , i be fourscore day in travail to culiacan , in all which time i and those gentleman my companion which be horseman , carry on our back , ix 145 king [ he . 374 - ] this be but 200. league from Mexico . and on our horse , a little victuali , so that from henceforward we carry none other needful apparel with we , that be above a pound weight : and all this notwithstanding , and though we put our self to such a small proportion of victual which we carry , for all the order that possible we can take , we be drive to our shift . and no marvel , because the way be rough and long : and with the carriage of our harquebuss down the mountain and hill , and in the passage of river , the great part of our corn be spoil . and because i send your lordship our voyage draw ' in a map , i will speak no more thereof in this my letter . thirty league before we arrive at the place which the father provinciali tell we so well of in his relation , i send Melchior Diaz before with fifteen horse , give he order to make but one day journey of two , because he may examine all thing , against my arrival : who travail four day journey through exceed rough mountain where he find neither victual , nor people , nor information of any thing , save that he find two or three poor little village , contain 20. or 30. cottage a piece , and by the inhabitant thereof he understand that from thence forward there be nothing but exceed rough mountain which run very far , utter disinhabit and void of people . and because it be labour lose , i will not write unto your lordship thereof . it grieve the whole company , that a thing so high commend , and whereof the father have make so great brag , shall be find so contrary , and it make they suspect that all the rest will fall out in like sort . which when i perceive i seek to encourage they the best i can , tell they that your lordship always be of opinion , that this voyage be a thing cast away , and that we shall fix our cogitation upon those seven city , and other province , whereof we have knowledge : that there shall be the end of our enterprise : and 146 ... i540 , with this resolution and purpose we all march cheerfully through a very bid way which be not passable but one by one , or else we must force out with pioner the path which we find , wherewith the soldier be not a little offend , find all that the friar have say to be quite contrary : for among other thing which the father say and affirm , this be one , that the way be plain and good , and that there be but one small hill of half a league in length . and yet in truth there be mountain which although the way be well mend can not be pass without great danger of break the horse neck : and the way be such , that of the cattle which your lordship send we for the provision of our army we lose a great part in the voyage through the roughness of the rock . the lamb and sheep lose their hoof in the way : and of those which i bring from culiacan , i leave the great part at the river of Lachimi , because they can not the river of keep company with we , and because they may come lachimi . soft after we , four man on horseback remain with they which be now come unto we , and have bring we not past four and twenty lamb , and four sheep , for all the rest be dead with travail through that rough passage , although they travail but two league a day , and rest themselves every day . at length i arrive at the valley of the people call the valley of Caracones , the 26. day of the month of May : and from culiacan until i come thither , i can not help my ara~ self , save only with a great quantity of bread of Maiz : for see the Maiz in the field be not yet ripe , i be constrain to leave they all behind i . in this valley of the Caracones we find more store of people then in any other part of the country which we have pass , and great store of tillage . but i understand that there be store thereof in another valley call the talk deal lord valley , which i will not disturb with force , sennor-but send thither Melchior Diaz with ware of exchange to procure some , and to give the say Maiz to the 147 indian our friend which we bring with we , and to some other that have lose their cattle in the way , and be not able to carry their victual so far which they bring from culiacan . it please God that we gate some small quantity of Maiz with this traffic , whereby certain Indians be relieve and some Spaniard . and by that time that we be come to this valley of the Caracones , some ten or twelve of our horse be dead through weariness : for be overcharge with great burden , and have but little meat , they can not endure the travail . likewise some of our negro and some of our Indians dye here ; which be no small want unto we for the performance of our enterprise . they the valley de tell i that this valley of the Caracones be five day isumt^ve5 journey fr°m the western sea i send for the indian davet intima of the sea coast to understand their estate , and while i from the wes - stay for they the horse rest : and i stay there team sea . four day , in which space the Indians of the sea coast [ three . 375. ] come unto i : which tell i , that two day sail seven or eight from their coast of the sea , there be seven or eight ^t^isks s^an^s tight over against they , well inhabit with of California , people , but bad furnish with victual , and be a rude people : and they tell i , that they have see a ship see a ship pass by not far from the shore : which i coast . wot not what to think whither it be one or those that go to discover the country , or else a ship of the Portugal . 148 they come to chichilticale : after they have rest themselves two day there , they enter into a country very barren of victual , and hard to travail for thirty league , beyond which they find a country very pleasant , and a river call Rio deal Lino , they fight with the Indians be assault by they , and with victory vanquish their city , they relieve themselves of their pinch hunger . 1 depart from the Caracones , and always keep by the sea coast as near as i can judge , and in very deed i still find my self the far off : in such sort that when i arrive at chichilticale i find my self ten day journey from the sea : and the father provinciali say that it be only but five league distance , and that he have see the same . we all conceive great grief and be not a little confound , when we see that we find every thing contrary to the information which he have give your lordship . the Indians of chichilticale say , that if at any time they go to the sea for fish , and other thing that they carry , they go traverse , and be ten day journey in go thither . and i be of opinion that the information which the Indians give i shall be true . the sea return towards the west right over against the Caracones the space of ten or twelve league . where i find that your lordship ship be see , which go to discover the haven of chichilticale , which father Marcus of ni ? a say to be in five and thirty degree . God know what grief of mind i have sustain : because i be in doubt that some mishap be fall unto they : and if they follow the coast , as they say they will , as long as their victual last which they carry with they , whereof i leave they store in culiacan , and if they be not fall into some misfortune , i hope well in God that by this they have make some good discovery , and in this respect their long stay out may be pardon . 149 chichilticale ten day journey from the sea . this chichil-ticaleisindeede but in 28. deg . i rest my self two day in chichilticale , and to have do well i shall have stay long , in respect that here we find our horse so tire : but because we want victual , we have no leisure to rest any long : i enter the confine of the desert country on the 23. of saint Johns eve , and to refresh our former travail , the June . first day we find no grass , but worse way of mountain and bid passage , than we have pass already : and the horse be tire , be great molest therewith : so that in this last desert we lose more horse than we have lose before : and some of my Indians which be our friend die , and one Spaniard who name be Spinosa ; and two negro , which die with eat certain herb for lack of victual . from this place i send before i one day journey the master don Garcia of the field don Garcia Lopez de Cardenas with fifteen nas^^^ ' h°rses to discover the country , and prepare our way : ' wherein he do like himself , and accord to the confidence which your lordship repose in he . and well i wot he fail not to do his part : for as i have inform your lordship , it be most wicked way , at least thirty league and more , because they be inaccessible mountain . a godly and but after we have pass these thirty league , we fruitful con - founj fresh river , and grass like that of Castille , and ’ special of that sort which we call Scaramoio , many nut tree and mulberry tree , but the nut tree differ from those of Spain in the leaf : and there be flax , but chief near the bank of a certain river which Rio deal Lino , therefore we call el Rio del Lino , that be say , the river of flax : we find no Indians at all for a day travail , but afterward four Indians come out unto we in peaceable manner , say that they be send even to that desert place to signify unto we that we be welcome , and that the next day all the people will come out to meet we on the way with victual : and the master of the field give they a cross , will they to signify to those of their city that they shall not fear , and they shall 150 rather let the people stay in their house , because i come only in the name of his majesty to defend and aid they . and this do , Fernando Alvarado return to advertise i , that certain Indians be come unto they in peaceable manner , and that two of they stay for my come with the master of the field . whereupon i go unto they and give they bead and certain short cloak , will they to return unto their city , and bid [ three . 376. ] they to stay quiet in their house , and fear nothing . and this do i send the master of the field to search wisefore-wheth there be any bad passage which the Indians cast it may keep against we , and that he shall take and defend it until the next day that i shall come thither . so he go , and find in the way a very bad passage , where we may have sustain very great harm : wherefore there he seat himself with his company that be with he : and that very night the Indians come to take that passage to defend it , and find it take , they assault our man there , and as they tell i , treason of they assault they like valiant man ; although in the the n^ans-ende they retire and flee away ; for the master of the field be watchful , and be in order with his company : the Indians in token of retreat sound on a certain small trumpet , and do no hurt among the Spaniard . the very same night the master of the great forecast field certify i hereof . whereupon the next day in the best order that i can i depart in so great want master . of victuali , that i think that if we shall stay one day long without food , we shall all perish for hunger , especial the Indians , for among we all we have not two bushel of corn : wherefore it behoove i to prick forward without delay . the Indians here and their make fire , and be answer again afar off as orderly as we for our life can have do , to give their fellow understanding , how we march and where we arrive . 0 . assoon as i come within sight of this city of Granada , at city y i send don Garcias Lopez campmaster , friar Daniel , Cibola . 151 the arrogande of the people of Cibola . the english voyage and friar Lewis , and Fernando Vermizzo somewhat before with certain horseman , to seek the Indians and to advertise they that our come be not to hurt they , but to defend they in the name of the emperor our lord , accord as his majesty have give we in charge : which message be deliver to the inhabitant of that country by a interpreter . but they like arrogant people make small account thereof ; because we seem very few in their eye , and that they may destroy we without any difficulty ; and they strike friar Lewis with a arrow on the gown , which by the grace of God do he no harm . in the mean space i arrive with all the rest of the horseman , and footman , and find in the field a great sort of the Indians which begin to shoot at we with command - their arrow : and because i will obey your will and mean to use ^g command of the mark , i will not let my and they savage people charge they , forbid my company , which entreat i that they may set upon they , in any wise to provoke they , say that that which the enemy do be nothing , and that it be not meet to set upon so few people . on the other side the Indians perceive that we stir not , take great stomach and courage unto they : insomuch that they come hard to our horse heal to shoot at we with their arrow . whereupon see that it be now time to stay no long , and that the friar also be off the same opinion , i set upon they without any danger : for sudden they flee part to the city which be near and well fortify , and other into the field , which way they can shift : and some of the indian be slay , and more have be if i will have suffer they to have be pursue . but consider that hereof we may reap but small profit , because the Indians that be without , be few , there be and those which be retire into the city , with they t^towne ' which stay within at the first be many , where the ' comara^ist . victual be whereof we have so great need , i assemble gen . cap . wonderful > - my people , and divide they as i think best to assault ! 52 the city , and i compass it about : and because the famine which we sustain suffer no delay , my self with certain of these gentleman and soldier put our self on foot , and command that the crossbow and harquebusier shall give the assault , and shall beat the enemy from the wall , that they may not hurt we , and i assault the wall on one side , where they tell i there be a scale ladder set up , and that there be one gate : but the crossebowman sudden break the string of their bow , and the harquebusier do nothing at all : for they come thither so weak and feeble , that scarce they can stand on their foot : and by this mean the people that be aloft on the wall to defend the town be no way hinder from do we all the mischief they can : so that twice they strike i to the ground with infinite number of great stone , which they cast down : and if i have not be defend with a excellent good headpiece which i wear , i think it have go hardly with i : nevertheless my company take i up with two small wound in the face , and a arrow stick in my foot , and many blow with stone on my arm and leg , and thus i go out of the battle very weak . i think that if don Garcias Lopez they defend the wait with stone like those of Hochelaga . de Cardenas the second time that they strike i to the ground have not succour i with stride over i like a good knight , i have be in far great danger than i be . but it please God that the Indians yield themselves unto we , and that this city be take : and such store of Maiz be find therein , as our necessity [ three . 377. ] require . the master of the field , and don Pedro de Tovar , and Fernando de Alvarado , and Paul de Melgosa captain of the footman escape with certain knock with stone : though none of they be wound with arrow , yet Agoniez Quarez be wound in one arm with the shot of a arrow , and one Torres a townsman of Panuco be shoot into the face with another , and two footman more have two small wound with arrow . and because my armour be gild and glitter , they 153 excellent house four or five loft high . all lay load on i , and therefore i be more wound than the rest , not that i do more than they , or put my self forward than the rest , for all these gentleman and soldier carry themselves as manful as be look for at their hand . i be now well recover i thank God , although somewhat bruise with stone . likewise in the skirmish which we have in the field , two or three other soldier be hurt , and three horse slay , one of don Lopez , the other of Viliega and the three of don Alonso Manrique , and seven or eight other horse be wound ; but both the man and horse be whole and sound . Chap. 3. of the situation and state of the seven city call the kingdom of Cibola , and of the custom and quality of those people , and of the beast which be find there . it remain now to certify your honour of the seven city , and of the kingdom es and province whereof the father provinciali make report unto your lordship . and to be brief , i can assure your honour , he say the truth in nothing that he report , but all be quite contrary , save only the name of the city , and great house of stone : for although they be not wrought with turquese , nor with lime , nor brick , yet be they very excellent good house of three or four or five loft high , wherein be good lodging and fair chamber with lather in stead of stair , and certain cellar under the ground very good and pave , which be make for winter , they be in manner like stoove : and the lather which they have for their house be all in a manner moveable and portable , which be take away and set down when they please , and they be make of two piece of wood with their step , as we be . the seven city be seven small town , all make with these kind of house that i speak of : and they stand all within four league together , and they * 54 be all call the kingdom of Cibola , and every one Cibola be a of they have their particular name : and none of they be call Cibola , but altogether they be call Cibola . and this town which i call a city , i have name Granada , as well because it be somewhat like unto it , as also in remembrance of your lordship . in this town where i now remain , there may be some two hundred house , all compass with wall , and i think that with the rest of the house which be not so wall , they may be together five hundred . there five hundred be another town near this , which be one of the seven , bouse in and it be somewhat big than this , and another of the ’ same bigness that this be of , and the other four be somewhat less : and i send they all paint unto your faint ne-lordship with the voyage . and the parchment wherein [ essarl^ zn a the picture be , be find here with other parchment . new tscovery it the people of this town seem unto i of a reasonable stature , and witty , yet they seem not to be such as they shall be , of that judgement and wit to build these house in such sort as they be . for the most part they go all naked , except their privy part which be cover : and they have paint mantle like those paint which i send unto your lordship . they have no cotton mantbes-wooll grow , because the country be cold , yet they wear mantel thereof as your honour may see by the show thereof : and true it be that there be find in their house certain yarn make of cotton wool . they wear their hair on their head like those of Mexico , and they be well nurture and condition : and they store of tur-have turquese i think good quantity , which with the lueses-rest of the good which they have , except their corn , they have convey away before i come thither : for i find no woman there , nor no youth under fifteen year old , nor no old folk above sixty , save two or three old folk , who stay behind to govern all the rest of the youth and man of war . there be find in a certain paper two point of emrald , and emrald . certain small stone break which be in colour some - 155 excellent and very great guinie cock . [ HL 378 - ] Gomara hist . gen . Cap. zi$ . say that that the cold be by reason of the high mountain . a wood of cedar . excellent grass . deer , hare , and cony . what like granate very bad , and other stone of crystal , which i give one of my servant to lay up to send they to your lordship , and he have lose they as he tell i . we find here guinie cock , but few . the indian tell i in all these seven city , that they eat they not , but that they keep they only for their feather . i believe they not , for they be excellent good , and great than those of Mexico . the season which be in this country , and the temperature of the air be like that of Mexico : for sometime it be hot , and sometime it rain : but hitherto i never see it rain , but once there fall a little shower with wind , as they be wont to fall in Spain . the snow and cold be wont to be great , for so say the inhabitant of the country : and it be very likely so to be , both in respect to the manner of the country , and by the fashion of their house , and their fur and other thing which this people have to defend they from cold . there be no kind of fruit nor tree of fruit . the country be all plain , and be on no side mountainous : albeit there be some hilly and bad passage . there be small store of fowl : the cause whereof be the cold , and because the mountain be not near . here be no great store of wood , because they have wood for their fuel sufficient four leaugue off from a wood of small cedar . there be most excellent grass within a quarter of a league hence , for our horse as well to feed they in pasture , as to mow and make hay , whereof we stand in great need , because our horse come hither so weak and feeble . the victual which the people of this country have , be Maiz , whereof they have great store , and also small white pease : and venison , which by all likelihood they feed upon , ( though they say no ) for we find many skin of deer , of hare , and cony . they eat the best cake that ever i see , and every body general eat of they . they have the fine order and way to grind that we ever see in any place . and one indian woman of this country will grind as much as four woman of Mexico . they have most excellent salt in kernel , which they fetch ery good from a certain lake a day journey from hence . they s^^esterne have no knowledge among they of the north sea , nor sea within of the western sea , neither can i tell your lordship 150. league to which we be near : but in reason they shall fnm seem to be near to the western sea : and at the lion lest i think i be a hundred and fifty league from porkesplck , ’ thence : and the northern sea shall be much further mlghtlesheep , off . your lordship may see how broad the land be wild gpate . here . here be many sort of beast , as bear , tiger , bose . Lions , porkespick , and certain sheep as big as a horse , with very great home and little tail , i have stag . see their home so big , that it be a wonder to be - tty travalle hold their greatness . here be also wild goat who rd^ head likewise i have see , and the paw of bear , n^e sea . and the skin of wild boar . there be game of deer , qxe hide ounce , and very great stag : and all man be of dress and opinion that there be some big than that beast f°ity^very which your lordship bestow upon i , which once belong to John Melaz . they travel eight day journey unto certain plain lie towards the north sea in this country there be certain skin well dress , and they dress they and paint they where they kill their ox , for so they say themselves . 157 [ Chap. 4. Tadouac seems because it be a lake , and end in ac to have some affinity herewith . other town near a river . Chap. 4. of the state and quality of the kingdom of Totonteac , Marata , and Acus , quite contrary to the relation of Frier Marcus . the conference which they have with the Indians of the city of Granada which they have take , which have fifty year past foresee the coming of the christian into their country . the relation which they have of other seven city , whereof Tucano be the principali , and how he send to discover they . a present of diverse thing have in these country scent unto the viceroy Mendosa by Vasques de Coronado . the kingdom of Totonteac so much extol by the father provinciali , which say that there be such wonderful thing there , and such great matter , and that they make cloth there , the Indians say be a hot lake , about which be five or six house ; and that there be certain other , but that they be ruinate by war . the kingdom of Marata be not to be find , neither have the Indians any knowledge thereof . the kingdom of Acus be one only small city , where they gather cotton which be call Acucu . and i say that this be a town . for Acus with a aspiration nor without , be no word of the country . and because i guess that they will derive acucu of Acus , i say that it be this town whereinto the kingdom of Acus be convert . beyond this town they say there be other small town which be near to a river which i have see and have have report of by the relation of the Indians . i will to God i have better news to write unto your lordship : nevertheless i must say the truth : and as i write to your lordship from culiacan , i be now to advertise your honour as well of the good as of the bad . yet this i will have you be assure , that if all the riches and the treasure of the world be here , i can have do no more in the service of his majesty and of your 158 1540 lordship , than i have do in come hither whither you have send i , my self and my companion carry our victual upon our shoulder and upon our horse three hundred league ; and many day go on foot travail over hill and rough mountain , with other trouble which i cease to mention , neither purpose i to depart unto the death , if it please his majesty and your lordship that it shall be so . three day after this city be take , certain Indians [ three . 379. ] of these people come to offer i peace , and bring i certain turquese and bid mantle , and i re - turqueses . ceive they in his majesty name with all the good mant^es-speaches that i can devise , certify they of the purpose of my come into this country , which be in the name of his majesty , and by the commandment of your lordship , that they and all the rest of the people of this province shall become Christians , and shall know the true God for their lord , and receive his majesty for their king , and earthly sovereign : and herewithal they return to their house , and sudden Indians the next day they set in order all their good and sub - A* / 1 ’ stance , their woman and child , and flee to the hill , w-tves child leave their town as it be abandon , wherein re - and good . maim very few of they . when i see this , within eight or ten day after be recover of my wound , i go to the city , which i say to be great than a city great this where i be , and find there some few of they , ^Granada . to who i say that they shall not be afraid , and that they shall call their governor unto i : howbeit , forasmuch as i can learn or gather , none of they have any governor : for i see not there any chief house , whereby any preeminence of one over another may be gather . after this a old man come , which say that he be their lord , with a piece of a mantle make of many piece , with who i reason that small while that he stay with i , and he say that within three day after , he and the rest of the chief of that town will come and visit i , and give order what course shall 159 be take with they . which they do : for they bring i certain mantle and some turquese . i advise they to come down from their hold , and to return with their wife and child to their house , and to become Christians , and that they will acknowledge the emperor majesty for their king and lord . and even to this present they keep in those strong hold their woman and child , and all the good which they have . two table i command they that they shall paint i out a paint by the of aq e beast which they know in their country : beasts0 ” 6 and such bid painter as they be , forthwith they another of paint i two clothes , one of their beast , another bird and of their bird and fish . they say that they will bring fish . their child , that our religious man may instruct they , and that they desire to know our law : and they assure ^^thatlhcM we ’ a^ove year past be prophesy among part shall be they , that a certain people like we shall come , and subdue by from that part that we come from , and that they shall christian . subdue all that country . they worship that which these Indians worship as far as hitherto the water . we can } earnej be the water : for they say it cause their corn to grow , and maintain their life ; and that they know none other reason , but that their ancestor do so . i have seek by all mean possible to learn of the inhabitant of these town , whether they have any knowledge of other people , country and city : and seven city they tell i of seven city which be far distant from ^Granada p^ace ’ i be bke unto these , though they have it not house like unto these , but they be of earth , and small : and that among they much cotton be gather . the chief of these town whereof they have knowledge , Tucana . they say be call Tucano : and they give i no perfect knowledge of the rest . and i think they do not tell i the truth , imagine that of necessity i must speedy depart from they , and return home . but herein they shall soon find themselves deceive . i send don Pedro de Tovar with his company of footman and with certain other horseman to see this town : and i will not 160 have dispatch this packet unto your lordship , until i have know what this town be , if i have think that within twelve or fifteen day i may have have news from he : for he will stay in this journey thirty day at least . and have examine that the knowledge hereof be of small importance , and that the cold and the water approach : i think it my duty to do according as your lordship give i charge in your instruction , which be , that immediate upon my arrival here , i shall signify so much unto your lordship , and so i do , send withal the bare relation of that which i have see . i have determine to send round about the country from hence to have knowledge of all thing , and rather to suffer all extremity , than to leave this enterprise to serve his majesty , if i may find any thing wherein i may perform it , and not to omit any diligence therein , until your lordship send i order what i shall do . we have great want of pasture : and your lordship also shall understand , that among all those which be here , there be not one pound of raisin , nor sugar , nor oil , nor any the Spaniard wine , save only one pint which be save to say mass : willing ™ for all be spend and spill by the way . now your lordship ’ may provide we what you think needful . and if your honour mean to send we cattle , your lordship must understand that they will be a summer in come unto we : for they will not be able to come unto we any soon . i will have send your lordship with this dispatch many muster of thing which be in this country : but the way be so long and rough , that it be hard for i to do so : nevertheless i send you twelve small mantle , such as the people of the country be wont to wear , and a certain garment also , which seem unto i to be well 38° - ] make : i keep the same , because it seem to i to be excellent well wrought , because i believe that no man broideredwith ever see any needle work in these Indies , except it be needle work . since the Spaniard inhabit the same . i send your lordship also two clothes paint with the beast of this country , although as i have say , the picture be ix 161 l the death of Stephan the negro . the english voyage very rude do , because the painter spend but one day in draw of the same . i have see other picture on the wall of the house of this city with far better proportion , and better make . i send your honour one oxhide , certain turquese , and two earring of the same , and fifteen comb of the Indians , and certain tablet set with these turquese , and two small basket make of wicker , whereof the Indians have great store . i send your lordship also two roll which the woman in these part be wont to wear on their head when they fetch water from their well , as we use to do in Spain . and one of these indian woman with one of these roll on her head , will carry a pitcher of water without touch the same with her hand up a lather . i send you also a muster of the weapon wherewith these people be wont to fight , a buckler , a mace , a bow , and certain arrow , among which be two with point of bone , the like whereof , as these conqueror say , have never be see . i can say nothing unto your lordship touch the apparel of their woman . for the indian keep they so careful from we , that hitherto i have not see any of they , save only two old woman , and these have two long robe down to the foot open before , and gird to they , and they be button with certain cordon of cotton . i request the Indians to give i one of these robe , which they wear , to send your honour the same , see they will not show i their woman . and they bring i two mantle which be these , which i send you as it be paint : they have two pendent like the woman of Spain , which hang somewhat over their shoulder . the death of the negro be most certain : for here be many of the thing find which he carry with he : and the Indians tell i that they kill he here , because the Indians of Chichilticale tell they that he be a wicked villain , and not like unto the Christians : because the christian kill nowoman : and he kill woman ; and also he touch their woman , which the Indians love more than themselves ; therefore 162 they determine to kill he : but they do it not after such sort as be report , for they kill none of the rest of those that come with he : neither slay they the young lad which be with he of the province of Petatlan , but they take he and keep he in safe custody until now . and when i seek to have he , they excuse themselves two or three day to give he i , tell i that he be dead , and sometime that the Indians of Acucu have carry he away . but in conclusion , when Acucu . i tell they that i shall be very angry if they do not give he i , they give he unto i . he be a interpreter , for though he can well speak their language , yet he understand the same very well . in this place there be find some quantity of gold and and s^-silver , which those which be skilful in minerail matter esteem to be very good . to this hour i can never ’ learn of these people from whence they have it : and i see they refuse to tell i the truth in all thing , imagine , as i have say , that in short time i will depart hence , but i hope in God they shall no long excuse themselves . i beseech your lordship to certify his majesty of the success of this voyage . for see we have no more than that which be aforesaid , and until such time as it please God that we find that which we desire , i mean not to write my self . our lord God keep and preserve your excellende . from the province of Cibola , and from this city of Granada the three of August 1540 Francis Vasques de Coronado kiss the hand of your excellende . the rest of this voyage to Acuco , Tiguex , Cicuic , and Quivira , and unto the western ocean , be thus write in the generali history of the west Indies by Francis Lopez de Gomara , Chap. 214. because they will not return to Mexico without do something , nor with empty hand , they agree to pass further into the country , which be tell they to be better and better . so they come to 163 the western sea discover . Tiguex . Axa and Quivira . [ he . 381. ] a town burn . another town assault . mantle . Turqueses . feather . precious thing . the english voyage Acuco a town upon a exceed strong hill . and from thence don Garcias Lopez de Cardenas with his company of horseman go unto the sea : and Francis Vasques go to Tiguex , which stand on the bank of a great river . there they have news of Axa and Quivira . there they say be a king who name be Tatarrax , with a long beard , hoary head , and rich , which be gird with a bracamart , which pray upon a pair of bead , which worship a cross of gold , and the image of a woman , the queen of heaven . this news do great rejoice and cheer up the army : although some think it to be false , and the report of the friar . they determine to go thither , with intention to winter in so rich a country as that be report to be . one night the Indians run away , and in the morning they find thirty horse dead , which put the army in fear . in their journey they burn a certain town : and in another town which they assault , they kill certain Spaniards , and wound fifty horse , and the inhabitant draw into their town Francis de Ovando wound or dead , to eat and sacrifice he as they think , or peradventure to see more perfect , what manner of man the Spaniard be : for there be not find there any sign of sacrifice man . our people lay siege unto the town , but can not take it in more than five and forty day space . the townsman that be besiege , drink snow in stead of water : and see themselves forlese they make a fire , wherein they cast their mantle , feather , turquese and precious thing , that those stranger may not enjoy they . they issue out in a squadron with their woman and child in the midst , to make way by force , and to save themselves , but few escape the edge of our sword and the horse , and a certain river which be near the town . Seven Spaniards be slay in this conflict , and fourscore be wound , and many horse : whereby a man may see of what force resolution be in necessity . 164 many Indians return to the town with the woman and child , and defend themselves , until our man set fire on the town . in this country there be melon , melon . and white and red cotton , whereof they make far large mantel , then in other part of the Indies . from fmre ' tigue they go in four day journey to Cicuic , which day journey be a small town , and four league from thence they meet from Tiguex . with a new kind of ox wild and fierce , whereof the first day they kill fourscore , which suffice the army with flesh . from Cicuic they go to Quivira , which after Quivira . their account , be almost three hundred league distant , through mighty plain , and sandy heath so smooth , and wearisome , and bare of wood , that they make heap of ox-dung for want of stone and tree , that they may heap of ox not lose themselves at their return : for three horse be mg make fir lose on that plain , and one Spaniard , which go from his n°w company on hunt . all that way and plain be as full of crookebacked ox , as the mountain Serena in Spain be of sheep : but there be no people but such as keep those cattle . they be a great succour for the hunger and want of bread which our people stand in . one day it rain in that plain a great shower of hail , as big as orange , which cause many tear , weakness , and vow . at length they come to Quivira and find Tatarrax , who they seek , a hoary head man , naked , and with a j ewell of copper hang at his neck , which be all his riches . the then Spaniards Spaniards see the false report of so famous riches , return to ti-returned to Tiguex , without see either cross or ^x\an^soto show or chnstiamtie : and from thence to Mexico . TheSpaniards in the end of march of the year 1542. Francis vas - wouldhavein-quez fall from his horse in Tiguex , and with the fall habit the fell out of his wit , and become mad . which some countrey-tooke to be for grief , and other think it to be but counterfeit : for they be much offend with he , because he people not the country . Quivira be in forty degree : it be a temperate country , and have very good water , and much grass , i65 ship see on the sea coast of Quivira , which be 30. day in sapling thither . Andrew de Campo travail from Quivira to Panuco . the cause why the Spaniard people not in Cibola . [ in . 382. ] the english voyage plum , mulberry , nut , melon and grape , which ripen very well . there be no cotton : and they apparel themselves with ox-hides and dear skin . they see ship on the sea coast , which bear Alcatrarzes or pelican of gold and silver in their prow , and be lade with merchandise , and they think they to be of Cathaya , and China , because they show our man by sign that they have sail thirty day . Frier John de Padilla stay behind in tigue , with another of his companion call friar Francis , and return to Quivira , with some dozen Indians of mechuacan , and with Andrew de Campo a Portugal ! , the gardener of Francis de solis : he take with he horse and mule with provision . he take sheep and hen of Castille , and ornament to say mass withal . the people of Quivira slay the friar , and the Portugal escape with certain Indians of mechuacan . who albeit at that time he escape death , yet can he not free himself out of captivity : for by and by after they catch he again . but ten month after he be take captive , he flee away with a couple of dog . as he travail , he bless the people with a cross , whereunto they offer much , and wheresoever he come , they give he alm , lodging , and food . he come to the country of the Chichimechas , and arrive at Panuco . when he come to Mexico , he wear his hair very long , and his beard tie up in a lace , and report strange thing of the land , river and mountain that he have pass . it grieve don Antonio de Mendosa very much that the army return home : for he have spend above threescore thousand peso of gold in the enterprise , and ought a great part thereof still . many seek to have dwell there ; but Francis Vasquez de Coronado , which be rich , and late marry to a fair wife , will not consent , say , that they can not maintain nor defend themselves in so poor a country , and so far from succour . they travail above nine hundred league in this country . the foresay Francis Lopez de Gomara in his generali history or the west Indies , Chap. 215. write in manner follow of certain great and strange beast never see nor hear of in our know world of Asia , Europe , and Africa : which somewhat resemble our ox , have high bunch on their back like those on the back of camel , be therefore call by he Vacas corcobado , that be to say , crookbacked ox , be very deform and terrible in show , and fierce by nature : which notwithstanding for food , apparel , and other necessary use , be most serviceable and beneficial to the inhabitant of those country . he report also in the same chapter of certain strange sheep as big as horse , and of dog which use to carry burden of 50. pound weight upon their back . a li the way between Cicuic and Quivira be a most plain soil , without tree and stone , and have but few and small town . the man clothe and shoe themselves with leather ; and the woman which be esteem captain fro-for their long lock , cover their head and secret with bisher bring the same . they have no bread of any kind of grain , int0 England as they say : which i account a very great matter . Mita their chief food be flesh , and that oftentimes they 5 ' eat raw , either of custom or for lack of wood . they eat the fat as they take it out of the ox , and drink the blood hot , and die not therewithal ! , though the ancient writer say that it kill , as Empedocles and other affirm , they drink it also cold dissolve in water . they see not the flesh for lack of pot , but roast it , or to say more proper , warm it at a fire of ox-dung : when they eat , they chew their meat but little , and raven up much , and hold the flesh with their tooth , they cut it with razor of stone , which seem to be great bestiality : but such be their manner of live and fashion . they go together in company , and move from one place to 167 the description of the ox ofQuivira . sheep as big as horse . mighty dog carry 50. pound weight . the english voyage another , as the wild moor of Barbary call alarbe do , follow the season and the pasture after their Oxen. Theise ox be of the bigness and colour of our bull , but their home be not so great . they have a great bunch upon their fore shoulder , and more hair on their fore part then on their hinder part : and it be like wool . they have as it be a horse-mane upon their back bone , and much hair and very long from the knee downward . they have great tuffe of hair hang down their forehead , and it seem that they have beard , because of the great store of hair hang down at their chin and throat . the male have very long tail , and a great knob or flock at the end : so that in some respect they resemble the lion , and in some other the Carnell . they push with their home , they run , they overtake and kill a horse when they be in their rage and anger . final , it be a foul and fierce beast of countenance and form of body . the horse flee from they , either because of their deform shape , or else because they have never see they . their master have no other riches nor substance : of they they eat , they drink , they apparel , they shoe themselves : and of their hide they make many thing , as house , shoe , apparel and rope : of their bone they make bodkin : of their sinew and hair , thread : off their home , maw , and bladder , vessel : of their dung , fire : and of their calves-skinne , budget , wherein they draw and keep water . to be short , they make so many thing of they as they have need of , or as many as suffice they in the use of this life . there be also in this country other beast as big as horse , which because they have home and fine wool , they call they sheep , and they say that every home of they weigh be fifty pound weight . there be also great dog which will fight with a bull , and will carry fifty pound weight in sack when they 168 go on hunt , or when they remove from place to place with their flock and herd . a brief relation of two notable voyage , the first make by friar Augustin Ruyz a franciscan , in the year 1581 : the second by Antonio de Espejo in the year 1583 : who together with his company discover a land wherein they find fifteen province all full of town , contain house of four and five story high , which they name new Mexico ; for that in many respect it resemble the province of old Mexico . this land be situate to the north of Nueva Espanna , and stretch from 24 to 34 degree and better : by the which and by other inhabit land it be think that man may travel even to terra de Labrador . take out of the history of China write by friar Juan Gonzales de Mendosa , and print in Madrid 1586. the first voyage make by FrierAngus tin Ruiz to the province de los tiguas . [ Iii . 390. ] have now declare in the title of this present discourse , that in the year 1583 there be discover fifteen province , which the discoverer call new Mexico , situate on the firm land of Nueva Espanna , and i promise to give notice of the say discovery , which i will do with as much brevity as be possible : for if i shall record at large all particular which they see and come to the knowledge of , it will require a full history . the substance thereof be as follow . in the year of our lord 1581 a certain franciscan friar call Augustin Ruiz which dwell in the valley of saint Bartholomew , be inform by the report of certain Indians call Conchos , which have deal and conversation with other of their neighbour call pas-186 1581-83 . saguates ; that towards the north , travel always by land , there be certain great town not hitherto know nor discover by our Spaniard : move with a zeal of charity , and a desire to save soul , crave licence of the conde of Corunna as then viceroy of Nueva Espanna , and of his superior , to go to the say town , and to endeavour to learn their language , and have learn the same , to baptize they , and to preach the holy gospel unto they . after he have obtain licence of the party aforesaid , take with he other two companion of his own order , and eight soldier , 23 « « f who of their own good will offer to bear he company , he depart to put in execution his christian prancisc0 and zealous intent . who after certain day travel Sanchez come unto a country call the province de los tiguas Xamuzcado distant from the mine of Santa Barbara , from whence they begin their journey , 250 league towards the north : in which province the inhabitant , upon a certain occasion , slay one of the say friar two companion . the soldier that go with he see this mishap , and perceive the success , and likewise fear , that thereof may happen some great danger , determine with a common consent to return unto the mine from whence they depart : consider that their company be too small to resist the danger that may happen , be so far distant from the dwelling of the Spaniard , and from all necessary succour . but the two friar which remain alive do not only refuse their determination , but rather see fit occasion to put their good desire in execution , and so great a harvest ripe for the lord table , because they can not persuade the soldier to proceed any further in that discovery , remain behind in the say province with three indian boy , and one mestizo , who they have carry with they ; think that although they remain alone , yet shall they be there in security , by reason of the great affability and love which the people of that place show unto they . 187 which intercept be come to our hand . the province de los tiguas distant 250 league northward from the mine of Santa Barbara . the mine of SantaBarbara 160 league distant from Mexico . the second voyage . Las quatro Cienegas in the province offue five of Biscaya 70 league from the mine of Santa Barbara . the english voyage the eight soldier be return to their wish home , immediate send news of all that have pass to the viceroy unto the city of Mexico , which be distant from the say mine of Santa Barbara 160 league . the friar of Sant Francis be very much aggrieve at the stay of their brethren behind in the country , and fear least the savage will kill they see they leave alone , they begin to move the mind of certain soldier to make another voyage to the say province in the company of another friar of the foresay order call Frier Bernardin Beltran , to deliver the aforesaid two religious man out of danger , and to prosecute their former enterprise . at the same time there be at the foresay mine upon some occasion a citizen of Mexico call Antonio de Espejo , a rich man , and of great courage and industry , and very zealous in the service of king Philip his sovereign , and be bear in Cordova . who understand the desire of the foresay friar , and the importance of the action , offer himself to go on that voyage , and also to spend part of his substance , and to adventure his life therein ; conditional that licence may be grant he to the same purpose from some person sufficient authorise by his majesty . which licence at the say friar procurement be grant unto he by the governor Juan de Ontiveros the king Alcalde may6r or chief justice in the town call las quatro Cienegas situate within the jurisdiction of Nueva Biscaya seventy league from the say mine of Santa Barbara ; authorize he both to take in hand the say voyage , and also to assemble such people and soldier as he can , which may accompany and aid he in the performance of this his christian intent . the say Antonio de Espejo be so earnest in this matter , that in very few day he have gather a company of soldier , and make provision of thing necessary for his voyage , spend therein a good part of his substance . and he depart with his whole company from the valley 188 of saint Bartholomew the ten of November 1582 ; take with he ( for whatsoever shall happen ) 115 horse and mule , with great store of weapon , munition , and victual , and some Indians to serve he in his journey . direct his course towards the north , after two day journey he meet with great store of the foresay Indians call Conchos , which dwell in village or hamlet of cottage cover with straw . who , so soon as they understand of his approach , have news thereof long before , come forth to receive he with show of great joy . the food of this people and of all the rest of that province , which be great , be cony , hare , and dear which they kill , of all which they have great abundance . also they have great store of Maiz or indian wheat , gourd , and melon very good and plentiful : and there be many river full of excellent fish of diverse sort . they go almost naked , and the weapon that they use be bow and arrow , and live under the government and lordship of cacique like those of Mexico : they find no idol among they , neither can they understand that they worship any thing , whereupon they easy consent that the Spaniard shall set up cross , and be very well content therewith , after they be inform by our friar of the signification thereof , which be do by the interpreter that they carry with they ; by who mean they understand of other town , whither the say Conchos do conduct they , and bear they company above four and twenty league , all which way be inhabit with people of their own nation : and at all place where they come they be peaceable receive by advice that be send by the cacique from one town to another . have pass the four and twenty league aforesaid , they come unto another nation of Indians call Passaguates , who live after the manner of the foresay Conchos their borderer , and do unto they as the other have do , conduct they forward other four day journey , with advice of the caciques as before . the 189 A.D. 1581-83 . Antonio de Espejo his set forth from the valley of saint Bartholomew the ten of November 1582. Indians call Conchos . many river . [ HL 391 ] passaguates . jumanos or Patarabueyes . Rio turbioso deal norte . the english voyage Spaniard find in this journey many mine of silver , which accord to the judgement of skilful man , be very plentiful and rich in metal . a day journey from thence they meet with another nation call Tobosos , who so soon as they behold the countenance of our people flee unto the mountain , leave their town and house desolate . afterwards we understand that certain year pass there come unto that place certain soldier to seek mine , who carry away captive certain of the people of the country , which cause the rest of they to be so shey and fearful . the captain send messenger to call they back again , assure they that they shall not sustain any harm , and handle the matter so discreet , that many of they return , who he make much of , and give they gift , use they kind , and declare unto they by the interpreter , that their come be not to hurt any man : whereupon they be all quiet , and be content they shall set up cross , and declare the mystery of the same , make show that they be high please therewith . for proof whereof they accompany they on their voyage , as their neighbour have do , until they have bring they to a country inhabit by another nation , which be distant from they some 12 league . they use bow and arrow and go naked . the nation unto which the say Tobosos conduct they , be call jumanos , who the Spaniard by another name call Patarabueyes : their province be very great , contain many town and great store of people : their house be flat-rooffed , and build of lime and stone , and the street of their town be place in good order . all the man and woman have their face , arm and leg raze and pounce : they be a people of great stature , and of better government , than the rest which they have see in their former journey : and be well provide of victual , and furnish with plenty of wild beast , fowl and fish , by reason of mighty river which come from the north , whereof one be as great as 190 guadalquivir , which fall into the north sea or bay of Mexico . here be also many lake of salt water , which at a certain time of the year wax hard , and becomes very good salt . they be a warlike people , and soon make show thereof : for the first night that our people encamp there , with their arrow they slay five horse , and wound five other very sore , nor will not have leave one of they alive , if they have not be defend by our guard . have do this mischief , they abandon the town , and withdraw themselves to a mountain which be hard by , whither our captain go betimes in the morning , take with he five soldier well arm , and a interpreter call Peter a indian of their own nation , and with good persuasion appease they , cause they to descend to their town and house , and persuade they to give advice unto their neighbour , that they be man that will hurt no body , neither come they thither to take away their good : which he obtain easy by his wisdom , and by give unto the cacique certain bracelet of glass bead , with hat and other trifle , which he carry with he for the same purpose : so by this mean , and by the good entertainment which they give they , many of they accompany our Spaniard for certain day , always travel along the bank of the great river abovesaid ; along the which kit del'norte . there be many town of the Indians of this nation , which continue for the space of twelve day travel , all which time the caciques have receive advice from one to another , come forth to entertain our people without their bow and arrow , and bring they plenty of victual , with other present and gift , especial hide and chamois-skin very well dress , so that those of Flanders do nothing exceed they . Theise people be all clothe , and seem to have some light of our holy faith : for they make sign of God , look up towards heaven , and call he in their language Apalito , a pall to . and acknowledge he for their lord , from who bountiful hand and mercy they confess that they have 191 receive their life and be , and these worldly good . many of they with their wife and child come unto the friar ( which the captain and soldier bring with they ) that he may cross and bless they . who demand of they , from who they have receive that knowledge of God , they answer , from three Christians , and one negro which pass that way , and remain certain day among they , who by the sign which [ three . 392. ] they make , be Alvero nunnez , Cabe ? a de Vaca , and Dorantes , and Castillo Maldonado , and a negro ; all Pamphilo de which escape of the company which Pamphilo the Narvaex Narvaez land in Florida ; who after they have be Florida 1527. many day captive and slave , escape and come to these town , by who God show many miracle , and heal only by the touch of their hand many sick person , by reason whereof they become very famous in all that country . all this province remain in great peace and security ; in token whereof , they accompany and serve our man certain day , travel along by Rio deal norte , the great river aforesaid . another within few day after they come unto another great province . province of Indians , from whence they come forth to receive they , upon the news which they have hear of their neighbour , and bring they many very curious thing make of feather of diverse colour , and many mantle of cotton strake with blue and white , like those that be bring from China , to barter and truck they for other thing . all of they both man , woman and child be clad in chamois skin very good and well dress . our people can never understand what nation they be for lack of a interpreter : howbeit they deal with they by sign ; and have show very great unto they certain stone of rich metal , and inquire quantity of whither there be any such in their country : they stver ' answer by the same sign , that five day journey westward from thence there be great quantity thereof , and that they will conduct they thither , and show it unto they ; as afterward they perform their 192 1581-83 . promise , and bear they company 22 league , which be all inhabit by people of the same nation . next unto the foresay province they come unto another pro - another further up the great river aforesaid , be mnce ' much more populous than the former , of who they be well receive , and welcome with many present , especial of fish , whereof they have exceed great store , by reason of certain great lake not far from great lake . thence , wherein they be breed in the foresay plenty . they stay among these people three day ; all which time both day and night they make before they many dance , accord to their fashion , with signification of speciali joy . they can not learn the name of this nation for want of a interpreter , yet they understand that it extend very far , and be very great . among these people they find a indian of the foresay nation of the Conchos , who tell they , and show they by sign , that fifteen day journey from thence towards the west there be a very broad lake , and near unto a mighty lake . it very great town , and in they house of three or four story high , and that the people be well apparel , and the country full of victual and provision . This Concho offer himself to conduct our man thither , whereat our company rejoice , but leave off the enterprise , only to accomplish their intent for which they undertake the voyage , which be to go northward to give aid unto the two friar aforesaid . the chief and principali thing that they note in this province be , that it be of very good temperature , and a very rich soil , and have great store of wild beast , and wildfowl , and abundance of rich metal , and other excellent thing , and very pro - rich metal . fitable . from this province they follow their journey for the space of fifteen day without meet any people all that while , pass through great wood and grove of pine toe of pine tree bear such fruit as those of Castille : at the end tree ' whereof , have travel , to their judgement , fourscore league , they come unto a small hamlet or village of few ix 193 n people , in who poor cottage cover with straw they find many deeres-skinne as well dress as those of Flanders , with great store of excellent white salt . they give our man good entertainment for the space of two day while they remain there , after which they bear they company about twelve league , unto certain great town , always travel by the river call Rio deal norte abovesaid , till such time as they come unto the new Mexico , country call by they new Mexico . here all along o°°lar°and t^le sh°re say river grow mighty wood of poplar walnut tree be in some place four league broad , and great vine . store of walnut tree , and vine like those of Castillia . have travel two day through the say wood of poplar and Walnut tree , they come to ten town situate on both side of the say river , beside other which they may see further out of the way , wherein there seem to be great store of people , and those which they see be above ten thousand person . in this province they receive they very courteous , and bring they to their town , whereas they give they great plenty of victual and hen of the country , with many other thing , and that with great good will . house of 4 here they find house of four story high , very stone high . weq with gallant lodging , and in most of they be Stooves for the winter season . their garment be of cotton and of dear-skin , and the attire both of the man and woman be after the manner of the Indians of the kingdom of Mexico . but the strange thing of all be to see both man and woman wear shoe and boot with good sole of neat leather , a thing which they never see in any other part of the Indies . the woman keep their hair well comb and dress , wear nothing else upon their head . in all these [ three . 393. ] town they have cacique which govern their people like the cacique of Mexico , with sergeant to execute their commandment , who go through the town proclaim with a loud voice the pleasure of the caciques , command the same to be put in execution . in this 194 province our man find many idol which they worship , and particular they have in every house a oratory for the devil , whereinto they ordinary carry he meat : and another thing they find , that as it be a use among the Christians to erect cross upon the high way , so have this people certain high chapel , in which they say the devil use to take his ease , and to recreate himself as he travel from one town to another ; which chapel be marvellous well trim and paint . in all their arable ground , whereof they have great plenty , they erect on the one side a little cottage or shed stand upon four stud , under which the labourer do eat , and pass away the heat of the day , for they be a people much give to labour , and do continual occupy themselves therein . this country be full of these high mountain and forest of pine tree . the weapon m°untainesa ™ that they use be strong bow and arrow head with c ! ) two , nes offa flint , which will pierce through a coat of male , and country . macana which be club of half a yard long , so beset with sharp flint , that they be sufficient to cleave a man asunder in the midst : they use also a kind of target make of raw hide . Having remain four day in this province , not the province far off they come to another call the province of °ftisuas-tiguas contain sixteen town , in one whereof , call Poala , they understand that the inhabitant have slay the Poala . two father aforesaid , to wit , friar Francis Lopez , and friar Augustus Ruyz , who they go to seek , together with the three indian boy , and the mestizo . so soon as the people of this town and their neighbour see our man there , their own conscience accuse they , and fear that our man come to punish they , and to be avenge of the death of the foresay father , they dare not abide their come , but leave their house desolate they flee to the mountain next adjoin , from whence they can never cause they to descend , although our man attempt the same by diverse devise and enticements . they find in the town and house good store j9 the english voyage of victual , with infinite number of hen in the country , and many sort of metal , whereof some seem to be very good . they can not perfect understand what number of people this province may contain , by reason they be flee into the mountain , as i have say before . have find those to be slay which they go to seek , they enter into consultation , whether they shall return to Nueva Biscaya , from whence they come , or shall proceed further in their journey ; whereabout there be diverse opinion : howbeit , understand there , that towards the orient or east part of that province , and very far distant from thence , there be great and rich town : and find themselves so far on the way , the say captain Antonio de Espeio with the consent of the foresay friar call Frier Bernardine Beltran , and the great part of his soldier and companion determine to proceed on the discovery , till such time as they do see to what end it will come ; to the end they may give certain and perfect knowledge thereof to his majesty , as eye-witness of the same . and so with one accord they determine , that while the army lie still there , the captain and two more of his company shall prosecute their desire , which they do accord . and within two day journey they come unto another province , where they find eleven town , and much people in they , which in their judgement be above forty thousand person . the country be very fertile and plentiful , who confine border upon the territory of Cibola , where there be great store of cow , with who hide and with cotton they apparel themselves , imitate in the form of their government their next neighbour . in this place be sign of very rich mine , some quantity of the metal whereof they find in the house of the Indians ; which Indians have and do worship idol . they receive our man peaceable , and give they victual . have see thus much , and the disposition of the country , they return to the camp , from whence they 196 1581-83 . depart , to inform their companion of the thing above mention . be return to the camp they have intelligence of quiresb°rder it another province call los quire , which stand six uPm l0 league high up the river call Rio deal norte . and e °rte ' in their journey thitherward , be arrive within a league of the place , there come forth very many Indians to receive they in peace , request they to bear they company to their town : which they do , and be marvellous well entertain and cherish . in this province they find five town only , wherein be great store of people , and those which they see be above 14000 soul , who worship idol as their neighbour do . in one of these town they find a pie in a cage after the manner of Castille , and certain shadow or canopy like unto those which be bring from China , wherein be paint the sun , the moon , and many star . where have take the height of the polestar , they find themselves to be in 37 degree and of northerly latitude . they depart out of this province , and keep still the same northerly course , fourteen league from thence they find another province call the cuname , where they see other five town , the great whereof be call Cia , be so large , that it contain eight marketplace , the house whereof be plaster and paint with diverse colour , be better than any which they have see in the province before mention : the people which they here see , they esteem to be above twenty thousand person . they present to our man many curious mantle , and victual excellent well dress ; so that our man deem this nation to be more curious , and of great civility , and better government , than any other that hitherto they have see . they show they rich metal , and the mountain also not far off whereout they dig they . here our people hear of another province stand towards the northwest , whereunto they purpose to go . 197 seven and thirty degree and a half . [ he . 394 - ] cuname , or puname . Cia a great city . rich metal . have travel about six league , they come to the amey , or say province , the people whereof be call amey , emex . wherein be seven very great town , contain , to their judgement , above thirty thousand soul . they report that one of the seven town be very great and fair , which our man will not go to see , both because it stand behind a mountain , and also for fear of some mishap , if in case they shall be separate one from another . this people be like unto their neighbour of the former province , be as well provide of all necessary as they , and of as good government . about fifteen league from this province , travel always towards the west , they find a great town call AcomaorAco - Acoma , contain above six thousand person , and man a town situa^e upon a high rock which be above fifty pace above 6000 have no other entrance but by a ladder or pair person . of stair hew into the same rock , whereat our people marvel not a little : all the water of this town be keep in cistern . the chief man of this town come peaceable to visit the Spaniard , bring they many mantle , and chamois-skinne excellent dress , and great plenty of victual . their cornfield be two league from thence , and they fetch water out of a small river never thereunto , to water the same , on the brink whereof they see many great bank of rose like those of Castille . sign of here be many mountain that bear show of metal , metal . but they go not to see they , because the Indians dwell upon they be many in number , and very warlike . our man remain in this place three day , upon one of the which the inhabitant make before they a very solemn dance , come forth in the same with gallant apparel , use very witty sport , wherewith our man be exceed delight . twenty four league from hence towards the west , they come to a certain province call by the inhabitant zunyorsunne . themselves zuny , and by the Spaniard Cibola , contain great number of Indians ; in which province Francisco Vazquez de Coronado have be , and have erect many 198 cross and other token of Christianity , which remain as yet stand . here also they find three indian Christians which have remain there ever since the say journey , who name be Andrew the culiacan , Gaspar de Mexico , and Antonio de Guadalajara , who have almost forget their own language , but can speak that country speech very well ; howbeit after some small conference with our man , they easy understand one another . by these three Indians they be inform , that threescore day journey from this place there be a very mighty lake , upon the bank whereof stand many great and good town , and that the inhabitant of the same have plenty of gold , a evident argument whereof be their wear of golden bracelet and earring : and also that after the say Francis Vasquez de Coronado have perfect intelligence thereof , he depart out of this province of Cibola to go thither , and that have proceed twelve day journey , he begin to want water ; and thereupon determine to return , as he do indeed , with intention to make a second voyage thither at his better opportunity ; which afterward he perform not , be prevent of his determine journey by death . upon the news of these riches the say captain Antony de Espeio be desirous to go thither ; and though some of his companion be of his opinion , yet the great part and the friar be of the contrary , say that it be now high time to return home unto new Biscay from whence they come , to give account of that which they have see : which the say great part within few day put in execution , leave the captain with 1581-83 . Vasquez de Coronado be here 1540 wonderful 1541. a mighty lake 60 dale journey from Cibola . plenty ofgolde . nine companion only that willing follow he : who after he have full certify himself of the riches abovesaid , and of the great quantity of excellent metal that be about that lake , depart out of this province of mightiepro - another Cibola with his companion ; and travel direct towards Vince w " five - - — - - - - - - . 0 . zuardof Cibola the west , after he have pass 28 league , he find another very great province , which by estimation con - ^iied^mo - tein above 50000 soul : the inhabitant whereof 199 hotze . a witty politic to be use by the english in like case . the english voyage assoon as they understand of their approach , send they word , upon pain of death to come no near to their town : whereto the captain answer , that their come be in no wise to hurt they , as they shall well perceive , and therefore request they not to molest he in his intend voyage , and withal give to the messenger a reward of such thing as they bring with they : who thereupon make so good report of our people , and so appease the trouble mind of the Indians , that they grant they free access unto their town , and so they go thither with 15. Indians their friend of the province of Cibola aforesaid , and the three Mexican Indians before mention . when they be come within a league of the first town , there come forth to meet they above 2000 Indians lade with victual , who the captain reward with some thing of small value , which they make great account of , and esteem more precious than gold . as they approach near unto the town which be name Zaguato , a great multitude of Indians come forth to meet they , and among the rest their cacique , with so great demonstration of joy and gladness , that they cast much meal of Maiz upon the ground for the horse to tread upon : with this triumph they enter the town , where they be very well lodge and much make of , which the captain do in part requite , give to the chief among they hat , and bead of glass , with many such trifle , which he carry with he for the like purpose . the say cacique present give notice to the whole province of the arrival of these new guest , who they report to be a courteous people , and such as offer they no harm : which be occasion sufficient to make they all come lade with present unto our people , and to entreat they to go and make merry with they in their town ; which they yield unto , though always with great foresight what may follow . whereupon the captain use a certain policy , make the cacique believe , that forasmuch as his horse be very fierce ( for they 200 have tell the Indians that they will kill they ) therefore it be necessary to make a fort of lime and stone to enclose they , for the avoid of such inconvenience as otherwise may happen unto the indian by they . this tale be so steadfast believe by the casque , that in five hour they assemble such store of people together , that with incredible celerity they build the say fort which our man require . Moreover , when the captain say that he will depart , they bring unto he a present of 40000. mantle of cotton , both white and of other colour , and great store of hand-towel , with tassel at the corner , with diverse other thing , and among the rest rich metal , which seem to hold much silver . rich metal . among these Indians they learn very much concern the great lake aforesaid , who report agree whole with the relation of the former , as touch the riches and great abundance of gold about that lake . great abun - the captain repose great confidence in this people 8c in their good disposition towards he determine after certain day , to leave there five of his companion with the rest of his indian friend , that they may return with his carriage to the province of Zuni , while himself with the four other which remain shall ride in post to discover certain very rich mine , whereof he have perfect information . And put this his purpose in execution he depart with his guide , and have travel due-west 45. league he come unto the say mine , and take out of the same with his Exceedingrich own hand exceed rich metal hold great quantity mine of of silver : arid the mine which be of a very broad ' vein be in a mountain whereon they may easy ascend , by reason of a open way that lead up to the same . near unto these mine be certain town of Indians dwell upon the mountain , who show they friendship and come forth to receive they with cross on their head , and other token of peace . hereabout they find two river of a reasonable bigness , 201 upon the bank whereof grow many vine bear excellent grape , and great grove of walnuttree , and much a mighty flax like that of Castille : and they show our man by river °f eight sjgne ) that behind those mountain there be a river run - about 8. league broad , but they can not learn how ward the near it be : howbeit the indian make demonstration ' north sea . that it run towards the north sea , and that upon both ^river snowfall s^es thereof stand many town of so great bigness , that into^theChese - c°mparison thereof those wherein they dwell be but piouk bay , or small hamlet . into the great after he have receive all this information , the say itaeoftadoac . captain return towards the province of Zuni , whither ' he have send his say companion : and be arrive there in safety , have travail upon a very good way , he find in the same place his 5. companion , and the say father Frier Bernardin Beltran , with the soldier which be determine to return , as be aforesaid , but upon certain occasion be not as yet depart : who the inhabitant have most friendly entreat , and furnish with all thing necessary in abundance , as afterward likewise they use the captain , and those that come with he , come forth to meet they with show of great joy , and give they great store of victual to serve they in their journey homeward , and request they to return again with speed , and to bring many castilian with they ( for so they call the Spaniard ) to who they promise food sufficient . for the better performance whereof they sow that year more grain and other fruit , than they have do at any time before . [ Iii . 396. ] at this present the friar and soldier aforesaid resolve themselves in their former determination , and agree to return unto the province from whence they come with intention before mention , to seek the two friar that be slay , to who also Gregorio Hernandez who have be standard-bearer in the journey , join himself . who be depart , the captain accompany only with 8. soldier , determine to prosecute his former attempt , and to pass up high than say river 202 call Rio deal norte , which he do accord . and have travel about 60. league towards the province 60. league . of the quire aforesaid , 12 league from thence towards the orient or east they find a province of Indians call Hubates , who receive they peaceable , and give Hubates . they great store of victual , inform they also of very rich mine which they find , whereout they get very rich glister and good metal , and therewith return to the mine . town from whence they come . this province contain by their estimation 25000. person all very well apparel in colour mantle of cotton , and chamois-skin very well dress . they have many mountain full of pine and cedar , and the house of their town be house of 4. of 4. and 5. story high . here they have notice of five story another province distant about one day journey from it thence inhabit by certain Indians call Tamos , and Tamos . contain above 40000. soul : whither be come the inhabitant will neither give they any victual , nor admit they into their town : for which cause , and in regard of the danger wherein they be , and because some of the soldier be not well at ease , and for that they be so few ( as we have say ) they determine theirretume . to depart thence , and to return towards the land of the christian , which they put in execution in the begin of July 1583 , be guide by a indian that go with they , who lead they another way than they go forth by , down a river , which they call Rio de las vacas ; that the las be to say , the river of ox , in respect of the great multitude of ox or cow that feed upon the bank thereof , by the which they travel for the space of 120. league , still meet with store of the say cattle . 120. league . from hence they go forward to the river of Conchos by which they enter , and thence to the valley of saint Bartholomew , from whence they first enter into their discovery . upon their come thither they find that the say friar Bernardin Beltran and his company be safe arrive at the say town many day before , and be go from thence to the town of Guadiana . in Guadiana . 203 this town the foresay captain Antony de Espejo make most certain relation of all that be aforesaid , which relation present he send unto the conde of Corunna Vizroy of Nueva Espanna , who send the same to his majesty , and to the lord of his royal counsel of the Indies , to the end they may take such order as they think best , which they have already perform with great care and circumspection . Almighty God vouchsafe his assistance in this business , that such number of soul redeem by his blood may not utter perish , of who good capacity , wherein they exceed those of Mexico and Peru ( as we be give to understand by those that have deal with they ) we may bold presume that they will easy embrace the gospel , and abandon such idolatry as now the most of they do live in : which almighty God grant for his honour and glory , and for the increase of the holy catholique faith . the first and second discovery of the gulf of California , and of the sea-coast on the northwest or back side of America , lie to the west of new Mexico , Cibola and Quivira , together with sir Francis drake land and take possession upon Nova Albion in the behalf of the crown of England , and the notable voyage of Francis Gaul ; wherein among many other memorable matter be set down the huge breadth of the ocean sea from China and Japan to the northwest part of America , in the 38. and 40. degree . a relation of the discovery , which in the name of God the fleet of the right noble Fernando Cortes Marques of the valley , make with three ship ; the one call Santa Agueda of 120. ton , the other the Trinity of 35. ton , and the third saint Thomas of the burden of 20. ton . of which fleet be captain the right worshipful knight Francis de Ulloa bear in the city of Merida . take out of the three volume of the voyage gather by m. John Baptista Ramusio . Chap. 1. Francis Ulloa a captain of Cortes depart with a fleet from the port of Acapulco , and go to discover unknown land , he pass by the coast of Sacatula and Motin , and by tempest run to the river of Guajaval , from whence he cross over to the haven of Santa Cruz , along the coast whereof he discover 3. small hand , and within two day and a half return to the main land he discover the river call Rio de san Pedro y san Pablo , and not far distant from thence two other river as big or great than that of Guadalquivir which run by Sivil , together with their head-spring . e embark our self in the haven of Acapulco in Acapulco on the 8. of July in the year i 7 ; degree of of our lord 1539 , call upon almighty atitude-God to guide we with his holy hand unto such place where he may be serve , and his holy faith advance . and we sail from the say port by the coast of Sacatula and Motin , which be sweet and pleasant the coast of through the abundance of tree that grow thereon , and $acatfla river which pass through those country , for the which motin-wee often thank God the creator of they . So sail along we come to the haven of saint Iago in the province s - Iago de of Colima : but before we arrive there , the main mast of our ship call Santa Agueda be break by a storm of wind that take we , so as the ship be force to sail without her mast until we arrive in the say haven . from the port of Acapulco to this haven of Colima we be sail the space of 20. day . here we stay to mend our mast and to take in certain victual , water , and wood , the space of 27. day . and we depart from the say haven the 23. of August , and the isle of sail by the isle of Xalisco the 27. or 28. of the Xalisco . say month we be take with a extreme tempest wherein we think we shall have perish , and be toss and weather-beaten , we run as far as Guajaval . the river of Guajaval in the province of culiacan . in this storm we lose the pinnace call Sant Thomas , and because we have lose she we cross over to the Santa Cruz port of Santa Cruz in California : for while we be ' cedifornla so beat tbe f°rmer tempest , the pilot of the bark signify unto we , that he perceive she begin to leak , and that already she have receive in much water , insomuch that she begin to founder : whereupon , to help her need , and that we may meet together in a know haven , if by chance the tempest shall separate we , as it do indeed , we will he to repair to the haven of Santa Cruz , where we mean to repair his harm and our own . wherefore be all arrive in this place of Santa Cruz , we stay there five day and take in water , wherein we hear no news of our bark which we have lose : whereupon the captain resolve to follow on our voyage ; wherefore we set sail the 12. of September , and as we sail we three hand , see along the coast of the say haven 3. Islands , whereof the captain make no great account , think there can be no great good find in any of they . Theise Islands seem not to be great ; wherefore he command the master and pilot to proceed on their voyage , and not to lose time without any profit . So sail over the gulf of California , in two day and a half Rio de san we come to the river of saint Peter and S. Paul , find Ppablo* ! an before we enter into the same a small island in the a ° ' mouth of the river , be 4. or 5. mile distant from the main . on both side of this river we behold goodly and pleasant great plain full of many green and beautiful tree , and far within the land we behold certain exceed high mountain full of wood very pleasant to behold . from this river we sail still along the coast the space of 15. league , in which course we find two other river in our judgement two great as great or great than Guadalquivir the river of nvers-sivilia in Spain . all the coast by these river be plain as the other which we have pass , with many wood : likewise within the land appear great mountain cover with wood very beautiful to behold , and beneath in the plain appear certain lake of water . from these river we sail 18. league , and find very pleasant plain , and certain great lake who certainegreat mouth open into the sea : here our captain thought la^es ' good thorough to discover what those lake be , and to search whether there be any good haven for his ship to ride in , or to harbour themselves , if any tempest shall arise ; and so he command a boat to be hoist out into the sea , with a master and five or six man to view they , and to sound the depth , and bottom of they : who go thither , and find the coast very shall , and the mouth of the lake ; whereupon they make no account of they , only because the shore be so shallow , for otherwise the land be very pleasant . here at evening we see on the shore 10. or 12. Indians and fire . the aforesaid two river be two league distant the one from the other little more or less , and be great , as i have say , and be in the last of they we go up to the ship-top , and see many lake , and one among the rest exceed great , and we suppose that they have their spring out of this great lake , as other river also have from other lake , for we see the course of they several each by themselves , have goodly wood grow all along their bank . the current of these river may be discern three league within the sea : and at the mouth of they be many small stake set up for mark : the shore here be plain and sandy , and the country very pleasant . Chap. 2. sail along the coast from the two aforesaid great river , they discover three mouth of lake and a goodly country , they come unto Cabo Roxo , and take possession of those country for the emperor majesty . a discourse of the fair haven that be on those coast , and of very many island which they see , before they come to the cape call Capo de las plaias . this day we sail along the coast the space of 16. league , and in the midst of this voyage there be a bay very fair of 4. or 5. league , have certain bank or fence in it , in behold whereof we take great pleasure . the night follow we ride in 20. radome water . the next day we follow our voyage towards the north , and have sail 3. or 4. league we see 3. mouth of lake which enter into the land , where they become like stand pool . we ride a league distance from these mouth in 6. fathom water , to see what they be , and send our boat with certain man , to see if there be any entry for our ship : for half a league from shore we have not pass one or two fathom water . here our man see 7. or 8. Indians , and find sundry sort of green herb somewhat differ from those of Nueva Espanna . the country be plain , but far within land they see great and small hill extend themselves a great way , and be very fair and pleasant to behold . the day follow we proceed on our voyage , sail always in sight of the plain coast towards the northwest , in 10. or 15. fathom water . and have sail 6. good league we find a bay on the coast within the land of about 5. league over , from whence the coast trend northwest , and this day we sail about 16. league . all this coast be plain , and not so pleasant as that which we have pass : here be certain small hill , but not so high as those which we have find before . thus we sail all night northwest , and until the next day at noon , at which time we fall with a headland of white sand , where by the height which we take that day we find our self to be in the latitude of 27. degree and this cape we call Capo roxo . all the coast be plain and fair and clean sand , and we see within land some few tree not very great , with certain mountain 8c wood 3. or 4. league distant from the say cape : and here likewise appear a mouth of a river , which ( as far as we can discern ) make certain lake up within the land : from the mouth whereof for the space of a league into the sea it seem to be very shall , because the sea do break very much . here we see within the land 3. or 4. river . in this sort we sail on our voyage to the northward , 8c because we have not good weather we ride that night in a great haven lie in our way , where on the shore we see certain plain , and up within the land certain hill not very high : and continue our course towards the north about 3. league from this haven we find a hand of about one league in circuit lie before the mouth of the say haven . And sail forward we find a haven which have two mouth into the sea , into which we enter by the northermost mouth , which have 10. or 12. fathom water , 8c so decrease till it come to 5. fathom , where we ancker in a pool which the sea make , which be a strange thing to behold , for there be so many entrance 8c mouth of stream and haven , that we be all astonish at the sight thereof ; and these haven be so excellent frame by nature , as the like be not to be see in the world , wherein we find great store of fish . here we ancker , and the captain go on shore , and take possession , use all such ceremony as thereunto belong . here also we find certain wear to catch fish make by the Indians , and certain small cottage , wherein be diverse piece of earthen pot as fine make as those in Spain . here by commandment of the captain a cross be erect upon a hill , and it be set up by Francis Preciado . in this place we see the country full of fresh and green grass , howbeit differ from that of new Spain , and up within the country we see many great and very green mountain . this country seem very goodly and delightsome to all of we , in regard of the greenness and beauty thereof , and we judge it to be very populous within the land . from this haven we depart and keep our way towards the northwest with good weather , and begin to find hard by the seashore exceed high mountain spot with white , and in they we see many fowl which have their nest in certain hole of those rock , and sail io . league until night , all which night we be becalm . the next day we follow our course northwest with good weather : and from that day forward we begin to see on the western shore ( whereon the foresay haven of saint Cruz stand ) certain island or high land , whereat we rejoice not a little . and so sail a island . forward we meet with a island about two league in bigness , and on the east shore have still the main land and island in sight , we sail 15. league until the evening , always find hard by the sea-coast exceed high mountain bare of tree , the land appear still more plain unto we on the western shore . where-some take they upon we begin to be of diverse opinion , some think lfomiaafe ' that coast of Santa Cruz be a firm land , and nothing but that join with the continent of Nueva Espanna , island . other think the contrary , and that they be nothing else but island , which be to the westward . and in this sort we proceed forward , have the land on both side of we , so far , that we all begin to wonder at it . this day we sail some 15. league , and call this cape Capo de las plaias . Capo roxo . the coast run it northward . fishingweare like those of Virginia . of the strait which they discover on the coast of Capo de las plaias , and of the pleasant country which they find before they come to the rock call los diamantes . of the wonderful whiteness of that sea , and of the ebb and flow thereof : and of the multitude of island and land , which extend themselves northward from the haven of Santa Cruz. the day follow we sail until night with so good weather , that we run about 20. league . all this coast along the shore be full of little hill without grass or tree : and that night our ancker in 20. fathom water . the next day we follow our voyage beginning to sail before break of day northwestward , and we come into the midst of a strait or mouth which be straight of 12 league broad from one land to the other , which straight have two hand in the midst thereof be 4. cede depth league distant the one from the other : and here we discern the country to be plain , and certain mountain , 8c it seem that a certain gut of water like a brook run through the plain . This straight ( as far as we can perceive ) be very deep , for we can find no bottom : and here we see the land stretch afar off from the one shore to the other , and on the western shore of the haven of saint Cruz , the land be more high with very bare mountain . the day follow we pass on our way towards the north , and sail some the strait 15. league , and in the midst of our way we find a ^re rume circuit or bay of 6. league into the land with many northward . coove or creek , and the next day follow continue our course we sail some 10. league , and the coast in this day journey be all of high mountain naked and bare without any tree . it be very deep hard by the shore , and that night we be constrain to stay by reason of the contrary wind . the next morning before break of day we sail still along the coast to the northwest until evening , and run about some 15. league . all along this shore we see very goodly mountain within the land , and many plain and down with some few tree , and the sea shore be all sandy . in the midst of this day course we find certain small rock in the sea 4. league distant from the main , be the say land make a great point into the sea , and here we stay the rest of the night , where we have a very great shower of rain . the day follow we proceed on our voyage , and sail until night by a compass or turn , some 8. or 9 league , and see within land a few mountain have no tree upon they , but the sun shine always very clear , as far as we can descry , they be very great , on the western shore of the haven of Santa Cruz. here we stay all night because we find very shallow water and see the sea very white , and in a manner like to chalk , so that we all begin to marveile thereat . the day follow we go forward again along the coast northwestward , and sail eight league , and see another land which stretch northwest , and be full of high mountain . and still continue this course we search very diligent to see if there be any passage through between both the land , for right forward we see no land . and thus sail we always find more shallow water , and the sea thick , black , and very muddy , and come at length into five fathom water ; and see this , we determine to pass over to the land which we have see on the other side , and here likewise we find as little depth and less , whereupon we ride all night in five fathom water , and we perceive the sea to run with so great a rage into the land , that it be a thing much to be marveil at , and with the like fury it return back again with the ebb ; during which time we find 11. fathom water , and the flood and ebb continue from six to six hour . the day follow the captain and pilot go up to the ship top , and see all the land full of sand in a great round compass , and join it self with the other shore , and it be so low , that whereas we be a league from the same we can not well discern it , and it seem that there be a inlet of the mouth of certain lake , whereby the sea go in and out . there be diverse opinion among we , and some thought that that current enter into those lake , and also that some great river there may be the cause thereof . and when we can perceive no passage through , nor can discern the country to be inhabit , the captain accompany with certain of we go to take possession thereof . the same day with the ebb of the sea we fall down from the other coast from the side of Nueva Espanna , though always we have in sight the firm land on the one side of we , and the other island on our left hand , on the side of the port of Santa Cruz situate on the western shore : for on that side there be so many island and land , so far as we can descry , that it be great to be wonder at : for from the say haven of Santa Cruz , and from the coast of culiacan we have always in a manner land on both side of we , and that so great a country , that i suppose if it shall so continue further inward , there be country enough for many year to conquer . this day we have the wind contrary , and cast anchor until the flood increase , which be in the afternoon , and then we set sail likewise with contrary wind until midnight , and then cast anchor . the next day we depart , shape our course along the coast Southwest , until midnight with little wind , and we see within the land high mountain with some opening , and we make way some three league , and all the next night we be becalm , and the next day we continue our course but a little while , for we sail not above five league , and all the night be becalm , and see the land full of bare and high mountain , and on our left hand we descry a plain country , and see in the night certain fire . chap 4. they land upon a island to discover the same , and there they see many fire , which issue out of certain mountain , and many seal-fish . here they take a indian , and can not understand his language . run along they discover another island , and take possession thereof for the emperor majesty , and a great haven in the firm land , which they call Ancon de Sant Andres , or the haven of saint Andrew . the next day follow our course we see a great haven with a hand in the sea , within a crossbow shoot of the firm land , and in this island and on the firm land be see many smoke by the judgement of all the company ; wherefore the captain think good that we shall go on land to know the certainty of these smoke and fire , himself take ten or twelve of we with a boat in his company : and go on shore in the island , we find that the smoke proceed out of burn certain mountain and breach of burn earth , where-mountaine . out ascend into the air certain cinder and ash which mount up to the middle region of the air , in such great quantity , that we can not esteem less than twenty load of wood to be burn for the cause of every of those smoke , whereat we be all not a little amaze . in this island be such abundance of seal , as it be wonderful . here we stay that day , and kill a great number of these seal , with who we have some trouble : for they be so many , and aid one another so well , that it be strange to behold ; for it fall out , that while we be occupy in kill some of they with staff , they assemble twenty or thirty together , and lift abundance of themselves up assail we with their foot in a squadron , seal . and overthrow two or three of our company on the ground : whereupon let go those which they have in their hand , they and the other escape we and go into the sea , howbeit we kill good store of they , which be so fat as it be wonderful : and when we open some of they to have their liver , we find certain small b'lacke stone in their body , whereat we much marveil . the next day we ride at anchor here for lack of good weather to sail withal : whereupon the captain determine to go on shore with nine or ten in his company , to see whether there be any people there , or any sign of people that have be there , and they find on the main land seven or eight Indians like to Chichimecas , which be go a fish , and have a raft rafi °f of cane ; who so soon as they espy we run away and betake themselves to flight , but be pursue by we , in the end we take one of they , who language be so strange that we can by no mean understand he ; his clothing be nothing at all , for he be stark naked . Theise people carry their water in bottle make of beast skin , they fish with hook of bone , and we find good store of their fish , whereof we take three or four dozen . the indian which we have take see himself in our hand do nothing but weep , but the captain call he , and make much of he , give he certain bead , with a hat and certain hook of we , and then let he go . and it seem that after he be return to his companion , he declare unto they how we have do he no harm at all , show they the thing which we have give he : whereupon they also determine to come unto we to our boat , but because it be now night , and that our ship be far from we , we force not to stay for they , especial because it be a bad place and a dangerous . this country have on the sea-coast high and bare mountain with certain grass in some place like unto our broom , or like unto wood of rosemary . Bottles of beast skin and fishhook of bone Ancon de S. Andres , or the haven of saint Andrew in 32 degree . two Indians of exceed huge stature . the next day we sail near to the coast on the same side , with very scarce wind , and in a manner calm , and run not above five league , and all the night follow we lay becalm , and we see on the shore five or six fire . the land be high with very-high mountain without grass , have certain cave in they : the next day also , and part of the night follow we be becalm : and the morrow after we follow our course along the say coast , and pass between a great island full of exceed high mountain , and the main land , where we see a very great haven in the firm land in which we anchor to see what it be , and be come to a anchor , the captain and some of we go on land the same day to see if there be any people and fresh water , and we find certain small cottage cover with dry grass , with certain little staff lay overthwart , and we go a little way into the country which be very baren , by certain small and strait path , and find a little pond or pit , but dry and without water ; and here the captain take possession for the mark of the valley in the name of his majesty , and after this we return to our ship , and that night we see four or five fire on the land . the next day the captain determine , because he have see these fire , to go on shore , and so with our two boat we go fifteen or twenty of we unto certain crooked strand two league from the place where our ship ride , and where we have see the fire , and we find two Indians of exceed huge stature , so that they cause we great to wonder ; they carry their bow and arrow in their hand , and as soon as they see we leap on shore they run away , and we follow they unto their dwelling and lodging , which be certain cottage and bower cover with bough , and there we find great and small step of many people , but they have no kind of victual but only cuttle-fish which we find there . the country towards the sea side seem but barren , for we see neither tree nor green grass there , yet be there certain small path not well beat , and along the sea-coast we see many tract of dog , hare , and cony , and in certain small island near unto the main we see seal-fish . this haven be call Ancon Ancon de Zant de Sant Andres . Andres . Chap. 5. they discover a mountainous island very great , and near unto it certain other island with a goodly green and pleasant country . they have sight of certain Indians in canoas of cane , who language sound like the flemish tongue , with who they can not have any traffic . the next day we proceed on our voyage , sail between the main and a island , which we suppose to be in circuit about a hundred or eighty league , sail sometime within one , and sometime within two league of the main . the soil of this island be of certain mountain not very steep with cave in they , and as far as we can descry by the coast , there appear no sign of any plain country . here from this day forward we begin to be afraid , consider that we be to return to the port of Santa Cruz ; for it be suppose , that all along this mighty gulf from the entrance in at culiacan until the return back unto the say haven , be all firm land , and also because we have the firm land always on our right hand and it go round circlewise unto the say haven ; but many thought and hope that we shall find some mouth or outlet , whereby we may pass through unto the other coast . what our success be our will declare in the relation follow . the next day be Thursday we sail with scant wind , for it be almost calm , and pass beyond that great island , have firm land always on our right hand , and coast ( as i say ) very near unto it . the next day likewise we sail with little wind , it be in a manner calm , and pass near unto the shore by certain round bay , and certain point which the land make , which be pleasant to behold be somewhat green , and there seem to be some a great island . they return from the bot-tomeofthegulf of California . 219 creek there . This Friday at night we sail altogether with a fresh gale , and at break of day we another be between the main land , and a island on our island . | eft hand , which be somewhat big , as far as we can discern . there be a great bay in the firm land , and before it be a point which stretch far into the sea . the firm land seem to be much fresh and pleasant than those land which we have pass , have many bank and hill of indifferent height , and beautiful to behold . the country ( as far as we can discern ) be so pleasant and delightful , that we all desire to go on shore , and to search up into it two or three day journey , to see whether it be inhabit or not . we see within the land of that bay two fire . the night follow be Saturday we sail continual with a prosperous and fresh gale , and the wind be so great that we draw our bonnet to our main sail , and sail so till the morning . on Sunday the twelve of October we find our self altogether enclose with land , on the right hand with the main , which compass we before and behind , and on the left hand with a island of a league and a half ; and between the main and the island in the midst of the sea there lay a small Islet , and also between the say main and the island there be two mouth , through which there appear a passage whereby afterward we pass through . this main be much more fresh and green than the other which we have pass , and have certain plain and point of mountain of pleasant view , and full of green grass . here all this night we see two or three village which be very great , and at break of day we see a Canoa or boat make of cane , which come from the land out of a creek , and we stand still until it come near unto we in the ship , and they begin to speak in their language which no man understand , who pronunciation be like to the Fleming , and be 220 call they return with great haste unto the shore , and we be very sorry because our boat have not follow they . here happen unto we a very strange thing , which be , that as this indian return to the shore in [ he . 403. ] certain of these creek where a number of his fellow Indians be , as we view that part , we see five canoas issue forth , which come towards we : whereupon we stay to see what they will do . in the mean while our admiral come up unto we , which be near the shore , for she also have see they , and so be come together we cast anchor , expect what those canoas will do . in the mean while our generali command we to make ready our boat , and to furnish the same with oar and man , to try if we can by any mean take some of they , that we may come to some knowledge of they , and that we may give they some of our trifle , and special of our hook and bead to win their friendship . the indian with their five canoas approach within one or two stone cast of we , and then begin to speak very loud unto we in a very strange language , always stand upon their guard to retire themselves with speed . when our captain see this , and that they will not come near we , but rather retire , he command six mariner to go into the boat from the stern of the ship , and himself also go with they with all possible haste towards the Indians . the indian return to the shore with so great celerity , that they seem to fly in those little canoas of cane . nevertheless our man use such diligence that one of the Canaos be board and take ; but the indian in the Canoa see himself now take leap into the water , and our man follow with their boat to take he , but see himself within their reach , he duck with his head under their boat , and so deceive they , and then rise up again , and with their oar and with staff they give 221 he certain blow , to amaze he , but nothing will serve they ; for as they be about to lay hand upon he he still dive under water , and with his hand and foot get near to the shore : and as he rise up above the water , he call to his fellow which stand on the shore to behold , cry Belen with a loud voice , and so they pursue he , and strike he sometime be very near the shore , and he always go call the rest of his fellow to come and help he , whereupon within a short while after three other canoas come forth to succour he , be full of Indians with bow and arrow in their hand , cry with a loud voice , that we shall come on shore : these Indians be of great stature and savage , fat also and well set , and of a brown colour . our captain perceive this , lest they shall wound any of our people with their arrow , return back , and command we immediate to set sail , and so forthwith we depart . this day the wind scant , and we return to anchor in the foresay place , and our admiral ride from the firm land towards the island , and we which be in the ship call the Trinity lie near unto the main , and before break of day we depart with a fresh gale . and before we disemboque out of that channel we see certain grass very high and green upon the main : whereupon a mariner , and the pilot go up into the top , and see the mouth of a river which run through that green country into the sea . but because our admiral be under all her sail far from we , we can not tell they of this river , where we will have take water , whereof we have some need , and because it be a very good haven to go on shore to take it , and therefore without water we follow our course . on Monday we depart from this haven which be like unto a lake , for on all side we be compass with land , have the continent before , behind we , and on our right side , and the island on our left side , and we pass forth 222 1539 ' at those mouth beforemention , which show a outlet into the open sea . thus we sail along still view the situation of the country , rejoice all of we at the sight thereof , for it always please we moor and more , still appear moor green and pleasant , and the grass which we find near unto the shore be fresh and delectable , but not very high , be ( to all our judgement ) not past a span long . likewise the hill which we see , which be many , and many down make a very pleasant prospect , especial because we judge , that there be many valley and dale between they . Chap. 6. they discover a very great bay with four small island in it , whereas they take possession . as they sail along and discover diverse island they come at length to the port of Santa Cruz , where not be able to get any knowledge of those Indians , although they lie in wait for they at a place call the well of Grijalva , they depart thence . they have a perilous and long tempest , which cease , after they have see a light on their shrowd . at our come out of these opening we begin to great find a bay with a very great haven , environ with havendiver small hill have upon they green wood and pleasant to behold . in this bay and strand be two [ three . 404. ] small island near unto the shore , one of the which be like unto a table about half a league in bigness , and the other be a round hill almost as big as the former . Theise island serve we only to content our sight , for we pass by they without stay , have but a slack wind on Monday morning : all which day we follow our course with the foresay slack wind , and within a while after it become flat contrary , so that we be constrain to anchor at the say point of the say haven ; and on Tewesday at break of day we set sail , but make but little away all the day , because 223 the wind continue contrary , although but very weak . the night follow we be becalm a little beyond the point of this haven ; but about midnight we begin to have a fresh gale , and on Wednesday in the morning we be seven league distant from that point . this country show ( as it be indeed ) more plain than the rest , with certain small woody hill , and within the other point which be before descry , the situation seem to be more pleasant and delightsome than the rest which we have pass . and at the uttermost end of the point be two small islet . the say Wednesday about nine of the clock the wind blow a good gale , and we sail by evening between seven and eight league , and come over against a land not very high , where we see certain creek or breach not very ragged , into every of which a river seem to fall , because the soil be very green , and have certain tree grow on it far big than those which we have find before . here the captain with five or six man go on shore , and take possession pass up one of those river , and find the foot of many Indians upon the sand . on the bank of that river they see many fruitful tree , as cherry-tree and little appletree , and other white tree : they find also in the wood three or four beast call adibe , which be a kind of dog . the same night we set sail with the wind off - the land , which blow so fresh , that it make we to strike our foresail ; and on the sixeteenth of October at nine of the clock we come near unto a point of certain high mountain , on which day be Thursday we make little way , because the wind cease , but it rise again in the night , whereupon by the break of day on Friday we come before the say point be six or seven league off . the land seem to be very mountainous with certain sharp point not great clad with grass , but somewhat bare . on our left hand we see two island , the one of a league and a half , the other not so much , and it seem that we draw near 224 to the port of Santa Cruz , whereat we be sorry , because we be always in good hope to find some outlet into the main ocean in some place of that land , and that the same port be the same outlet , and also that by the say coast we may return to the foresay haven of Santa Cruz , and that we have commit a great error , because we have not certain seek out the secret , whether that be a strait or a river , which we have leave behind we unsearched at the bottom of this great sea or gulf . all Friday and the night follow we sail with a scant wind , and on Saturday at break of day we be between two point of land which make a bay , wherein - a bay with 4 we see before and behind four or five great and small or 5 inland . Islands . the land be very mountainous , part whereof be cover with grass , and part be void . within the land appear more mountain and hill , and in this place we be come near unto the haven of Santa Cruz , which be all firm land , except it be divide in the very nook by some streite or great river which part it from the main , which because we have not thorough discover , all of we that be employ in this voyage be not a little grieve . and this main land stretch so far in length , that i can well express it : for from the haven of Acapulco , which stand in seventeen degree and twenty minute of latitude , we have always the coast of the firm land on our right hand , until we come to the great current of the white and red sea : this current and here ( as i have say ) we know not the secret of this u in 32 ae-current , whether it be cause by a river or by a strait : and so suppose that the coast which we have on our and red . right hand be close up without passage , we return back again , always descend southward by our degree , until we return unto the say haven of this return santa Cruz , find still along the coast a goodly and u pleasant country , and still see fire make by the ca$ ' Indians , and canoas mad of cane . we determine to take in fresh water at the haven of Santa Cruz , to ix 225 p run along the outward western coast , and to see what it be , if it please God . here we rest our self , and eat of the plum and fruit call Pithaias : they arrive and we enter into the port of Santa Cruz on Sunday ‘ ot^san^’1 th® * 8 °f October and stay there eight day to take Qruz in wood and water rest our self all that while , that our man may strengthen and refresh themselves . our captain determine to divide among we certain garment of taffeta , with cloak and say , and a piece of taffeta , and likewise ordain , that we shall go on land to catch a couple of Indians , that they may talk with our interpreter , and that we may come to the knowledge of their language . whereupon thirteen of we go out [ three . 405. ] of our ship by night , and lie in ambush in a place which be call the well of Grijalva , where we stay until noon between certain secret way , and can never see or descry any one Indian : wherefore we return the Spaniard to our ship , with two mastive-dog which we carry with they to catc^ th® Indians with more ease : and in our Indians return we find two Indians hide in certain thicket , ' which be come thither to spy what we do : but because we and our dog be weary , and think not on they , these Indians issue out of the thicket , and flee away , and we run after they , and our dog see they not : wherefore by reason of the read more of thickness of the wild thistle , and of the thorn and these staff briar , and because we be weary , we can never cat - i0 - overtake they : they leave behind they certain staff so fine wrought that they be very beautiful to behold , consider how cunning they be make with a handle and a cord to fling they . the nine and twenty of October be Wednesday , we set sail out of this haven of Santa Cruz with little wind , and in sail down the channel our ship call the Trinity come on ground upon certain sholde : this be at noon at a low water , and with all the remedy that we can use we can not draw she off , whereupon we be constrain to underprop she , and to stay 226 the next tide : and when the tide begin to increase we use all diligence to draw she off , and can not by any mean , whereat all the company and the captain be not a little grieve : for we think we shall have lose she there , although we cease not with all our might to labour with both our boat , and with our cable and capsten . in the end it please God about midnight at a full sea with the great force which we use to recover she , that we draw she off the sand , for which we give God most hearty thanks , and ride at anchor all the rest of the night , wait for daylight for fear of fall into any further danger or mishap . when day be come , we set forward with a fresh gale , and proceed on our voyage , direct our prow to the main sea , to see whether it will please God to let we discover the secret of this point . but whether it please not his great goodness , or whether it be for our sin , we spend eight day from this port , before we can double the point , by reason of contrary wind , and great rain , and lightning and darkness every night : also the wind grow so rage and tempestuous , that they make we all to quake , and to pray continual unto God to aid we . and hereupon we make our cable and anchor ready , and the chief pilot command we with all speed to cast anchor , and in this sort we pass our trouble : and whereas we ride in no security , he cause we forthwith to weigh our anchor , and to go whither the wind shall drive we . and in this sort we spend those eight day , turn back by night the same way that we have go by day , and sometime make good in the night that which we have lose in the day , not without great desire of all the company to have a wind which may set we forward on our voyage , be afflict with the misery which we endure by reason of the thunder , lightning , and rain , wherewith we be wet from top to toe , by reason of the toil which we have in weigh and cast of our anchor , as need require . and on one of these night , which be very dark 227 and tempestuous with wind and rain , because we think we shall have perish , be very near the shore , we pray unto God that he will vouchsafe to aid and save we without call our sin to remembrance . and straightway we see upon the shrowd of the Trinity as it be a candle , which of it self shine , and give a light , whereat all the company great rejoice , in such sort that we cease not to give thanks unto God . whereupon we assure our self , that of his mercy he will guide and save we , and will not suffer we to perish , as indeed it fall out ; for the next day we have good weather , and all the mariner say , that it be the light of saint Elmo which appear on the shrowd , and they salute it with their song and prayer . Theise storm take we between the isle of saint Iago and saint Philip , and the isle call Isla de perlas lie over against the point of California suppose to be firm land . Chap. 7. sail on their way they discover a pleasant country , and in their judgement great inhabit , and find the sea-coast very deep . they go to discover or view the isle of pearl . and by a current one of their ship be separate from the other , and with great joy after three day they have sight again of she , and follow their voyage they discover certain great , green , and pleasant plain . we begin to sail along the coast the seven or eight of November , the land always show very green with grass pleasant to behold , and certain plain near the shore , and up within the country many [ three . 406. ] pleasant hill replenish with wood , and certain valley , so that we be delight above measure , and wonder at the greatness and goodly view of the country : and every night we see fire , which show that the country be great inhabit . thus we proceed on our voyage until the ten of the say month of November , have 228 1539-alwayes the coast of the main ocean on our right hand , from hence and the far we sail , we always find the country more delightsome and pleasant , as well in behold the green thereof , as also in that it show certain plain backside of and deep valley , through which river do fall down California . into the land , within certain mountain , and hill full of great wood which be not very high , and appear within the country . here we be 54 league distant from California little more or less , always towards the California . Southwest , see in the night three or four fire , whereby it appear that the country be inhabit , and full of people , for the greatness of the country argue no less : and we suppose that there must needs be great town inhabit within the land , although in this point we be of diverse opinion . the sea be so deep on all this coast that we can scarce find ground in 54 fathom . on the great part of the coast there be hill of very white sand , and it seem to be a dangerous coast , because of the great and swift tide which go there , for the sand show so much for the space of ten or twelve league , for so the pilot affirm . this day be Saturday the wind increase , and we have sight of the isle of Isla de perlas . pearl , which on this side of the gulf appear with a deep valley all cover over with tree , and show much fair than on the other side , and we enter into the porte of Santa Cruz. from the nine of November to the fifteen we sail not above ten league , because we have contrary wind , and great shower : and beside this we have another mischance which do not a little grieve we : for we lose company of the ship call the Trinity , and can never see she for the space of three day , whereupon we suspect that she be return home unto new Spain , or that she be sever from our company : wherefore we be grieve out of measure to see our self so leave alone , and the captain of all other be most sad , though he cease not to encourage we to proceed on our voyage , say that notwithstanding all this we ought 229 not to leave off this enterprise which we have begin , and that though we be leave alone we shall deserve the great commendation and credit : whereupon we all answer he , that we will not have he think that any of we will ever be discourage , but that we will follow he until he shall think it reasonable that we shall not proceed any further in the enterprise , and that we be in danger of perish , and that until then we will be at his commandment : but withal we persuade he that after he have see any great difficulty to proceed any further , he shall do well to return back to make relation of our success to the R. H. lord the mark de valle . hereupon he make a oration unto we wherein he tell we , that he can not believe , much less can imagine , wherefore the ship call the Trinity shall return into new Spain , nor why she shall willing depart from we , and go unto any other place , and that he think by all reason , that some current have carry she out of our sight , and that through contrary weather and tempest she can not fetch we up , and that notwithstanding all that which we have do in the voyage , he have a instruction , that if by chance we be separate one from the other , we be to take this course to meet again together , namely to return back eight or ten league to seek one another , beyond certain headland which lie out into the sea , and that therefore we shall do well to return to seek she up . this sentence please we all , and so return to seek she , we espy she two league distant from we , come towards we with a fresh gale of wind , whereat we great rejoice . thus be come together we anchor for that day , because the weather seem very contrary , and the captain chide they for their negligence in sail , because they have in such sort lose our company ; and they excuse themselves , that they can do no less , because a current have carry they away above three league , whereby they can never reach unto we . the next day 230 be the sixeteenth of November we set forward , but sail very little , for the north and northwest wind be against we . here we discover certain plain , in my judgement very great and green , and right before we we can not discern any mountain or wood , whereat we marveil to see so great a country . and we meet a indian in a Canoa on the shore whereon the sea do break , who stay to behold we a great while , and oftentimes he lift up himself to view we the better , and then return back along the coast : we use all diligence to see whether he will come out further from the shore , to give he chase , and to try whether we can catch he , but he very cunning view we without come near unto we , and return to the shore with his Canoa . here we see in the evening but one fire , and wit not whether it be do by the cunning of the Indians , because they will not have we know that there be people there , or that it be [ in . 407. ] so indeed . from the say 16 day of November until the 24 of the same month we can not proceed on our way above 12 or 15 league : and look into our sea-chart , we find our self distant from the xaguge of the port of Santa Cruz about 70 league . they be 70 now on the 24 be Monday very early in the morn - teagtuffrom ing we begin to take very good view of that SantaCruz country , and all along the coast we see many fair plain with certain furrow make in the midst like unto half plain , the say plain still appear up into the country , with pleasant champion , because the grass which grow there be very beautiful , short , and green , and good pasture for cattle . howbeit because we ride so far off , we can not perfect judge what kind of grass it be , but it show very short and green , and without thorn . Theise plain on the right hand make a bay into a valley which seem to be a piece of a mountain : the rest show to be all plain without any thistle or weed , but full of grass good for cattle very green and fair , as i have say . 231 one of their ship by tempest be separate from the other , and afterward meet with her consort she report that the land stretch to the west by the mouth of the great lake . the pilot be of diverse judgement touch the state of this coast inhabit by Chichimecas . they enter into a haven to take in fresh water , and be sudden assail by two squadron of Indians . they defend themselves valiant , and the captain with some of his soldier be grievous wound . the 26 of this month be Wednesday at night the north wind take we , which still increase more and more so great that it put we to much trouble , for it continue two day , in which the sea be always boisterous ; and this night again we lose the Trinity be beat with the north wind aforesaid ( and we have sight of she on Monday the 24 ) wherewith we be all of we great aggrieve , both captain , soldier and mariner , because we see we be leave alone , and our ship call Santa Agueda wherein we be , be but bad condition , and this grieve we more than the trouble which we have with the boisterousness of the sea , imagine that if we shall lose the Trinity , or if any mishap shall fall unto we , we shall not be able to follow our voyage accord to our captain and our own land run desire . This say 24 day be Monday we see a the country with high mountain towards the northwest , oit west . anj seem that the land stretch on still forward , whereat we exceed rejoice , because we judge that the land grow always broad and broad , and that we shall meet with some speciali good thing . whereupon we desire that it will please God to send we good weather for our voyage , which hitherto we note . find always contrary , so that in 26 day we sail not above 70 league , and that with much trouble , sometime ride at anchor and sometime sail , and seek 232 the remedy and benefit of the shore to avoid peril . in this country which we discover the 26 day we always see ( as i have say ) along the shore , and within the land , goodly plain without any tree , in the midst whereof be a lake or gather together of the seawater , which ( to our judgement ) be above 12 league in compass , and the sea-coast reach to the mountain before mention . and this day we see our ship call the Trinity , which ride 2 league distant from we , which so soon as she see we , set sail , and we come together and rejoice great . they bring we great quantity a wonderful of grey fish , and of another kind : for at the point fi^nsplace of those mountain they find a fish which be very wonderful , for they suffer themselves to be take by hand : and they be so great that every one have much ado to find room to lay his fish in . they find also on the say point a fountain of fresh water which descend from those hill , and they tell we that at the same place they have find a narrow passage , whereby the sea enter into the say lake . they comfort we much with the report of these thing , and in tell we that the land trend to the west ; for the chief pilot think , and the other pilot be of the same opinion , that we shall find a good country . this night we set sail to go to that point to take in fresh water which we want , and to see this lake , and to put some man on shore : and after midnight the wind come upon we so forcible at the north that we can not stay there : whereupon we be constrain to put further into the sea , and return the same way back again unto the shore with much ado , and come to a anchor a great way short of the place from whence we be drive : and there we ride until Thursday at noon with this bitter north wind , and on Friday about noon , when we most think it will have cease , it begin to increase again , which grieve we not a little see the weather so contrary , hope always that it will cease , and that some wind will blow from the shore , whereby 233 [ three . 408. ] we may recover the point of land to take in fresh water , and to search whether there be any people about that lake . here we lay from the 26 of the say month till the 29 , drive up and down the sea , wind in by little and little until we have get under the shelter of those mountain : which be obtain we ride the say 29 of the month half a league from those woody mountain , which we have see in the sea we stay in this place at our ease all the Sunday , and Juan Castilio the chief pilot go that day in the boat on shore with seven in his company , and they land near the sea , and on a certain low ground they find four or five Indians Chichimecas of great stature , and go towards they , who flee away like deer that have be chase . after this the pilot go a little way along the seashore , and then return to his boat , and by that time he be enter thereinto , he see about fifteen Indians of great stature also , with their bow and arrow which call unto he with a loud and strong voice , make sign with their bow ; but the pilot make no account of their gesture , but rather return to the ship , and declare what have pass between he and the Indians . the same day the captain command that our cask shall be make ready against the next morning to take in water , for in both the ship there be about five and twenty buttes empty . the first of December , and the second day in the morning the captain go with both the bark on shore with some dozen soldier , and the great part of the mariner which labour in fill of water , leave in the ship as many as be needful , and as soon as we be come on shore at the water place the captain cause the buttes to be take out , to the end they may be fill with water , and while they return to fetch the barrel and hogshead of the ship , the captain walk a turn or two upon the shore for the space of one or two crossbow shoot , and afterward we go up to certain of those 234 mountain , to view the disposition of the country , and in truth we find it in that place very bad to our judgement , for it be very ragged , full of wood and cave , and so stony , that we have much ado to go . be come unto the top we find certain small hill full of wood , and cliff that be not so craggy , although very troublesome to climb up ; and while we look from these little hill , we can not discern any more mountain , but rather judge that from that place forward there be great plain . the captain will not suffer we to go any further , because in those place we have see certain Indians which seem to be spy , and warn we thereof he command we to retire unto the shore , where we be to take in water , and to dispatch our business quick , and appoint we to make certain pit , that our butt may more easy be fill with water . And set our guard or centinel , we begin to fill water . in the mean while the captain take certain soldier , and go to the top of a high hill , from whence he descry a great part of the sea , and a lake which be within the land : for the sea enter in the space of a league , and there be a good fish place round about : and the lake be a fishingplace so great , that it seem unto we to be very near 30 °f league in compass , for we can not discern the end thereof . than we come down with no less trouble ’ than we have mount up unto the hill , by reason of the steepenesse of the place , and some tumble down with no small laughter of the rest . And be come somewhat late to our water place ( for it be then past noon ) we set our self to dinner , always appoint some of our company in sentinel , until we be call to dinner , and when some be call two other be appoint in their room . and about two of the clock after dinner , the captain and the rest suspect no danger of assault of Indians , both because the place seem not to be fit for it , as also for that we have set our centinel at the passage ; two squadron of Indians 235 a sudden assault of the indian with stone , arrow , and staff . [ Iii . 409. ] the english voyage come upon we very secret and covert , for one come by the great valley through which the water run which we take , and the other come by a part of that great hill which we have ascend to see the lake , and all of they come so covert , that our centinel can neither see nor hear they ; and we have not perceive they , if a soldier by chance lift up his eye have not say , arm , arm , my master , for many Indians come upon we . when we hear this the captain leap up in a great rage , because the guard be change out of their place : and with his sword and target , be follow by a soldier , who name be Haro , and afterward by the rest , he and the say soldier go towards a little gate of certain stone , whither the rest of we be to follow he : for if the Indians have get that place from we , we shall have incur great danger , and the great part of we have like to have be slay , and none can have escape but such as by chance can have leap into the boat , and the tide go so high , that none can be save but such as be most excellent swimmer . but at length the captain bestir himself very nimble , use all celerity that be possible . therefore when he and Haro have win the gate , the rest of the soldier gate up after they , and the captain and Haro turn themselves to the Indians and make head against they , and the Indians assail they with such number of stone , arrow , and javelin ( which be a very strange thing ) that they break in piece the target which the captain have on his arm , and beside that wound he with a arrow in the bend of his knee , and though the wound be not great , yet be it very painful unto he . while they thus stand to withstand their assault , they strike Haro which be on the other side so forcible with a stone , that they throw he flat upon the ground : and by and by another stone light upon he which shiver his target , and they hit the captain with another arrow , and shoot he quite through one of his ear . another arrow come and strike a 236 soldier call Graviello Marques in the leg , of which he feel great pain and go halt . in the mean space Francis Preciado , and certain other soldier come up and join himself with the rest on the left hand of the captain , say unto he , sir , withdraw your self , for you be wound , but be you not dismay , for they be but Indians and can hurt we . in this wise we begin to rush in among they upon the side of a rock always gain ground of they , which great encourage our mind , and when we begin to enforce they to retire , we win a small woody hill , where we shelter our self , whereas before they shoot upon we from aloft , for they be on the high ground under covert in safety , and then by no mean we can offend they , but by run forcible upon they with our target on our arm , and our sword in our hand . on the other side , to approach and seek to overtake they be a vain thing , see they be as swift as wild goat . by this time Haro be get up on foot , and have clap a woollen cloth upon his head , which have bleed extreme , he join himself unto we , of who we receive no small aid . in the mean space the indian fortify themselves on the crag of a rock , from whence they do not a little molest we , and we likewise fortify our self upon a hillock , whereby we descend into their fort , and there be a small valley between they and we , which be not very deep from the upper part . there we be 6 soldier and two negro with the captain , and all of we be of opinion that it be not good to pass that place , lest you Indians be many may destroy we all , for the rest of our soldier which be beneath at the foot of the hill , make head against the other squadron of the Indians , keep they from hurt those which take in water on the strand and from break the butt of water , and be but few , we conclude to stay here , and so we stand still fortify our self as well as we can , especial consider that we have no succour on any side ; for Berecillo our mastive-dogge which shall have 237 A.D. 1539 - the Spaniard use mastiffs in their warn against the Indians . Reade more hereof cap . 12. the english voyage aid we be grievous wound with 3 arrow , so that by no mean we can get he from we : this mastive be wound in the first assault when the Indians come upon we , who behave himself very well , and great aid we ; for he set upon they , and put 8 or 10 of they out of array , 8c make they run away , leave many arrow behind they : but at length ( as i have say ) he be so wound , that by no mean we can get he to go from we to set any more upon the Indians , 8c the other two mastiff do we more harm than good : for when they go against they , they shoot at they with their bow , and we receive hurt and trouble in defend they . the captain leg when he wax cold be so swell , that we lap it up in a woollen cloth , and he halt much of it : and while the Indians thus stand still , one part of they begin to dance , sing , and shout , and then they begin all to lade themselves with stone , and to put their arrow into their bow , and to come down towards we very resolute to assault we , and with great outcry they begin to fling stone and to shoot their arrow . then Francis Preciado turn he to the captain and say : sir , these Indians know or think , that we be afeard of they , 8c in itrueth it be a great fait to give they this encouragement , it be better for we resolute to set upon they with these dog , 8c to assault they on this hill , that they may know we to be no dastard , for they be but Indians and dare not stand we ; and if we can get their fort upon the hill , God will give we victory in all the rest . the captain answer , that he like well of the motion , and that it be best so to do , although for any further pursuit up the hill , he think we be to take another course . by and by Francis Preciado get his target on his arm , and his sword in his hand , run unto the other side of the valley , which on that part be not very steep , cry saint Iago , upon they my master , and after he leap Haro , Teresa , Spinosa , and a crossebow-man call Montanno , and after they follow the captain , 238 1539-though very lame , with a negro and a soldier which accompany he , encourage and comfort they , will they not to fear . thus we drive they to the place where they have fortify themselves , and from whence they descend , and we take another hill over against they within a dart cast of they . and have breathe our self a little , the captain come unto we , and say , go too my master , upon they before they strengthen themselves on this hill , for now we see plain that they be afeard of we , see we chase they continual from their fort : and sudden 3 or 4 of we go towards they well cover with target , unto the foot of their fort where they be assemble , and the rest of our company follow we : the Indians begin [ three . 410. ] to make head against we , and to fling many stone upon we , and shoot many arrow , and we with our sword in our hand rush upon they in such sort , that they see how furious we set upon they , abandon the fort , and run down the hill as swift as deer , and flee unto another hill over against we , where the other squadron of the indian stand , of who they be rescue , and they begin to talk among themselves , but in a low voice , and join together 6 and 6 and 8 8c 8 in a company , and make a fire and warm themselves , and we stand quiet behold what they do . 239 [ Chap. 9 after the skirmish the captain be wound , and the rest of the soldier see the indian depart , return unto their ship . the next day take in fresh water at the say place he send mariner to sound the mouth of the lake . depart thence they come to the port call Baya de Sant Abad , and endure a dangerous storm at sea . and afterward come near the shore to take fresh water in the say haven , they see certain peaceable Indians . by this time it be late and the night approach , and the Indians see this , within a short while after determine to get they pack , and each of they or the great part take firebrand in their hand , and get they away into craggy place . when the captain see this he command we to return aboard our boat , it be now dark night , thank we all for the good service we have do he . And be not able to stand upon his leg , he lean with his arm upon Francis Preciado ; and thus we return to our boat , where with much ado we get aboard , by reason of the great tide and roughness of the sea , so that our boat be fill with every wave . thus very weary , wet , and some wound ( as be aforesaid ) each man return unto his ship , where our bed which we find , and our refresh , and the cheer we have at supper do not great comfort we in regard of our former travel . we pass that night in this sort , and the next day be Tuesday the captain find himself great pain with his wound , and chief with that on his leg , because it be great swell with his go upon it . we lack 12 butt to fill with water , and the barrel in both the ship , and the captain will have go out to cause they to be fill , but we will not suffer he , and therefore we leave off the business for that day . but he appoint that the crossbow shall be make ready , and two speciali good 240 harquebuss , and the next day be Wednesday very early , he command Juan Castilio chief pilot to go out with both the boat and with all the soldier and mariner that he can make , have the day before command the Trinity to go as near the shore as she may , and to make ready some of her ordinance , that if the Indians shall show themselves , they may affright they , and do they as much hurt as they can . wherefore on the Wednesday all we that be soldier , save the wound person , go on shore with certain mariner in the best order that we can , and take the first hill , where we have fortify our self , stand all upon our guard until the water be fill , and until we be call , during which time not one indian show himself . thus we go aboard when we think good our self , at least without any suspicion of the Indians , although the tide of the sea go so high y‘ it put we to great trouble , for oftentimes with great wave it beat into our boat . this be on the Wednesday the 3 of December . and to avoid loss of time the captain command Juan Castilio the chief pilot to take a boat and certain mariner as he shall think good , and to view the mouth of the lake to see whether the entrance be deep enough for to harbour the ship . he take the boat of the admiral with 8 mariner , and we of the Trinity , go and sound the mouth , and on the shallow place of the bar without they find 3 fathom a special good depth , and far in 4 , and up high 5 , always increase unto 10 or 12 fathom , when they be come into the two point of the say lake , which be a league broad from one point to the other , and all their sound be exceed good ground . than they go over to the southeast point , and there they see a great boat or raft which they endeavour to take to carry unto their ship . in you mean while they espy certain cottage , which the pilot determine to go and see , and be come near they see 3 other raft with 3 Indians on they distant from the cottage one or two cross-bowe shoot , ix 241 q and he leap on land with 4 or 5 mariner in his company : and while they behold those cottage , they see many Indians descend down a small hill in warlike manner with their bow and arrow , whereupon they determine to retire to their boat , and to return to their ship , and they be not go from the seashore scarce a stone cast , but the indian be come upon they to shoot at they with their arrow , and because they be unarm , they will not fight with they , have go on shore for no other purpose , but to sound the mouth and entrance of that lake . on Thursday the 4 of December we set sail with a fresh gale of wind , and sail some 8 or 10 league , and come unto certain [ three . 411. ] mouth or inlet which seem to all of we as though they have be hand , and we enter into one of they , Baya deal and come into a haven which we call Baya deal Abad Abad it100 ap inc [ ose ( l anj compass with land , be one of they the point of fair haven that have be see : and about the same , California . especial on both side the land be green and goodly to behold ; we descry certain river on that part which seem green , and therefore we return back , go out at that mouth whereby we come in , always have contrary wind : yet the pilot use their best endeavour to make way : and we see before we certain woody hill , and beyond they certain plain ; this we see from the Friday the 5 of the say month , until the Tuesday , which be the nine . as we draw near to these wood they seem very pleasant , and there be goodly and large hill and beyond they towards the sea be certain plain , and through all the country we see these wood . many great from the day before , which be the conception of our tmoke , of lady , we see many great smoke , whereat we much Francis gualle marvel , be or diverse opinion among our self , make man - whether those smoke be make by the inhabitant of cion . the country or no . over against these wood there fall every night such a dew , that every morning when we rise , the deck of the ship be so wet , that until the sun be of a good height , we always make the 242 deck dirty with go upon it . we ride over against these wood from the Tuesday morning when we set sail , until Thursday about midnight , when a cruel northwest wind take we , which , whither we will or no , enforce we to way our anchor ; and it be so great , that the ship Santa Agueda begin to return back , until her cable break , and the ship hull , and sudden with a great gust the trinket and the mizzen be rend asunder , then northwest wind still grow more and more : within a short while after the main sail be rend with a mighty flaw of wind , so that we be enforce , both soldier , captain , and all of we , to do our best endeavour to mend our sail ; and the Trinity be drive to do the like , for she go round upon her anchor , when she come ahead of it , her cable break , so that there we lose two anchor , each ship one . we go back to seek Baya deal Abad , for we be within 20 league of the same , and this day we come within four league of it , and be not able to reach it by reason of contrary wind , we ride under the lee of certain mountain and hill which be bare , and almost void of grass , near unto a strand full of sandy hill . near unto this road we find a fishingplace under a point afishingplace . of land , where have let down our lead to see what ground be there , a fish catch it in his mouth , and begin to draw it , and he which hold the sounding-lead cry and show his fellow that it be catch , that they may help he , as soon as he have get it above the water , take the fish , and loose the cord of the sounding-lead , and throw it again into the sea , to see whither there be any good depth , and it be catch again , whereupon he begin to cry for help , and all of we make a shout for joy ; thus draw the fish the rope of the sounding-lead be very great be crack , but at length we catch the fish which be very fair . here we stay from Friday when we arrive there , until the Monday , when as it seem good to our captain , that we shall repair to the water place , from whence 243 we be some six league distant , to take in 12 buttes of water , which we have drink and spend , because he know not whither we shall from thenceforth find any water , or no ; and though we shall find water , it be doubtful whither we shall be able to take it by reason great tide of the great tide that go upon that coast . we draw upon this coast . near to that place on Monday at night , when as we see certain fire of the Indians . and on Tuesday morning our generali command that the Trinity shall come as near our ship and to the shore as it can , that if we have need , they may help we with their great ordinance : and have make 3 or 4 bourd to draw near the shore , there come 4 or 5 Indians to the seaside ; who stand and behold while we put out our boat and anchor , mark also how our bwoy float upon the water ; and when our boat return to the ship , two of they leap into the sea , and swim unto the bwoy , and behold it a great while ; then they take a cane of a arrow , and tie to the say bwoy a very fair and shine sea-oyster of pearl , and then return to the shore , near to the water place . Chap. 10. they give unto the Indians many trifle which stand upon the shore to see they , and seek to parley with they by their interpreter , which be a chichimeco , who can not understand their language . they go to take fresh water . Francis Preciado spend the time with they with many sign , and truck and be afeard of their great multitude , retire himself wise with his companion , return with safety to the ship . when the captain and we behold this , we judge these Indians to be peaceable people ; whereupon the captain take the boat with 4 or 5 mariner carry [ three . 412. ] with he certain bead to truck , and go to speak with they . in the mean while he command the indian interpreter our chichimeco , to be call out of 244 the admiral that he shall parley with they . and the captain come unto the boy , and lay certain thing upon it for exchange , and make sign unto the savage to come and take they ; and a indian make sign unto our man with his hand , his arm , and head , that they understand they not , but signify that they shall go aside . whereupon the captain depart a small distance from that place with his boat . and they make sign again that he shall get he further ; whereupon we depart a great way off , the say Indians leap into the water , come unto the boy , and take those bead , and return back again to land , and then come unto the other three , and all of they view our thing , they give a bow and certain arrow to a indian , and send he away , run with all haste on the shore , and make sign unto we that they have send word unto their lord what thing we have give they , and that he will come thither . within a while after the say Indian return , run as he do before , and begin to make sign unto we , that his lord be come . and while we stay here , we see on the shore ten or twelve Indians assemble themselves , which come unto the other Indians , apd by and by we see another company of 12 or 15 more appear , who assemble themselves all together . and again they begin to make sign unto we , to come forthwith to our boat , and show we many oyster of pearl on the top of certain cane , make sign that they will give they we . when we behold this , the captain command we to make ready our boat , and go aboard it with the say mariner , and row to a certain stone in form of a rock , which lie in the sea near unto the shore . and hither come first 2 or 3 Indians and lay down one of those oyster , and a garland make of parats feather , or sparrow feather paint red ; they lay down also certain plume of white feather , and other of blue colour . in the mean while we see continual Indians assemble to the shore by ten and ten , and so by little and little they come in squadron ; 245 and one of they assoon as he see the boat begin to leap forward and backward with so great nimbleness , that doubtless he seem to all of we a man of great agility , and we take no small pleasure while we behold he fetch those gambol : but the rest of the Indians which stand at the mouth of the fresh water run towards he , and cry unto he , forbid he to use those gesture , because we be come thither in peaceable sort , and by this mean he come with the rest to the water place , where by little and little in this manner there assemble above a hundred of they all in order , with certain staff with cord to fling they , and with their bow and arrow , and they be all paint . in the mean while our chichimeco-interpreter bear in the he of California , be come unto we , and the captain again command a mariner to strip himself , and to swim and lay upon the say rock certain bell , and more bead , and when he have lay they there , the Indians make sign that he shall go away ; and so they come thither and take they , and our man draw near with their boat . the captain command the indian our chichimeco to speak unto they , but they can not understand he , so that we assure believe , that they understand not the language of the he of California . this day be Tuesday until night the Indians stay at this water place , take some of our bead , and give unto we their feather and other thing , and when it be very late they depart . the morrow follow be Wednesday very early the captain command that our buttes shall be make ready , that before break of day , and before the Indians shall take the hill , which stand over the water place , we may be land in good order : which be put in execution : for we go on shore with as many as can go , save those that have charge to take in the water , and such as be to stay on shipboard , which in all be about fourteen or fifteen person , in as good order as we can devise : for we be four crossbow , two 246 ... I539 ' harquebuzier , and eight or nine target , and the most part of we carry very good sling , and every one eighteen river stone , which weapon the captain invent , because the indian at the first have handle we very shrewd with the multitude of stone which they fling at we : we have nothing to defend we save our target , and to seek to win the fort from whence they endamage we ; he therefore think with these sling , that we may offend they , and we likewise think well of his opinion , for make trial of they , we throw very well with they , and much far than we think we can have do : for the sling be make of hemp , we fling very far with they . now be come to the water place the say Wednesday by break of day we take the fort of the fountain , which be certain crag or rock hang over the same , between which there be a open or deep valley through which this water run , which be no great quantity , but a little brook not past a fathom broad . So stand all in order , other four or five Indians come thither , who as soon as they see we to be come on shore , and to have get the top of the water place , [ three . 413. ] they retire unto a small hill on the other side , for the valley be between they and we : neither stay they long before they begin to assemble themselves as they have do the day before by 10 and 10 , and 15 and 15 , range themselves on this high hill , where they make sign unto we . and Francis Preciado crave licence of the generali to parley with these Indians , and to give they some trifle ; wherewith he be content , charge he not to come too near they , nor to go into any place where they may hurt he . whereupon Francis go unto a plain place , under the hill where the Indians stand , and to put they out of fear he lay down his sword and target , have only a dagger hang down at his girdle , and in a scarf which he carry at his neck , certain bead to exchange with they , comb , fishinghook and comfit . and he begin to go up the hill , and 247 truck wonderful traffic with the indian fir mother ofpearle , and other thing . the english voyage to show they diverse of his merchandise . the Indians as soon as he have lay those thing on the ground , and go somewhat aside , come down from the hill and take they , and carry they up , for it seem that their lord be among they , to who they carry those trifle . than they come down again , and lay to give unto he in the say place , a oyster of pearl , and two feather like hawk feather , make sign to Preciado that he shall come and take they ; which he do , and again lay there a string of bell , and a great fishhook , and certain bead ; and they take the same , lay there again another oyster of pearl , and certain feather : and he lay down other bead , two fishhook , and more comfit , and the Indians come to take they up , and approach much near unto he , then at other time , and so near that a man may have touch they with a pike , and then they begin to talk together : and 7 or 8 moor come down , unto who Francis Preciado make sign , that they shall come down no low , and they incontinent lay their bow and arrow on the ground , and have lay they down come somewhat low , and there with sign , together with they which come first , they begin to parley with he , and require mariner breech and apparel of he , and above all thing a red hat please they high , which the say Francis wear on his head , and they pray he to reach it unto they , or to lay it in the place ; and after this certain of they make sign unto he to know whether he will have a harlot , signify with their finger those villainy and dishonest action , and among the rest they set before he a indian of great stature die whole with black , with certain shell of the mother of pearl at his neck , and on his head , and speak by sign to Francis Preciado touch the foresay act of fornication , thrust their finger through a hole , they say unto he , that if he will have a woman , they will bring he one ; and he answer , that he like well of it , and that therefore they shall bring he one . in the mean space 248 on the other side where the generali stand with his company , another squadron of Indians show themselves , whereupon the generali and his company make a stir , and put themselves in battle array : whereupon Francis Preciado be enforce to come down from they , to joy ne with the generali and his company : and here the Indians which come last begin to make sign that we shall lay down something to truck , and that they will give we some of their shell of mother of pearl , which they bring upon certain small stick , and herewithal they come very near unto we , wherewith we be not well content . and Francis Preciado say unto the captain , that if it please he , he will cause all the Indians to come together and to stay upon that high hill ; and he answer , that it be best to draw they all together , for by this time our man have take in all their water , and stay for the boat : whereupon Francis take a crown of bead go towards the valley , through which the water run towards the Indians , and . make sign unto they to call the rest , and to come all together , because he will go to the old place , to lay thing on the ground for exchange , as at the first ; and they answer that he shall do so , and that they have call the other , and that they will do , as he will have they , and so they do , for they cause they to come unto they , which they do , and Francis likewise go alone towards they , in which mean space the generali command his people to get into the boat . Francis come unto the place begin to lay down his merchandise of traffic , and afterward make sign unto they to stay there , because he will go to the ship to bring they other thing , and so he return to the place where the captain be , and find they all get into the boat , save the generali and three or four other , and the generali make as though he have give other trifle to Preciado to carry unto the Indians , and when he be go a little from he , he call he back again , and all this while the 249 Indians stand still , and be come unto he , we go fair and soft to our boat , and get into they at our ease , without any throng , and thence we come aboard our ship . the Indians see we thus go aboard come down to the strand where the brook of water be , and call unto we to come forth with our boat , and to come on shore , and to bring our bead , and that they will give we of their mother of pearl : but we be now set at [ three . 4.14 . ] dinner make no account of they : whereupon they begin to shoot arrow at the ship , and although they fall near we , yet they do not reach we . in the mean season certain mariner go out in the boat , to weigh the anchor , whereupon the Indians see they come towards they , 8c bring they nothing , they begin in scorn to show they their buttock , make sign that they shall kiss their bum : and these seem to be those that come last . the generali see this , command a musket to be once or twice shoot off , and that they shall take their just aim . they see these shot to be make ready , some of they rise and go to shoot their arrow at our mariner , which be go to weigh the anchor , than the generali command the great ordinance speedy to be shoot off , whereupon three or four bullet be discharge , and we perceive that we have slay one of they , for we assure see he lie dead upon the shore ; and i think some of the rest be wound . they hear this noise , and see he dead run away as fast as ever they can , some along the shore , and some through the valley , drag the dead indian with they , after which time none of they appear , save ten or twelve , which peep up with their head among those rock ; whereupon another piece of ordinance be discharge aloft against the place where they be , after which time we never see any more of they . 250 at the point of the Trinity they spend three day in fish , and in other pastime : after which set sail they discover pleasant country , and mountain void of grass , and a hand afterward call Isla de los cedros , or the he of cedar , near which they suffer sharp cold and rain , and to save themselves they return thither . immediate we set sail to join with the ship Santa Agueda , which be above half a league in the high sea from we , and this be on the Wednesday the seventeenth of December . be come together because the wind be contrary , we draw near to a headland , which we call Punta de la Trinidad , and here we stay fish , and solace our self two or three day , although we have always great store of rain . afterwards we begin to sail very slow , and at night we ride over against those mountain where we have leave our anchor , and upon knowledge of the place we receive great contentment see we have sail some five and thirty league from the place where we have take in water : neither be it any marvel that we so rejoice , because that the fear which we have of contrary wind cause we to be so well apay of the way which we have make . the day of the holy nativity of our lord , which be on the Thursday the five and twenty of the say month , God of his mercy begin to show we favour in give we a fresh wind almost in the poop , which carry we beyond those mountain , for the space of ten or twelve league , find the coast always plain : and two league within the land , which we coast along , and between these mountain , there be a great space of plain ground , which we may easy discern with our eye , although other be of another opinion . we begin from Christmas day to sail slow with certain small land-wind , and 251 great apparent of gold and silver . January 1540 forty league . [ Iii . 415. ] the english voyage sail from morning to night about seven or eight league , which we esteem no small matter , always pray to God to continue this his favour towards we , and thank he for his holy nativity , and all the day of this feast the friar say mass in the admiral , and the father Frier Raimund preach unto we , which give we not small comfort , by encourage we in the service of God . on Saturday at night be the 27 of the say month we ankor near unto a point which seem to be plain land all along the shore , and within the country be high mountain with certain wood , which wood and mountain run overthwart the country , and continue along with certain small hill sharp on the top , and certain little valley be between those mountain . and in truth to i which with diligent eye behold the same both in length and in the breadth thereof , it can not choose but be a good country , and to have great matter in it , as well touch the inhabit thereof by the Indians , as in gold and silver ; for there be great likelihood that there be store thereof . this night we see a fire far within the land towards those mountain , which make we think that the country be thorough inhabit . the next day be Sunday and innocent day , the 28 of the say month at break of day we set sail , and by nine or ten of the clock have sail three or four league , where we meet with a point which stretch toward the west , the pleasant situation whereof delight we much . from the eight and twenty of December we run our course until Thursday be newyeares day of the year 1540 , and we run some 40 league , pass by certain inlet and bay , and certain high mountain cover with grass in colour like rosemary : but towards the seaside very bare and burn , and towards the top be certain crag somewhat of a red colour , and beyond these appear certain white mountain , and so all the country show unto a point which appear beyond 252 those burn white and red mountain which have neither any grass nor tree upon they , whereat we marvel not a little . this newyeares day we see near the main two small hand , and rejoice great to see they ; for we stand in great fear , that contrary wind will drive we as far back in one day , as we have sail in ten , which if they have take we , we can not have withstand they . we run from the first of January until Monday which be five day , and the land always stretch northwest from the mountain aforesaid . and on the Sunday we see a far off " ahead of we a high land somewhat sever from the main shore , and all of we begin to dispute whether it be the land which trend towards the northwest , for that way the pilot hope to discover a better country : and the say Monday the five of Januarie we come to this high land beforesaid , and it be two hand the one a small one and the other a great one : we coast these two hand some six league , which be green , and have on the top of they many high slender tree ; and the great hand be twenty league in compass . we coast in 6 league in length without see or discover any other thing , but we see before we high land which stretch eight or ten league northward , where we ride on Monday at night . from Thursday be newyeares day until the next Monday we sail about 35 league . and in this course we feel great cold , which grieve we much , especial be assail by two or three windy shower which pinch we much with cold . we ride over against this land two or three night , have it near unto we , always keep watch by equal hour , one while mariner , and another soldier , all the night long with great vigilancy . on Tuesday be twelve day we come within two or three league of this land , which we have descry the day before , seem to we very pleasant for it show green with green tree of a ordinary bigness , and we see 253 two small islet near the main . Isla de id cedros mention in the 13 chapter the land trend here northwest 35 league . Thistle degree of northerly latitude . the english voyage many valley , out of which certain small mist arise , which continue in they for a long time , whereupon we gather , that they rise out of certain river . the same morning , to our great comfort we see great smoke , though we be above four league distant from they , and the captain make no great reckon to approach near unto they , nor to seek nor search what the matter be , and perchance because he be not then in the Santa Agueda , but be aboard the Trinity , as his manner be to come and stay there two or three day , as well to pass the time , as to give order for thing that be needful . in this country the winter and rain seem to be like that of Castille . we ride all night two or three league distance from shore , and towards evening we see five or six fire , whereat we all rejoice , but do not marvel thereat , because the situation of that country show to be habitable , be fair , pleasant , and all green , and likewise because the hand which we have leave behind we be ( as i have say ) twenty league in circuit , make show that it be well people . on the Wednesday we be 3 or 4 league at sea from the land , and begin to see two fire more , and therefore we assure our self that the country be very well inhabit ; and the far we sail , we always find it more civil . and for the space of fifty league before we come hither we always find swim on the sea certain float of weed of a ship length , and of the breadth of two ship , be round and full of gourd , and under these weed be many fish , and on some of they be store of fowl like unto white sea-meawes . we suppose that these float weed do grow upon some rock under the water . we be now in 30 degree of northerly latitude . we sail from the 7 of January until the 9 still with contrary wind : and on fry day about noon there rise a north and northeastern wind , which force we to return under the shelter of that hand which we leave behind we , from whence we have sail above 254 twenty league . and that Friday at night somewhat twenty late we have sail back above twelve league of the same , and because it be night we stay in the sea , ofqedar . where we and our ship be not a little trouble , so that all that night none of we sleep a wink , but watch every one . the next morning betimes be Saturday we proceed on our voyage , and gate under the shelter of the say hand , ride in thirty fathom water : and on that side where we ankor , we find high and close mountain , with heap of a certain earth which be all ash and burn , and in other place scorch and as black as coal , and like the rust of iron , and in other place whitish , and here and there small black hill , whereat we marvel exceed , consider that when we pass by , it seem unto we a habitable country full of tree , and now we see not a stick grow on this side . all of we suppose that on the other side towards the firm land the tree grow which we see , although ( as i have say ) we sail four or five league distant from the same . we stay here under the shelter of these mountain [ three . 416. ] Saturday , Sunday , and Monday , always have the northern wind so strong , that we think if it have catch we in the sea , we shall have be cast away . Chap. 12. they environ and land upon the hand of cedar , to discover the same , and to seek water and wood . they be assail of the Indians , and many of they wound with stone : but at length get the upper hand , they go to their cottage , and range far up into the island they find diverse thing which the Indians in their flight have leave behind they . on Friday the 13 of January the captain command we to hoist out our boat , and to go on shore , which be do accord , and we do row along the shore for the space of a good half league and 255 enter into a valley : for ( as i say ) all this country be full of high and bare hill , of such quality as i mention before : and in this and other small valley we find some water which be brackish , and not far from thence certain cottage make of shrub like unto broom ; likewise we find the footing of Indians both small and great , whereat we much marvel that in so rough and wild a country ( as far as we can discern ) there shall be people . here we stay all day , make four or five pit to take in water which we want , which though it be bad , and in small quantity we refuse not ; and so the evening be come , we return to our boat , and so come unto our ship which ride a good league from the shore . the next day be Wednesday the fourteenth of the say month our generali command we to set sail , and we sail about the say hand on the same side which we coast when we come from Nueva Espanna : for when we arrive on the coast we see five or six fire ; wherefore he desire to see and learn whether it be inhabit ; and at the far end of this inlet or bay where we ride there come out before we a Canoa , wherein be four indian which come row with certain small oar , and come very near we to see what we be : whereupon we tell our generali , that it be best to send some of we out with our boat to take these Indians or some one of they to give they something that they may think we to be good people : but he will not consent thereto , because he mind not to stay , have then a pretty gale of wind , whereby he may sail about this hand , hope that afterward we may find and take some other to speak with they , and give they what we will to carry on shore ; and as we sail near the land , we see a great hill full of goodly tree of the bigness of the tree and cypress of Castille . we find in this hand the foot of wild beast and cony , and see a piece of pine tree-wood , whereof we gather , that there be store 256 of they in that country . thus sail near unto the shore , we see another Canoa come towards we with other four Indians , but it come not very near we , and as we look forward , we see towards a point which be very near before we , three other canoas , one at the head of the point among certain flatte , and the other two moor into the sea , that they may descry we without come over near we . likewise between certain hill which be near the point , there appear here three and there four of they , and afterward we see a small troop of some twenty of they together , so that all of we rejoice great to behold they . on this side the land show green with piece of plain ground which be near the sea , and likewise all those coast of hill show green , and be cover with many tree , although they grow not very thick together . here at evening we ride near the shore hard upon the say point , to see if we can speak with those Indians , and likewise to see if we can get fresh water , which now we want , and still as soon as we be come to a anchor , we see the indian show themselves on land come likewise to in a Canoa , by six and seven at a time , whereat we marvel , because we never think that one of those canoas will hold so many man . in this wise we stay look still what will be the success , and in the place where we ride we be two small league distant from the shore , where we find these Indians in their canoas : whereupon we marvel not a little to see so great a alteration in so small a distance of country , as well because we still discover pleasant land with tree ( whereas on the other side of the isle there be none ) as also because it be so well people with Indians , which have so many canoas mad of wood , as we may discern , and not raft or Balsas , for so they Balsa be a call those float which be make all flat with cane . flat raft make the next day be Thursday the fifteen of the say cane ' month about break of day four or five Indians show ix 257 r near unto their lodging , themselves at the head of that point , who as soon as they have spy we retire behind the point , and hide themselves among the bush upon certain small hill that be there , from whence they issue forth , and cover all the green hill and mountain , which be along that coast ; whereupon we gather that they have their dwelling there , in regard of the commodity of the water and the defence against ill weather and the benefit of fish . at sunrising we see the indian appear in great company , go up unto the hill in small troop , and from thence they stand and behold we . immediate we see five or six canoas come out into the sea a good distance from we , and those which be in they stand often on their tiptoe , to view and descry we the better . on the other side we stir not at all for all these their gesture , but stand still ride at anchor ; and the generali seem not to be very willing to take any of they , but this day in the morning very early command the master mate to convey he to our other ship call the Trinity . thing pass in this sort , when about ten of the clock we see three canoas launch far into the sea to fish very near unto we , whereat we take great pleasure . at 12 of the clock the generali return from the Trinity and command the boat and man to be make ready , as well soldier as mariner , and that we shall go on shore to see if we can get any wood and water , and catch one of those Indians to understand their language if it be possible : and so all the man that be ready go into the admiral boat , and go towards the Trinity which by this time with the other ship have a small gale of wind , wherewith they enter far within the point , and we discover the lodging and house of the Indians , and see near the water side those five or six canoas which at the first come out to view we , draw on shore , and over against this place the ship cast anchor in 30 and 35 fathom water , and we be very near the land ; whereat we marvel much to find so great 258 depth of water so near the shore . be go aboard our boat , we make towards the shore over against a village of the Indians , who as soon as they see we village of about to come on land , leave a hill whereon they stand the indians-to behold what we do , and come down to the shore , where we be prepare to come on land : but before they come against we they cause their woman and child to fly into the mountain with their good , and then come direct towards we , threaten we with certain great staff which they carry in their hand some 3 yard long and thick than a man wrist : but perceive that for all this we cease not to come near the sea shore to come on land , they begin to charge we with stone and to fling cruel at we , and they hit skirmish of 4 or c man , among who they smite the generali with ilians two stone . in the mean while the other boat land stone . a little beneath , whereupon when they see that they be force to divide themselves to keep the rest of our company from come on land , they begin to be discourage , and do not assail the general boat so fierce , who begin to cause his people to go on shore with no small trouble ; for albeit he be near the land , yet as soon as they leap out of the boat they sink down , because they can find no fast foot ; and thus swim or otherwise as they can , first a soldier call Spinosa get on land , and next to he the general , and then some of the rest , and begin to make head against the Indians , and they come hasty with those staff in their hand , for other kind of weapon we see none , save bow and arrow of pinetree . after a short combat they break in piece the target of the generali , and of Spinosa . in the mean while those of the other boat be get on land , but not without much difficulty , by reason of the multitude of stone which continual rain down upon they , and they strike Terazzo on the head a use very shroud blow , and have it not be for our target , against arrow many of we have be wound , and in great distress , and stone . 2.59 although our enemy be but few in number . in this manner all our company come on shore with swim and with great difficulty , and if they have not help one another , some of they have be drown . thus we land , and within a while after those of the other boat be come on land , the Indians betake themselves to flight , take their way towards the mountain , whether they have send their woman , child and good : on the other side we pursue they , and one of those Indians which come to assail the general boat , be slay upon the strand , and two or three other be wound , and some say more . while we pursue they in this manner our mastive dog Berecillo overtake one of they not far from we ( who because we be so wet can not run very theuseofma - fast ) and pull he down , have bite he cruel , arr ” against and doubtless he have hold he till we have come , Indians . unless it have happen that another of his companion have not follow that Indian which the dog have pull down , who with a staff which he have in his hand give the dog a cruel blow on the back , and without any stay draw his fellow along like a deer , and Berecillo be fain to leave he for pain , neither have he scarce take the dog off on he , but the indian get up , and flee so hasty toward the mountain , that within a short while he overtake his fellow which have save he from the paw of the dog , who ( as it appear ) betake he lusty to his heal , and thus they come unto their fellow which descend not down to the shore be about some twenty , and they be in all about fifty or sixty . [ Iii . 418. ] after we have breathe our self a while , we view their house where they stand , which be certain cottage cover with shrub like broom and rosemary , with certain stake pight in the ground ; and the generali will we to march all together without disperse of our self , a little way up those mountain , to see if there be any water and wood , because we 260 stand in great need of they both . and while we march forward , we see in certain little valley the good which the woman have leave there behind they in their flight : for the Indians as soon as they see we pursue they overtake the woman , and for fear charge they to fly away with their child leave their stuff in this place . we go unto this booty , and find good store of freshfish , and dry fish , and certain bag contain above 28 pound weight full of dry fish ground to powder , and many seal-skin , the most part dress with a fair white grain upon they , and other very bad dress . there be also their instrument to fish withal , as hook make of the prick of certain shrub and tree . here we take the say skin without leave any one in the place , and then we return to the sea , because it be now night , or at least very late , and find our boat wait for we . Chap. 13. a description of the canoas of the Indians of the he of cedar , and how coast the same to find fresh water they find some , and desire to take thereof they go on shore , and be diverse molest with the weapon of the Indians . they christen a old indian , and return unto their ship . the canoas which they have be certain thick trunk of cedar , some of they of the thickness of two man , and three fathom long , be not make hollow at all , but be lay along and fasten together , they shove they into the sea , neither be they plain to any purpose , for we find no kind of edgetool , save that there be certain sharp stone , which we find upon certain rock that be very keen , wherewith we suppose that they do cut and flay those seal . and near the shore we find certain water , wherewith we fill certain bottle make of the skin of those seal , contain each of they above a great pail of water . the next day our generali command we to 261 seale-skws well dress with a white grain . Isla de id cedros , or the lie of cedar in 28 deg . and a quarter . the english voyage set sail , whereupon sail with a fresh gale about 2 league from the shore of this hand , trending about the same to see the end thereof , and also to approach near the firm land , to inform our self of the state thereof , because we have see 5 or 6 fire , we compass the same about : for by this mean we perform 2 or 3 good action , namely , we return to our right course , and search whether any river fall out of the coast of the firm land , or whether there be any tree there , or whether any store of Indians do show themselves or no . in this manner proceed on our way all the Friday be the 16 of January at evening , and seek to double the point of the hand , so fierce and contrary a northern wind encounter we , that it drive we back that night over against the lodging and habitation of the Indians , and here we stay all Saturday , what time we lose the Trinity again , but on sunday-night be the 18 we see she again , and begin to proceed on our way to compass that hand , if it please God to send we good weather . on Sunday , Monday , and Tuesday ( which be the twenty of the say month of Januarie ) we sail with scarce and contrary wind , and at length come to the cape of the point of the hand , which we call Isla de los cedros or the he of cedar , because that on the top of the mountain therein , there grow a wood of these cedar be very tall , as the nature of they be to be . this day the Trinity descry a village or town of the Indians , and find water : for on Sunday night we have new lose she , and have no sight of she until Tuesday , whenas we find she ride near the shore , not far from those cottage of the Indians . and as soon as we have descry she , we make towards she , and before we can reach she , we espy three canoas of Indians which come hard aboard the say ship call the Trinity , so that they touch almost the side of the ship , and give they of their fish , and our people 262 on the other side give they certain trifle in exchange , and after they have speak with they , the Indians go back to the shore , and at the same instant we come up unto the admiral and ride by they , and they all salute we , say that the indian be near they , and tell what have pass between they , whereat the generali and we receive great contentment . they tell we moreover , that they have find fresh water , whereby they increase our great joy , because we stand in much need thereof , for at the other place of the Indians we can get but a little . while we thus ride at anchor , we see a Canoa with 3 Indians put out into the sea from their cottage , and they go unto a fish place , among certain great and high weed , which grow in this sea among certain rock , the great part of which weed grow in 15 or 20 fathom depth ; and with great celerity they catch seven or eight fish , and return with they unto the Trinity , and give they unto they , and they in recompense give the indian certain trifle . after this the Indians stay at the stern of the ship , view the same above three hour space , and take the oar of our boat they try how they can row with they , whereat they take great pleasure ; and we which be in the admiral stir not a whit all this while , to give they the more assurance , that they shall not fly away , but shall see , that we mean to do they no harm , and that we be good people . as soon as we be come to anchor , and behold all that have pass between the Indians and those of the Trinity , after the indian be go to the shore in their canoas make of the body of tree , the general command the boat which be without to be these mighty deep and high weed be describe in the end of this treatise . [ Iii . 419. ] bring unto he : and when it be come , he , and Francis Preciado , and two other go into it , and so we go aboard the Trinity . the Indians see people come out of the other ship into the Trinity , send two canoas unto the stern of the ship , and bring we a bottle of water , and we give unto they certain 263 bead , and continue talk with they a little while ; but evening approach the air grow somewhat cold . the indian return on shore to their lodging , and the general and we to our ship . the next day be Wednesday in the morning , the general command certain of we to take the boat and go ashore , to see if we can find any brook or well of fresh water in the house of the Indians , because he think it unpossible for they to dwell there without any water to drink . the father friar Raimund likewise go out in our company , because the day before see the indian come to the stern of the ship and parley with we , he think he may have speak a little with they , with the like familiarity . in like sort many mariner and soldier go out in the boat of the Trinity , and go altogether with their weapon towards the shore , somewhat above the lodging of the Indians , very early in the morning they watch the boat , and perceive that we will come on land , whereupon they send away their woman and child with certain of they , who carry their good up into certain exceed steep mountain and hill , and 5 or 6 of they come towards we , which be excellent well make , and of a good stature . two of they have bow and arrow , and other two 2 bastinade much thick than the wrist of a man hand , and other two with 2 long staff like javelin with very sharp point , and approach very near we be now come on shore . And begin by sign very fierce to brave we , they come so near we , that almost they strike with one of those staff one of our soldier call Garcia a man of good parentage , but the general command he to withdraw himself , and not to hurt any of they . in the mean season the general and friar Raimund step forth , the friar lap a garment about his arm , because they have take up stone in their hand , fear that they will do they some mischief . then begin both of they to speak unto they by sign and word , to be quiet , signify , that they mean they no 264 1540-harme , but only be come to take water ; and the friar show they a drinking-cup ; but nothing will serve to make they leave that brag , and fling of stone : and the general continue still in a mind not to hurt they , command his man gentle to come near unto they , and that by sign they shall all show they , that they mean in no wise to hurt they , but that we be come on land only to take water . on the other side refuse utter to take knowledge of these thing they still insult more and more : whereupon Francis Preciado counsel the general to give he leave to kill one of they , because all the rest will flee away , whereby at our ease we may take water : but he reply that he will not have it so , but will they to looze the two mastiff Berecillo and Achillo : wherefore the dog be let loose , and as soon as they see they , they vanish immediate , betake they to their heal , and run up those cliff like goat . also other which come the great use from the mountain to succour they , betake they - °fmas^ve^^ self to flight . the dog overtake two or they , and indan . bit they a little , and we run after , lay hold on they , and they seem as fierce as wild and untamed beast , for 3 or 4 of we hold either of they , to cherish and pacific they , and to seek to give they some thing : but we avail not , for they bite we by the hand , and stoop down to take up stone for to strike we with they . we lead they a while in this manner , and come unto their lodging , where the generali give a charge , that no man shall touch any thing of they , command Francis Preciado to see that this order be observe , in not take any thing from they , although in very deed there be little or nothing there , because the woman and Indians which be flee have carry all away . here we find a old man in a cave so extreme age as it be wonderful , which can neither see nor go , because he be so lame and crooked . the father friar Raimund say , it be good ( see he be so age ) to make he a Christian ; whereupon we christen he . the captain 265 give the Indians which we have take two pair of earring , and certain counterfeit diamond , and make much of they , suffy they to depart at their pleasure , and in this sort fair and soft they return to the rest of their fellow in the mountain . we take the matter [ three . 420. ] of that village which be but a small quantity , and then the generali command we to return to our ship , because we have eat nothing as yet , and after our repast we sail towards a bay which lie beyond that village , where we see a very great valley , and those of the Trinity say , that they have see there good store of water , and sufficient for we ; wherefore we anchor near unto that valley . and the generali go on shore with both the boat , and the man that go on land in the morning with the two father friar Raimund , and friar Antony : and pass up that valley a crossebow-shot , we find a very small brook of water which nevertheless supply our necessity for we fill two butt thereof that evening , leave our vessel to take it with on shore until the next morning : and we rejoice not a little that we have find this water , for it be fresh , and the water which we have take up before be somewhat brackish , and do we great hurt both in our body and in our taste . Chap. 14. they take possession of the isle of cedar for the emperors majesty , and depart from thence they be great toss with a tempest of the sea , and return to the island , as to a safe harbour . the next day be the two and twenty of January very early the general command we to go on shore , and that we shall have our dinner bring we , and shall take in the rest of our water , which we do , and fill 17 butt without see any indian at all the next day go out to fill 8 or 9 vessel which be not yet fill , a great wind at northwest take we , whereupon they make sign to we from the ship , that with all haste we shall come on board again , for the wind grow 266 .... I54°‘ still high , and high , and the master be afraid that our cable will break , thus we be in the open sea . therefore be come aboard again not without great trouble , we return back over against the village of the Indians , * where we have slay the indian , and be - Cap. 12. cause the wind grow more calm about midnight , the pilot do not cast anchor , but hull under the shelter of this island , which ( as i have say ) be call the isle of isladehsge-cedar , and be one of the 3 isle of S. Stephan , the great and chief of they , where the general take possession . while we hull here , about midnight , the Stephan . next Friday be the 23 of the month , without our expectation we have a fresh gale of wind from the southeast , which be very favourable for our voyage , and the long it continue , the more it increase : so that between that night and the next day be Saturday the 24 of the say month we sail 18 great league . while read cap . 11. we be thus on our way , the wind grow so contrary a^out the end-and so tempestuous , that to our great grief we be constrain to coast about with our ship , and return twenty league back again , take for our succour the second time , the point of the lodging of the Indians , where the foresay Indian be slay , and here we stay Monday , Tewsday , and Wednesday , during which time the northwest and the north wind blow continual , whereupon we determine not to stir from thence until we see good weather , and well settle for our voyage : for in this climate these wind do reign so great , that we fear they will stay we long there than we will ; and we be so weary of stay , that every day seem a month unto we . the relation of the navigation and discovery [ he . 425. ] which captain Fernando Alarchon make by the order of the right honourable lord don Antonio de Mendosa viceroy of new Spain , date in Colima , a haven of new Spain . Chap. 1. Fernando Alarchon after he have suffer a storm , arrive with his fleet at the haven of saint Iago , and from thence at the haven of Aguaiaval : he be in great peril in seek to discover a bay , and get out of the same he discover a river on the coast with a great current , enter into the same , and coast along he descry a great many of Indians with their weapon : with sign he have traffic with they , and fear some great danger return to his ship . n Sunday the nine of May in the year 1540 i set sail with two ship , the one call saint Peter be admiral , and the other saint Catherine , and we set forward mean to go to the haven of saint Iago of good hope : but before we arrive there we have a terrible storm , wherewith they which be in the ship call saint Catherine , be more afraid than be need , cast over board nine piece of ordinance , two anchor and one cable , and many other thing as needful for the enterprise wherein we go , as the ship it self . assoon as we be arrive at the haven of saint Iago i repair the haven of my loss which i have receive , provide my self of stint jag > . thing necessary , and take aboard my people which look for my come , and direct my course towards the haven of Aguaiavall . And be there arrive i the haven of understand that the generali Francis Vazquez de Coronado be depart with all his people : whereupon take 279 the ship call saint Gabriel which carry victual for the army i lead she with i to put in execution your lordship order . afterwards i follow my course along the coast without depart from the same , to see if i can find any token or any indian which can give i knowledge of he : and in sail so near the shore i discover other very good haven , for the ship whereof captain Francis de ullua be generali for the marquess de Valle neither see nor find they . and these shoald when we be come to the flat and shoald from whence “ ofmarbe^ f°resaid fleet return , it seem aswell to i as mrin nr th , to the rest , that we have the firm land before we , and bay of Cali - that those shoald be so perilous and fearful , that it fimia . be a thing to be consider whither with our skiff we can enter in among they : and the pilot and the rest of the company will have have we do as captain Ullua do , and have return back again . but because your lordship command i , that i shall bring you the secret of that gulf , i resolve , that although i have know i shall have lose the ship , i will not have cease for any thing to have see the head thereof : and therefore i command Nicolas Zamorano pilot major , and Dominico deal Castello that each of they shall take a boat , and their lead in their hand , and run in among those shoald , to see if they can find out the channel whereby the ship may enter in : to who it seem that the ship may sail up high ( although with great travel and danger ) and in this sort i and he begin to follow our way which they have take , and within a short while after we find our self fast on the sand with all our three ship , in such sort that one can not help another , neither can the boat succour we , because the current be so great that it be impossible for one of we to come unto another : whereupon we be in such great j eopardie that the deck of the admiral be oftentimes under water , and if a great surge of the sea have not come and drive our ship right up , and give her leave as it be to breathe a while , 280 1540 ’ we have there be drown : and likewise the other two ship find themselves in very great hazard , yet because they be lesser and draw less water , their danger be not so great as we . now it please God upon the return of the flood that the ship come on float , and so we go forward . and although the company will have return back , yet for all this i determine to go forward , and to pursue our attempt voyage : and we pass forward with much ado , turn our stem now this way , now that way , to seek to find the chanel . and it please God that after this sort we come to the very bottom of the bay ; where we find a very mighty river , which run with so great fury of a stream , that we can hardly sail against it . in this sort i determine as well as i can to go up this river , and with two boat , leave the three with the ship , and twenty man , my self be in one of they with Roderigo Maldonado treasurer of this fleet , and Gaspar de Castilleia comptroller , and with certain small piece of artillery i begin to sail up the river , and charge all my company , that none of they shall stir nor use any sign , but he who i appoint , although we find Indians . the same day , which be Thursday the six and twenty of August , follow our voyage with draw the boat with halser we go about some 6 league : and the next day which be Friday by the break of day thus follow our way upward , i see certain Indians which go towards cer the bottom of the bay of California . [ Iii . 426. ] they go up the river of buena guia the 26. of August . taine cottage near unto the water , who assoon as they see we , ten or twelve of they rise up furious , and cry with a loud voice , other of their companion come run together to the number of 50 which with all haste carry out of their cottage such thing as they have , and lay they under certain shrub and many of they come run towards that part whether we approach , make great sign unto we that we shall go back again , use great threaten against we , one while run on this side and a other 281 he carry a interpreter with he . a very good course take to appease unknown savage . the english voyage while on that side . i see they in such a rage , cause our boat to launch from the shore into the mid of the river , that the Indians may be out of fear , and i ride at anchor , and set my people in as good order as i can , charge they that no man shall speak , nor make any sign nor motion , nor stir out of his place , nor shall not be offend for any thing that the Indians do , nor shall show no token of war : and by this mean the Indians come every foot near the river side to see we : and i gate by little and little towards they where the river seem to be deep . in this mean space there be above two hundred and fifty Indians assemble together with bow and arrow , and with certain banner in warlike sort in such manner as those of new Spain do use : and perceive that i draw towards the shore , they come with great cry towards we with bow and arrow put into they , and with their banner display . and i go unto the stem of my boat with the interpreter which i carry with i , who i command to speak unto they , and when he speak , they neither understand he , nor he they , although because they see he to be after their fashion , they stay themselves : and see this i draw near the shore , and they with great cry come to keep i from the shore of the river , make sign that i shall not come any far , put stake in my way between the water and the land : and the more i linger , the more people still flock together . which when i have consider i begin to make they sign of peace , and take my sword and target , i cast they down in the boat and set my foot upon they , give they to understand with this and other token that i desire not to have war with they , and that they shall do the like . also i take a banner and cast it down , and i cause my company that be with i to sit down likewise , and take the ware of exchange which i carry with i , i call they to give they some of they : yet for 282 all this none of they stir to take any of they , but rather flock together , and begin to make a great murmur among themselves : and sudden one come out from among they with a staff wherein certain shell be set , and enter into the water to give they unto i , and i take they , and make sign unto he that he shall come near i , which when he have do , i embrace he , and give he in recompense certain bead and other thing , and he return with they unto his fellow , begin to look upon they , and to parley together , and within a while after many of they come towards i , to who i make sign to lay down their banner , and to leave their weapon : which they do incontinent , than i make sign that they shall lay they altogether , and shall go aside from they , which likewise they do : and they cause those Indians which new come thither to leave they , and to lay they together with the rest . after this i call they unto i , and to all they which come i give some small trifle , use they gentle , and by this time they be so many that come throng about i , that i think i can not stay any long in safety among they , and i make sign unto they that they shall withdraw themselves , and that they shall stand all upon the side of a hill which be there between a plain and the river , and that they shall not press to i above ten at a time . and immediate the most ancient among they call unto they with a loud voice , will they to do so : and some ten or twelve of they come where i be : whereupon see my self in some security , i determine to go on land the more to put they out of fear : and for my more security , i make sign unto they , to sit down on the ground which they do : but when they see that ten or twelve of my companion come a shore after i , they begin to be angry , and i make sign unto they that we will be friend , and that they shall not fear , and herewithal they be pacify , and sit down as they do before , and i go 283 A.D. i54° - unto they , and embrace they , give they certain trifle , command my interpreter to speak unto they , for i great desire to understand their manner of speech , and the cry which they make at i . and that i may know what manner of food they have , i make a sign unto they , that we will glad eat , and they bring i certain cake of Maiz , and a loaf of mizquiqui , and they make sign unto i that they desire to see a harquebus shoot oflf , which i cause [ three . 427. ] to be discharge , and they be all wonderful afraid , except two or three old man among they which be not move at all , but rather cry out upon the rest , because they be afraid : and through the speech of one of these old man , they begin to rise up from the ground , and to lay hold on their weapon : who when i seek to appease , i will have give he a silken girdle of diverse colour , and he in a great rage bite his nether lip cruel , and give i a thump with his elbow on the breast , and turn in a great fury to speak unto his company . after that i see they advance their banner , i determine to return my self gentle to my boat , and with a small gale of wind i set sail , whereby we may break the current which be very great , although my company be not well please to go any far . in the mean space the indian come follow we along the shore of the river , make sign that i shall come on land , and that they will give i food to eat , some of they suck their finger , and other enter into the water with certain cake of Maiz , to give i they in my boat . Chap. 2. of the habit , armour and stature of the Indians . a relation of many other with who he have by sign traffic , victual and many courtesy . in this sort we go up two league , and i arrive near a clifle of a hill , whereupon be a arbour make new , where they make sign unto i , cry 284 that i shall go thither , show i the same with their hand , and tell i that there be meat to eat . but i will not go thither , see the place be good forecast . apt for some ambush , but follow on my voyage , within a while after issue out from thence above a thousand arm man with their bow and arrow , and after that many woman and child show themselves , towards who i will not go , but because the sun be almost set , i ride in the midst of the river . Theise Indians come deck after sundry fashion , some come with a paint that cover their face all over , some have their face half cover , but all besmouch with Indians be-cole , and every one as it like he best . other carry visard before they of the same colour which have the ' shape of face . they wear on their head a piece of a dear skin two span broad set after the manner of a helmet , and upon it certain small stick with some sort of feather . their weapon be bow and arrow of hard wood , and two or three sort of mace of wood harden in the fire . this be a mighty people , well feitured , and without any grossness . they have hole bore in their nostril whereat certain pendent hang : and other wear shell , and their ear be full of hole , whereon they hang bone and shell . all of they both great and small wear a girdle about their waste make of diverse colour , and in the middle be fasten a round bunch of feather , which hang down behind like a tail . likewise on the brawn of their arm they wear a strait string , which they wind so often about that it become as broad as one hand . they wear certain piece of dear bone fasten to their arm , wherewith they strike off the sweat , and at the other certain small pipe of cane . they carry pipe and also certain little long bag about a hand broad tie to their left arm , which serve they also in stead of dam continue ' braser for their bow , full of the powder of a certain herb , whereof they make a certain beverage . they have their body trace with coal , their hair cut before , 285 and behind it hang down to their waste . the woman go naked , and wear a great wreath of feather behind they , and before paint and glue together , and their hair like the man . there be among these Indians three or four man in woman apparel . now the next day be Saturday very early i go forward on my way up the river , set on shore two man for each boat to draw they with the rope , and about break forth of the sun , we hear a mighty cry of Indians on both side of the river with their weapon , but without any banner . i think good to attend their coming , aswell to see what they will have , as also to try whether our interpreter can understand they . when they come over against we they leap into the river on both side with their bow and arrow , and when they speak , our interpreter understand they not : whereupon i begin to make a sign unto they that they shall lay away their weapon , as the other have do . some do as i will they , and some do not , and those which do , i will to come near i and give they some thing which we have to truck withal , which when the other perceive , that they may likewise have their part , they lay away their weapon likewise . i judge my self to be in security leap on shore with they , and stand in the midst of they , who understand that i come not to fight with they , Skels and begin to give some of those shell and bead , and some bead . bring i certain skin well dress , and other maiz and a roll of the same naughty grind , so that none of they come unto i that bring i not some - [ three . 428. ] thing , and before they give it i go a little way from i they begin to cry out amain , and make a sign with their body and arm , and afterward they approach to give i that which they bring . and now that the sun begin to set i put off from the shore , and ride in the midst of the river . the next morning before break of day on both side of the river we hear great cry and of more Indians , which 286 leap into the river to swim , and they come to bring i certain gourd full of Maiz , and of those wreathe which i speak of before . i show unto they wheat and bean , and other seed , to see whether they have any of those kind : but they show i that they have no knowledge of they , and wonder at all of they , and by sign 1 come to understand that the thing which they most esteem and reverence be the sun : and i signify unto they that i come from a notable the sun . whereat they marveil , and then they begin to behold i from the top to the toe , and show i more favour than they do before ; and when i ask they for food , they bring i such abundance that i be enforce twice to call for the boat to put it into they , and from that time forward of all the thing which they bring i they fling up into the air one part unto the sun , and afterward turn towards i to give i the other part : and so i be always better serve and esteem of they as well in draw of the boat up the river , as also in give i food to eat : and they show i so great love , that when i stay they will have carry we in their arm unto their house : and in no kind of thing they will break my commandment : and for my surety , i will they not to carry any weapon in my sight : and they be so careful to do so , that if any man come new thither with they , sudden they will go and meet he to cause he to lay they down far from i : and i show they that i take great pleasure in their so do : and to some of the chief of they i give certain little napkin and other trifle ; for if i shall have give somewhat to every one of they in particular , all the small ware in swarm of new Spain will not have suffice . sometime it fall m / ' k out ( such be the great love and good will which they show i ) that if any Indians come thither by chance with their weapon , and if any one be warn to leave they behind he , if by negligence , or because he understand they not at the first warning , he have not lay they 287 a exceed great current of the river . the english voyage away , they will run unto he , and take they from he by force , and will break they in piece in my presence . afterwards they take the rope so love , and with strive one with another for it , that we have no need to pray they to do it . wherefore if we have not have this help , the current of the river be exceed great , and our man that draw the rope be not well acquaint with that occupation , it will have be impossible for we to have get up the river so against the stream . when i perceive that they understand i in all thing , and that i likewise understand they , i think good to try by some way or other to make a good entrance to find some good issue to obtain my desire : and i cause certain cross to be make of certain small stick and paper , and among other when i give any thing i give they these as thing of most price and kiss they , make sign unto they that they shall honour they and make great account of they , and that they shall wear they at their neck : give they to understand that this sign be from heaven , and they take they and kiss they , and lift they up aloft , and seem great to rejoice thereat when they do so , and sometime i take they into my boat , show they great good will , and sometime i give they of those trifle which i carry with i . and at length the matter grow to such issue , that i have not paper and stick enough to make cross . in this manner that day i be very well accompany , until that when night approach i seek to launch out into the river , and go to ride in the midst of the stream , and they come to ask leave of i to depart , say that they will return the next day with victual to visit i , and so by little and little they depart , so that there stay not above fifty which make fire over against we , and stay there all night call we , and before the day be perfect break , they leap into the water and swim unto we ask for the rope , and we give it they with a good will , thank God for the good provision which 288 1540-hee give we to go up the river : for the indian be so many , that if they have go about to let our passage , although we have be many more than we be , they may have do it . Chap. 3. one of the indian understanding the language of the interpreter , ask many question of the originali of the Spaniard , he tell he that their captain be the child of the sun , and that he be send of the sun unto they , and they will have receive he for their king . they take this indian into their boat , and of he they have many information of that country . in this manner we sail until Tuesday at night , go as we be wont , cause my interpreter to speak unto the people to see if peradventure any of they can understand he , i perceive that one [ three . 429. ] answer he , whereupon i cause the boat to be stay , and call he , which he understand , charge my interpreter that he shall not speak nor answer he any thing else , but only that which i say unto a wise devise . he : and i see as i stand still that that indian begin to speak to the people with great fury : whereupon all of they begin to draw together , and my interpreter understand , that he which come to the boat say unto they , that he desire to know what nation we be , and whence we come , and whither we come out of the water , or out of the earth , or from heaven : and at this speech a infinite number of people come together , which marvele to see i speak : and this indian turn on this side and on that side to speak unto they in . another language which my interpreter understand not . whereas he ask i what we be , i answer that we be Christians , and that we come from far to see they : and answer to the question , who have send i , i say , i be send by the sun , point unto he by sign as at the first , because they shall ix 289 t not take i in a lie . he begin again to ask i , how the sun have send i , see he go aloft in the sky and never stand still , and see these many year neither he nor their old man have ever see such as we be , of who they ever have any kind of knowledge , and that the sun till that hour have never send any other . i answer he that it be true that the sun make his course aloft in the sky , and do never stand still , yet nevertheless that they may well perceive that at his go down and rise in the morning he come near unto the earth , where his dwelling be , and that they ever see he come out of one place , and that he have make i in that land and country from whence he come , like as he have make many other which he send into other part , and that now he have send i to visit and view the same river , and the people that dwell near the same , that i shall speak unto they , and shall join with they in friendship , and shall give they thing which they have not , and that i shall charge they that they shall not make war one against another . whereunto he answer , that i shall tell he the cause why the sun have not send i no soon to pacific the war which have continue a long time among they , wherein many have be slay . i tell he the cause hereof be , because at that time i be but a child . than he ask the interpreter whether we take he with we perforce have take he in the war , or whether he come with we of his own accord . he answer he that he be with we of his own accord , and be very well apay of our company . he return to inquire , why we bring none save he only that understand we , and wherefore we understand not all other man , see we be the child of the sun : he answer , that the sun also have beget he , and give he a language to understand he , and i , and other : that the sun know well that they dwell there , but that because he have many other business , and because 290 i be but young he send i no soon . and he turn unto i say sudden : come thou therefore hither to be our lord , and that we shall serve thou ? i suppose that i shall not please he if i shall have say yea , answer he , not to be their lord , but rather to be their brother , and to give they such thing as i have . he ask i , whether the sun have beget i as he have beget other , and whether i be his kinsman or his son : i answer he that i be his son . he proceed to ask i whether the rest that be with i be also the child of the sun , i answer he not , but that they be bear all with i in one country , where i be bring up . than he cry out with a loud voice and say , see thou do we so much good , and will not have we to make war , and art the child of the sun , we will all receive thou for our lord , and always serve thou , therefore we pray thou that thou will not depart hence nor leave we : and sudden he turn to the people , and begin to tell they , that i be the child of the sun , and that therefore they shall all choose i for their lord . those Indians hear this , be astonish beyond measure , and come near still more and more to behold i . that indian also ask i other question , which to avoid tediousness i do not recite : and in this wise we pass the day , and see the night approach , i begin by all mean i can devise to get this fellow into our boat with we : and he refuse to go with we , the interpreter tell he that we will put he on the other side of the river , and upon this condition he enter into our boat , and there i make very much of he , and give he the best entertainment i can , put he always in security , and when i judge he to be out of all suspicion , i think it good to ask he somewhat of that country . and among the first thing that i ask he this be one , whether he have ever see any man like we , or have hear any report of they . he answer i not , save that he 291 the sun worship as God . the english voyage have sometime hear of old man , that very far from that country there be other white man , and with beard like we , and that he know nothing else . i ask he also whether he know a place call Cevola , and a river call Totonteac , and he answer i not . whereupon perceive that he can not give i any knowledge of Francis Vazquez nor of his company , i determine to ask he other thing of that country , and of their manner of life : and begin to inquire of he , whether they hold that there be one God , creator of heaven and earth , or that they worship any other idol . and he answer i no : but that they esteem and reverence the sun above all other thing , because it warm they and make their crop to grow : and that of all thing which they do eat , they cast a little up into the air unto he . i ask he next whether they have any lord , and he say no : but that they know well that there be a great lord , but they know not well which way he dwell . and i tell he that he be in heaven , and that he be call Jesus Christ , and i go no far in divinity with he . i ask he whether they have any war , and for what occasion . he answer that they have war and that very great , and upon exceed small occasion : for when they have no cause to make war , they assemble together , and some of they say , let we go to make war in such a place , and then all of they set forward with their weapon . i ask they who command the army : he answer the elder and most valiant , and that when they say they shall proceed no far , that sudden they retire from the war . i pray he to tell i what they do with those man which they kill in battle : he answer i that they take out the heart of some of they , and eat they , and other they burn ; and he add , that if it have not be for my come , they shall have be now at war : and because i command they that they shall not war , and that they shall cease 292 from arm , therefore as long as i shall not command they to take arm , they will not begin to wage war against other , and they say among themselves , that see i be come unto they , they have give over their intention of make war , and that they have a good mind to live in peace . he complain of certain people which dwell behind in a mountain certain war-which make great war upon they , and slay many of people bethem 1 1 answer hun } that from henceforward they taint shall not need to fear any more , because i have command they to be quiet , and if they will not obey my commandment , i will chasten they and kill they . he inquire of i how i can kill they see we be so few , and they so many in number . and because it be now late and that i see by this time he be weary to stay any long with i , i let he go out of my boat , and therewith i dismiss he very well content . Chap. 4. of naguachato and other chief man of those Indians they receive great store of victual , they cause they to set up a cross in their country , and he teach they to worship it . they have news of many people , of their diverse language , and custom in matrimony , how they punish adultery , of their opinion concern the dead , and of the sickness which they be subject unto . the next day betimes in the morning come the chief man among they call naguachato , and wish i to come on land because he have great store of victual to give i . and because i see my self in security i do so without doubt ; and incontinent a old man come with roll of that Maiz , and certain little gourd , and call i with a loud voice and use many gesture with his body and arm , come near unto i , and cause i to turn i unto that people , and he himself also turn unto they say unto 293 [ hl 431-1 these people be great incline to learn the christian faith . they , Sagueyca , and all the people answer with a great voice , hu , and he offer to the sun a little of every thing that he have there , and likewise a little more unto i ( although afterward he give i all the rest ) and do the like to all that be with i : and call out my interpreter , by mean of he i give they thank , tell they that because my boat be little i have not bring many thing to give they in exchange , but that i will come again another time and bring they , and that if they will go with i in my boat unto my ship which i have beneath at the river mouth , i will give they many thing . they answer that they will do so , be very glad in countenance . here by the help of my interpreter i seek to instruct they what the sign of the cross mean , and will they to bring i a piece of timber , whereof i cause a great cross to be make , and command all those that be with i that when it be make they shall worship it , and beseech the lord to grant his grace that that so great a people may come to the knowledge of his holy catholic faith : and this do i tell they by my interpreter that i leave they that sign , in token that i take they for my brethren , and that they shall keep it for i careful until i return , and that every morning at the sun rise they shall kneel before it . and they take it incontinent , and without suffer it to touch the ground they carry it to set it up in the midst of their house , where all of they may behold it ; and i will they always to worship it because it will preserve they from evil . they ask i how deep they shall set it in the ground , and i show they . great store of people follow the same , and they that stay behind inquire of i , how they shall join their hand , and how they shall kneel to worship the same ; and they seem to have great desire to learn it . this do , i take that chief man of the country , and go to our boat with he , i follow my journey up the 294 river , and all the company on both side of the shore accompany i with great good will , and serve i in draw of our boat , and in hail we off the sand , whereupon we often fall : for in many place we in find the river so shall , that we have no water for , . 1 ri fall ofshelfe . our boat . as we thus go on our way , some or the Indians which i have leave behind i , come after we to pray i that i will thorough instruct they , how they shall join their hand in the worship of the cross : other show i whither they be well set in such and such sort , so that they will not let i be quiet . near unto the other side of the river be great store of people , which call unto i very often , that i will receive the victual which they have bring i . and because i perceive that one envy the other , because i will not leave they discontent , i do so . and here come before i another old man like unto the former with the like ceremony and another old offering : and i seek to learn something of he as man ' i have do of the other . this man say likewise to the rest of the people , this be our lord . now you see how long ago our ancestor tell we , that there be beard and white people in the world , and we laugh they to scorn . i which a old and the rest which be here , have never see any such people as these . and if you will not believe i , behold these people which be in this river : let we give they therefore meat , see they give we of their victual : let we willing serve this lord , which wish we so well , and forbid we to make war , and embrace all of we : and they have mouth , hand and eye as we have , and speak as we do . 1 give these likewise another cross as i have do to the other beneath , and say unto they the self same word : which they listen unto with a better will , and use great diligence to learn that which i say . afterwards as i pass far up the river , i find another people , who my interpreter understand not a whit : wherefore i show they by sign the self - their ancestors tell they thattherewere beard and white man in the world . another nation . 295 same ceremony of worship the cross , which i have teach the rest . and that principal old man which i take with i , tell i that far up the river i shall find people which will understand my interpreter : and be now late , some of those man call i to give i victual , and do in all point as the other have do , dance and play to show i pleasure . i desire to know what people live on the bank of this people of 23. river : and i understand by this man that it be inlanguage habit by 23 language , and these be border upon mrs. river the river > beside other not far off , and that there be beside these 23. language , other people also which he know not , above the river . i ask he whether every people be live in one town together : and he answer i , no : but that they have many house stand scatter in the field , and that every people have their country several and distinguish , and that in every habitation there be great store of people . JcueoasGo - he show i a town which be in a mountain , mara write a ( j to | j i that fhere be there great store of people ouiuabse^ °f bad condition , which make continual war upon they : which be without a governor , and dwell in that desert place , where small store of Maiz grow , come down into the plain to buy it in truck of dear skin , wherewith they be apparel with long garment , which they do cut with razor , and sew with great house needle make of dear bone : and that they have great of stone . house of stone . i ask they whether there be any there of that country ; and i find one woman which wear a garment like a little mantle , which clad she from the waste down to the ground , of a dear skin well dress . than i ask he whether the people which dwell on the river side , dwell always there , or else sometime go to dwell in some other place : he answer i , that in the summer season they abide there , and sow there ; and after they have gather in their crop they go their way , and dwell in other house which they have at the foot of the mountain far from the 296 river . and he show i by sign that the house be of wood compass with earth without , and i understand that they make a round house wherein the man Roundhouses . and woman live all together . i ask he whither their woman be common or no : he tell i not , and that he which be marry , be to have but one wife only . i desire to know what order they keep in marry : and he tell i , that if any man have a daughter to marry , he go where the people keep , and say , i have a daughter to marry : be there any man here that will have she ? and if there be any that will have she , he answer that he will have she : and so the marriage be make . and that the father of he which will have she , bring some thing to give the young woman ; and from that hour forward the marriage be take to be finish , and that they sing and dance : and that when dance and night come , the parent take they , and leave they to - nn&ngatma-gether in a place where no body may see they . and 6 i learn that brethren , and sister , and kinsfolk marry not together : and that maid before they be marry converse not with man , nor talk not with they , but keep at home at their house and in their possession , [ three . 432. ] and wrought : and that if by chance any one have company with man before she be marry , her husband forsake she , and go away into other country : and that those woman which fall into this fault , be account naughty pack . and that if after they be marry , any man be take in adultery with another woman , they put he to death : and that no man may have more than one wife , but very secret . they tell i that they burn those which die : and such as remain they bume widow , stay half a year , or a whole year before their dead-they marry . i desire to know what they think of such as be dead . he tell i that they go to another world , but that they have neither punishment nor glory . the great sickness that this people dye of , be vomit of blood by the mouth : and they have physician which cure they with charm and blow 297 which they make . the apparel of these people be pipe to drink like the former : they carry their pipe with they to tobacco with . perfume themselves , like as the people of new Spain use tobacco . i inquire whether they have any governor , and find that they have none , but that every family have their several governor . Theise people have beside Maiz , gourd , their maiz certain gourd , and another corn like unto mill : they have grindstone and earthen pot , wherein earthenpot , they boil those gourd , and fish or the river , which goodfish . be very good . my interpreter can go no far than this place : for he say that those which we shall find far on our way , be their enemy , and therefore i send he back very well content . not long after i espy many Indians to come cry with a loud voice , and run after i . i stay to know what they will have ; and they tell i that they have set up the cross which i have give they , in the midst of their dwelling as i have appoint , but that i be to this river wit , that when the river do overflow , it be wont to ‘ banks^fcer*1 reac^ to P^aceJ therefore they pray i to give they take season . eave to remove it , and to set it in another place where the river can not come at it , nor carry it away : which i grant they . Chap. 5. of a indian of that country they have relation of the state of Cevola , and of the condition and custom of these people , and of their governor : and likewise of the country not far distant from thence , whereof one be call Quicoma , and the other coama : of the people of Quicoma , and of the other Indians not far distant they receive courtesy . thus sail i come where be many Indians , and another interpreter , which i cause to come with cold and i in my boat . and because it be cold , and my rain - people be wet , i leap on shore , and command a fire to be make , and as we stand thus warm our 298 w-selve , a indian come and strike i on the arm , point with his finger to a wood out of which i see two company of man come w‘ their weapon , and he tell i that they come to set upon we : and because i mean not to fall out with any of they , i retire my company into our boat , and the Indians which be with i swim into the water , and save themselves on the other side of the river . in the mean season i inquire of that indian which i have with i , what people they be that come out of the wood : and he tell i that they be their enemy , and therefore these other at their approach without say any word leap into the water : and do so , because they mean to turn back again , be without weapon , because they bring none with they , because they understand my will and pleasure , that they shall carry none . i inquire the same thing of this interpreter which i have do of the other of the thing of that country , because i understand that among some people one man use to have many wife , and among other but one . now i understand by he , that he have be at Cevola , and that it be a month journey from his country , and that from that place by a path that go along that river a man Cevola 40 might easy travel thither in forty . day , and that the occasion that move he to go thither , be only to see tk^river* ? Cevola , because it be a great thing , and have very high house of stone of 3. or 4. loft , and window on each side ; that the house be compass about with a wall contain the height of a man and a half , and that aloft and beneath they be inhabit with people , and that they use the same weapon , that other use , which we have see , that be to say , bow and arrow , mace , staff and buckler : and that they have one governor , and that they be apparel with mantle , and with ox-hides , and that their mantle have a paint about they , and that their governor wear a long shirt very fine gird unto he , and over the same diverse mantle : and that the woman wear very long garment , and that they be 299 white , and go all cover : and that every day many Indians wait at the gate of their governor to serve turquese in he , and that they do wear many azure or blue stone , Cevola . which be dig out of a rock of stone , and that they have but one wife , with who they be marry , and that when their governor die , all the good that they have be bury with they . and likewise all the while they eat , many [ three . 433. ] of their man wait at their table to court they , and see they eat , and they eat with napkin , and that they have bath . on Thursday morning at break of day the Indians come with the like cry to the bank of the river , and with great desire to serve we , bring i meat to eat , and make i the like good cheer , which the other have do unto i , have understand what i be : and i give they cross , with the self same order which i do unto the former . And go far up the river , i come to a country where i find better government : for the inhabitant be whole obedient unto one only . but return again to confer with my interpreter touch the dwelling of those of Cevola , he tell i , that the lord of that country have a dog like that which i carry with i . afterwards when i call for dinner , this interpreter see certain dish carry in the first and late service , whereupon he tell i that the lord of Cevola have also such as those be , but that they be green , and that none other have of they save their governor , and that they be 4. which he have get together this be then with that dog , and other thing , of a black man wentwlth which have a beard , but that he know not from what ™ rier Marco quarter he come thither , and that the king cause he the Niza . afterward to be kill , as he hear say . i ask he whether he know of any town that be near unto that place : he tell i that above the river he know some , and that among the rest there be a lord of a Quicoma . town call Quicoma , and another of a town call Coama . Coama : and that they have great store of people under they . and after he have give i this information , he 300 i54°-craved leave of i to return unto his companion . from hence i begin again to set sail , and within a day sail i find a town dispeople : where assoon as i be enter , by chance there arrive there 500 Indians with their bow and arrow , and with they be that principali Indian call naguachato , which i have leave behind , and bring with they certain cony cony and and yucas : and after i have friendly entertain they all , depart from they , i give they licence to return to their house . as i pass further by the desert , i come to certain cottage , out of which much people come towards i with a old man before they , cry in a language which my interpreter well understand , and he say unto those man : brethren , you see here that lord ; let we give he such as we have , see he do we pleasure , and have pass through so many discourteous people , to come to visit we . and have thus say , he ofired to the sun , and then to i in like sort as the rest have do . Theise have certain great bag and well make of the skin of fish call sea-bremes . and i understand that this be a town belong unto the lord of Quicoma , which people come thither only to gather the fruit of their harvest in summer ; and among they i find one which understand my interpreter very well : whereupon very easy i give they the like instruction of the cross which i have give to other behind . Theise people have cotton , but cotton . they be not very careful to use the same : because there be none among they that know the art of weave , and to make apparel thereof . they ask i how they shall set up their cross when they be come to their dwelling which be in the mountain , and whether a mountain . it be best to make a house about it , that it may not be wet , and whether they shall hang any thing upon the arm thereof . i say no ; and that it suffice to set it in a place where it may be see of all man , until i return : and lest peradventure any man of war shall come that way , they ofired i more man to go with 301 i , say that they be naughty man which i shall find above ; but i will have none : nevertheless 20. of they go with i , which when i draw near unto those which be their enemy , they warn i thereof : and i find their centinel set upon their guard on their border . on Saturday morning i find a great squadron of people sit under a exceed great arbour , and another part of they without : and when i see that they rise not up , i pass along on my voyage : when they behold this , a old man rise up which say unto i , sir , why do you not receive victual to eat of we , see you have take food of other ? i answer , that i take nothing but that which be give i , and that i go to none but to such as request i . here without any stay they bring i victual , say unto i , that because i enter not into their house , and stay all day and all night in the river , and because i be the son of the sun , all man be to receive i for their lord . i make they sign to sit down , and call that old man which my interpreter understand , and ask he who that country be , and whether the lord thereof be there , he say , yea : and i call he to i ; and when he be come , i embrace he , show he great love : and when i see that all of they take great pleasure at the friendly entertainment which i give he , i put a shirt upon he , and give he other trifle , and will my interpreter to use the like speech to that lord which he have do to the rest ; and that do , i give he a cross , which he receive with a very good will , as the other do : and this lord go a great way with i , until i be call unto from the other side of the river , where the former old man stand with much people : to who i give another cross , use the like speech to they which i have unto the rest , to wit , how they shall use it . then follow my way , i meet with another great company of people , with who come that very same old man who my interpreter under - 302 stand ; and when i see their lord which he show unto i , i pray he to come with i into my boat , which he do very willing , and so i go still up the river , and the old man come and show i who be the chief lord : and i speak unto they always with great courtesy , 8c all of they show that they rejoice much thereat , 8c speak very well of my coming thither . at night i withdraw my self into the midst of the river , 8c ask he many thing concern that country : and i find he as willing 8c well dispose to show they i , as i be desirous to know they . i ask he of Cevola : and he tell i he have be there , and that it be a goodly thing , 8c that the lord thereof be very well obey : and that there be other lord thereabouts , with who he be at continual war . i ask he whether they have silver 8c gold , and he behold certain bell , say they have metal of their colour . i inquire whether they make it there , and he answer i not , but that they bring it from a certain mountain , where a old woman dwell . i demand whether he have any knowledge of a river call Totonteac , he answer i not , but of another exceed mighty river , wherein there be such huge crocodile , that of their hide they make buckler , and that they worship the sun neither more nor less than those which i have pass : and when they offer unto he the fruit of the earth , they say : receive hereof , for thou have create they , and that they love he much , because he warm they ; and that when he break not forth , they be cold . herein reason with he , he begin somewhat to complain , say unto i , i know not wherefore the sun use these term with we , because he give we not clothe , nor people to spin nor to weave they , nor other thing which he give to many other , and he complain that those of that country will not suffer they to come there , and will not give they of their corn . i tell he that i will remedy this , whereat he remain very well satisfy . 3°3 A.D. 1540 [ Iii . 434. ] Cevola a goodly thing . gold and silver in a mountain near Cevola . a mighty river . this river seem to be northward by the cold . they be advertise by the Indians , wherefore the lord of Cevola kill the negro , which go with Frier Marco , and of many other thing : and of a old woman call Guatazaca , which live in a lake and eat no food . the description of a beast , of the skin whereof they make target . the suspicion that they conceive of they , that they be of those Christians which be see at Cevola , and how they cunning save themselves . the next day which be Sunday before break of day , begin their cry as they be wont : and this be the cry of 2. or 3. sort of people , which have lie all night near the river side , wait for i : and they take Maiz and other corn in their mouth , and sprinkle i therewith , say that that be the fashion which they use when they sacrifice unto the sun : afterward they give i of their victual to eat , and among other thing , they give i many white peason . i give they a cross as i have do to the rest : and in the mean season that old man tell they great matter of my do , and point i out with his finger , say , this be the lord , the son of the sun : and they make i to comb my beard , and to set my apparel handsome which i wear upon my back . and so great be the confidence that they have in i , that all of they tell i what thing have pass , and Dick pass among they , and what good or bad mind they bear one towards another . i ask they wherefore they impart unto i all their secret , and that old man answer i : thou be our lord , and we ought to hide nothing from our lord . after these thing , follow on our way , i begin again to inquire of he the state of Cevola , and whether he know that those of this country have ever see people like unto we : he answer i not , save one negro which wear about his leg and arm certain thing which do ring . your lordship 3°4 be to call to mind how this negro which go with friar 2% negro Marco be wont to wear bell , and feather on his arm and leg , and that he carry plate of diverse colour , and that it be not much above a year ago since he come into those part . i demand upon what occasion he be kill ; and he answer i , that the lord of Cevola inquire of he whether he have other brethren : he answer that he have a infinite number , and that they have great store of weapon with they , and that they be not very far from thence . which when he have hear , many of the chief man consult together , and resolve to kill he , that he may not give news unto cause these his brethren , where they dwell , and - that for this w^refire^te-cause they slay he , and cut he into many piece , the negro be which be divide among all those chief lord , that slalne . they may know assure that he be dead ; and also that he have a dog like i , which he likewise kill a great while after . i ask he whether they of Cevola have any enemy , and he say they have . and he reckon they off unto i 14. or 15. lord which have war with they : c^^have and that they have mantle , and bow like those above d^their mention : howbeit he tell i that i shall find go enemy . up the river a people that have no war neither with their neighbour , nor with any other . he tell i that they have 3. or 4. sort of tree bear most excellent fruit to eat : and that in a certain lake dwell a old anoldewoman woman , which be much honour and worship of call guatu-them : and that she remain in a little house which or-e be there , and that she never do eat any thing : and ship . that there they make thing which do sound , and that [ three . 435. ] many mantle , feather and Maiz be give unto she . Antonio d^es-i ask what her name be , and he tell i that she be call Guatuzaca , and that thereabouts be many 1^ lord which in their life and death , use the like order which they of Cevola do , which have their dwelling in the summer with paint mantle , and in the winter dwell in house of wood of 2. or 3. loft high : and that he have see all these thing , save the old woman . ix 305 u this may be the crook back ox of Quivira . the sea side . the english voyage and when again i begin to ask he more question , he will not answer i , say that he be weary of i : and many of those Indians come about i , they say among themselves : let we mark he well , that we may know he when he come back again . the Monday follow , the river be beset with people like to they , and i begin to request the old man to tell i what people be in that country , which tell i he think i will soon forget they : and here he reckon up unto i a great number of lord , and people at the least 200. And discourse with he of their armour , he say that some of they have certain very large target of leather , above two finger thick . i ask he of what beast skin they make they : and he describe unto i a very great beast , like unto a ox , but long by a great handful , with broad foot , the leg as big as the thigh of a man , and the head seven handful long , the forehead of three span , and the eye big than one fist , and the home of the length of a man leg , out of which grow sharp point , a handful long , the forfeit and hinderfeete above seven handful big , with a wreathe tail , but very great ; and hold up his arm above his head , he say the beast be high than that . after this he give i information of another old woman which dwell towards the sea side . i spend this day in give cross to those people as i have do unto the former . this old man that be with i leap on shore , 8c fall in conference with another which that day have often call he ; and here both of they use many gesture in their speech , move their arm , and point at i . therefore i send my interpreter out , will he to draw near unto they , and listen what they say ; and within a while i call he , and ask he whereof they talk , and he say , that he which make those gesture say unto the other , that in Cevola there be other like unto we with beard , and that they say they be Christians , and that both of they say that we be all of one company , 306 and that it be a good deed to kill we , that those other may have no knowledge of we , lest they may come to do they harm : and that the old man have answer he , this be the son of the sun , and our lord , he do we good , and will not enter into our house , although we request he thereunto : he will take away nothing of we , he will meddle with none of our woman , and that to be short , he have speak many other thing in my commendation and favour : and for all this the other steadfast affirm that we be all one , and that the old man say , let we go unto he , and ask he whether he be a christian as the other 1540 the savage treason to be take heed of . be , or else the son of the sun : and the old man come unto i , and say : in the country of Cevola whereof you speak unto i doe other man like unto you dwell . than i begin to make as though i wonder , and answer he , that it be impossible ; and they assure i that it be true , and that two man have see they which come from thence , which report that they have thing which do shoot fire , and sword as we have . i ask they whether they have see they with their own eye ? and they answer no ; but that certain of their companion have see they . than he ask i whether i be the son of the sun , i answer he yea . they say that those Christians of Cevola say so likewise . and i answer they that it may well be . than they ask i if those Christians of Cevola come to join themselves with i , whether i will join with they : and i answer they , that they need not to fear any whit at all , for if they be the son of the sun as they say , they must needs be my brethren , and will use towards all man the like love certain news of the span yard at Cevola . and courtesy which i use : whereupon hereat they seem to be somewhat satisfy . 307 [ Chap. 7 it be tell he that they be ten day journey distant from Cevola , and that there be Christians there , which make war against the lord of that country . of the sodomy which those Indians use with four young man appoint for that service , which wear woman apparel . see they can not send news of their be there to they of Cevola , they go back again down the river to their ship . Cevola ten r ■ ^en i pray they to tell i how many day that ^fromms^lace kingdom of Cevola , which they speak of , be distant a desert of fr°m that river : and that man answer , that there be ten dayesjour - the space of ten day journey without habitation , ne3 - and that he make none account of the rest of the way , because there be people to be find . upon this advertisement i be desirous to certify captain Francis Vazquez of my be there , and impart my mind [ three . 436. ] with my soldier , among who i find none that be willing to go thither , although i offer they many reward in your lordship name , only one negro slave though with a evil will offr ed himself unto i to go thither : but i look for the come of those two Indians which they tell i of , and herewithal we go on our way up the river against the stream in such sort as we have do before . here that old man show i as a strange thing a son of his clad in woman apparel , exercise their office : i ask he how many there be of these among they , and he tell i there be four ; and that when any of they die , there be a search make of all the woman with child which be in the country , and that the first son which be bear of they , be appoint to do that duty belong unto woman , and that the woman clad he in their apparel , say , that see he be to do that which belong to they , he shall wear their apparel : these young man may not have carnail copulation with any woman : but all the young man of the country which be to marry , 308 may company with they . Theise man receive no kind of reward for this incestuous act of the people of that country , because they have liberty to take whatsoever they find in any house for their food . i see likewise certain woman which live dishonest among man : and i ask the old man whether they be marry , who answer i noe , but they be common woman , which live apart from the marry woman . i come at length after these discourse to pray they to send for those Indians , which they say have be at Cevola , and they tell i that they be eight day journey distant from that place , but that notwithstanding there be one among they which be their companion and which have speak with they , as he meet they on the way , when they go to see the kingdom of Cevola , and that they tell he that he be not best to go any far , for he shall find there a fierce nation like we , and of the same quality and make , which have fight much with the people of Cevola , because they have kill a negro of their company , say , wherefore , have you kill he ? what do he to you ? do he take any bread from you , or do you any other wrong ? and such like speech . and they say moreover , that these people be call Christians , which dwell in a great house , and that many of they have ox like those of Cevola , and ox of other little black beast with wool and home , and that evola-some of they have beast which they ride upon , which run very swift ; and that one day before their departure , from sun rise until sun set these Christians be all day in come thither , and all of they lodge in that place where other have lodge , and that these two meet with two Christians , which ask they whence they be , and whether they have field sow with corn ; and they tell they that they dwell in a far country , and that they have corn , and that then they give each of they a little cap , and they give they another to carry to their other companion , which they promise to do , and depart quick . when i understand this , i speak 3°9 again with my company , to see if any one of they will go thither , but i find they unwilling as at the first , and they lay against i great inconvenience . than i call the old man to see if he will give i any people to go with i , and victual to travel through a desert , that wilderness , but he lay before i many inconvenience and danger , which i may incur in that voyage , show i the danger that there be in pass by a Cumana , lord of Cumana , which threaten to make war upon they , because his people have enter into the other country to take a stag , and that i shall not therefore depart thence without see he punish . and when i reply that in any wise i must needs go to Cevola , he will i to surcease from that purpose , for they look that that lord without all doubt will come to annoy they , 8c that therefore they can not leave their country naked to go with i , and that it will be better , that i will make a end of that war between they , and that then i may have their company to Cevola . and upon this point we grow to such variance , that we begin to grow into choler , and in a rage he will have go out of the boat , but i stay he , and with gentle speech begin to pacific he , see that it import i much to have he my friend : but for all my courtesy which i show he , i can not alter he from his mind , wherein he still remain obstinate . in this mean while i send a man away unto my ship to give they knowledge of the journey that i have determine to make . after this i pray the old man that he will fetch he back again , because i have determine , that see i see no mean to be able to go to Cevola , 8c because i will stay no long among those people , because they shall not discover i , and likewise because i mean in person to visit my ship , with determination to return again up the river , carry with i other companion , 8c leave there some which i have sick , and tell the old man and the rest that i will return , and leave they satisfy the best i 310 can ( although they always say that i go away for fear ) i return down the river : and that way which i have go against the stream up the river in 15. day and a half , i make in my return in 2. day and a half , because the stream be great and very swift . in this wise go down the river , much people come to the bank , say , sir , wherefore do you leave we ? what discourtesy have be do unto you ? do you he return in 2. day and a half to his ship . not say that you will remain continual with we , and be our lord ? and turn back again ? if any [ he . 437. ] man above the river have do you any wrong we will go with our weapon with you and kill he ; and such like word full of love and kindness . Chap. 8. when they come to their ship the captain name that coast la Campanna de la Cruz , and build a chapel unto our lady , and call the river el Rio de buena guia , and return up the same again : when he come to Quicona and Coama the lord of those place use he very courteous . upon my arrival at my ship i find all my people in health , although very heavy for my long stay , and because the current have fret four of their cable , and that they have lose two anchor which be recover . after we have bring our ship together , i cause they to bring they into a good harbour , and to give the carena to the ship call sanct Peter , and to mend all thing that be needful . and here assemble all my company together , i open unto they what knowledge i have receive of Francis Vasquez ; and how it may be that in those sixteen day space which i be in sail up the river he may peradventure have some knowledge of i , and that i be mind to return up the river once again to try if i can find any mean to join my self with he : and although some speak against my determination , i cause all my boat to be make ready , because the ship have no need of 311 mark what the . i cause one of they to be fill with ware thing then of exchange , with corn and other seed , with hen spamardes and cock of Castille , and depart up the river , leave in new dis - order that in that province call Campanna de la Cruz emery . they shall build a oratory or chapel , and call it the chapel of our lady de la buena guia , and that Rio de bvena they shall call this river Rio de buena guia because guia - that be your lordship devise : i carry with i Nicolas Zamorano pilot mayor , to take the height of the pole . and i depart on Tuesday the fourteenth of September , and on Wednesday i come unto the first dwelling of the first Indians , which come run to hinder my passage , suppose that we have be other people , for we carry with we a fifer , and a drummer , and i be clad in other apparel than i go in before , when they see i first of all : and when they know i they stay , though i can not grow unto perfect friendship with they , whereupon i give they some of those seed which i bring with i ; teach they how they shall sow they : and after i have sail 3 league , my first interpretor come even to my boat to seek i with great joy , of who i demand wherefore he have leave i , he tell i that certain companion of his have lead he away . i make he good countenance and better entertainment , because he shall bear i company again , consider how much it do import i to have he with i . he excuse himself because he parrot in stay there to bring i certain feather of parrot , these part . which he give i . i ask he what people these be , and whether they have any lord : he answer i , yea ; and name three or four unto i , of four or 25 name of people which he know and that they have house paint within , and that they have traffic with two moon those of Cevola , and that in two moon he come into to Cevola . the country . he tell i moreover many other name lord , and other people , which i have write down particular of in a b°oke ot i , which 1 will bring my self unto that country . your lordship . but i think good to deliver this 312 ...... I54°‘ brief relation to Augustine Guerriero in this haven of Colima , that he may send it overland to your lordship , to who i have many other thing to impart . but to return to my journey , i arrive at Quicama , Quicoma . where the Indians come forth with great joy and gladness to receive i , advertise i that their lord wait for my come ; to who when i be come i find that he have with he five or six thousand man without weapon , from who he go apart with some two hundred only , all which bring victual with they , and so he come towards i , go before the rest with great authority , and before he and on each side of he be certain which make the people stand aside , make he way to pass . he wear a garment close before and behind and open on both side , fasten with button , wrought with white and black chequer work , it be very soft and well make , be of the skin of certain delicate fish call sea bream . assoon as he be come to the water side his servant take he up in their arm , and bring he into my boat , where i embrace he and receive he with great joy , show unto he much kindness : upon which entertainment his people stand by and behold the same seem not a little to rejoice . this lord turn himself to his people will they to consider my courtesy , and that he be of his own accord come unto i with a strange people , they may see how good a man i be , and with how great love i have entertain he , and that therefore they shall take i for their lord , and that all of they shall become my servant , and do whatsoever 1 will [ three . 438. ] command they . there i cause he to sit down , and to eat certain conserves of sugar which i have bring with i , and will the interpreter to thank he in my name for the favour which he have do i in vouchsafe to come to see i , recommend unto he the worship of the cross , and all such other thing as i have recommend to the 313 rest of the Indians ; namely that they shall live in peace , and shall leave off war , and shall continue always good friend together : he answer that of long time they have continue in war with their neighbour , but that from thence forward he will command his people that they shall give food to all stranger that pass through his kingdom , and that they shall do they no kind of wrong , and that if any nation shall come to invade he , he say he will tell they how i have command that they shall live in peace , and if they refuse the same , he will defend himself , and promise i , that he will never go to seek war , if other come not to invade he . than i give he certain trifle , as well of the seed which i bring , as of the hen of Castille , wherewith he be not a little please . and at my departure i carry certain of his people with i , to make friendship between they and those other people which dwell above the river : and here the interpreter come unto i , to crave leave to return home ; and i give he certain gift wherewith he depart great satisfy . Coama . the next day i come to Coama , and many of they know i not , see i clad in other aparrel , but the old man which be there as soon as he know i leap into the water , say unto i , sir , lo here be the man which you leave with i , which come forth very joyful and pleasant declare unto i the great courtesy which that people have show he , say that they have stroven together who shall have he to his house , and that it be incredible to think what care they have at the rise of the sun to hold up their hand and kneel before the cross . i give they of my seed , and thank they hearty for the good entertainment which they have show my man , and they beseech i that i will leave he with they , which i grant they until my return , and he stay among they very willing . thus i go forward up the river , take that old man in my company , which tell i , that two 314 Indians come from Cumana to inquire for the christian , Cumana . and that he have answer they that he know none such , but that he know one which be the son of the sun , and that they have persuade he to join with they treason of they to kill i and my companion . i wish he to lend i two Indians , and i will send word by they , that i will come unto they , and be desirous of their friendship , but if that they on the contrary will have war , i will make such a war with they , that shall displease they . and so i pass through all that people , and some come and ask i , why i have not give they cross as well as the rest , and so i give they some . Chap. 9 they go on land , and see the people worship the cross which they have give they . the captain cause a indian to make a draught of the country : he send a cross to the lord of Cumana , and go down the river with the stream , he arrive at his ship . of the error of the pilot of Cortes as touch the situation of this coast . the next day i go on land to see certain cottage , and i find many woman and child hold up their hand and kneel before a cross which i have give they . when i come thither i do the like my self ; and confer with the old man , he begin to inform i of as many people and province as he know . and when evening be come i call the old man to come and lodge with i in my boat ; he answer that he will not go with i because i will weary he with ask he question of so many matter : i tell he that i will request he nothing else but that he will set i down in a chart as much as he know concern that river , and what manner of people those be which dwell upon the bank thereof on both side : which he do willing . and then he request i that i will describe my country unto he , as he have do his unto i . and for to 315 content he , i cause a draught of certain thing to be make for he . the next day i enter between certain very high mountain , through which this river pass with a strait chanel , and the boat go up against the stream very hardly for want of man to draw the same . here certain Indians come and tell i , that in the same place , there be certain people of Cumana , a enchanter , and among the rest a enchanter , who inquire which way we will pass ; and they tell he that we mean to pass by the river , he set certain cane on both side thereof , through which we pass , without receive any kind of damage which they intend against we . thus go forward i come unto the house of the old man which be in my company , and here i cause a very high cross to be set up , whereupon i engrave certain letter to signify that i be come thither : and this i do , that if by chance any of the people of the [ three . 439. ] generail Vasquez de Coronado shall come thither , they may have knowledge of my be there . at length see i can not attain to the knowledge of that which i seek for , i determine to return back unto my ship . And be ready to depart there arrive two Indians , which by mean of the interpreter of the old man , tell i that they be send to i , and that they be of Cumana , and that their lord can not come himself , because he be far from that place , but desire i to signify unto he what my pleasure be . i tell they , that i wish that he will always embrace peace , and that i be come to see that country , but be enforce to return back down the river i can not now do it , but that hereafter i will return , and that in the mean season they shall give that cross unto their lord , which they promise i to do , and they go direct to carry he that cross with certain this river feather which be on the same . of these i seek to he^up^n ' understand what people dwell upward upon the bank he^tra^ they and iverJ which give i knowledge of many people , veil . and tell i that the river go far moor up into the 316 land then i have yet see , but that they know not the head thereof , because it be very far into the country , and that many other river fall into the same . have learn thus much the next day morning i return down the river , and the day follow i come where i have leave my Spaniard , with who i speak , and tell he that all thing have go well with i , and that at this time and the former i have go above 30 league into the country . the Indians of that place inquire of i what the cause be of my departure , and when i will return ; to who i answer , that i will return short . thus sail down the stream , a woman leap into the water cry unto we to stay for she , and she come into our boat , and creep under a bench , from whence we can not make she to come out : i understand that she do this , because her husband have take unto he another wife , by who he have child , say that she mean not to dwell any long with he , see he have take another wife . thus she and another Indian come with i of their own accord , and so i come into my ship , and make they ready we proceed home on our voyage , coast and oftentimes go on land , and enter a great way into the country , to see if i can learn any news of captain Francis Vasquez and his company ; of who i can have no other knowledge , but such as i learn in the aforesaid river . i bring with i many act of take possession of all that coast . and by the situation of the river , and the height which i take , i find that that which the master and pilot of the marquess take be false , and that they be deceive by 2 degree , and i have sail beyond they above 4 degree . i sail up he sail it , the river 8 5 league , where i see and learn all the the particular before mention , and many other thing ; ' whereof when it shall please God to give i leave to kiss your lordship hand , i will deliver you the full and perfect relation . i think my self to have have 317 very good fortune , in that i find don Luis de Castilia , the port of and Augustine Ghenero in the port of Colima : for the Colima . Galiot of the adolantado come upon i , which be there with the rest of his fleet , and command i to strike sail , which seem a strange thing unto i , and not understand in what state thing be in Nueva Espanna , i go about to defend my self , and not to do it . in the mean while come don Luis de Castilia in a boat and confer with i , and i lay at anchor on the other side of the haven where the say fleet road , and i give unto he this relation ( and to avoid strife i determine to sail away by night ) which relation i carry about i brief write ; for i always have a purpose to send the same , as soon as i shall touch upon Nueva Espanna , to advertise your lordship of my proceed .  in this mean space the indian visit i , and bring i daily certain present , as fish , deer , turki-cock , leopard , little bear , and other thing accord to the place of their habitation . i recompense they with certain hatchet , knife , bead of glass , comb , and looking-glass . two Indians come unto i one day to salute i on the behalf of their king , who name be Marracou , kingmarra-dwelling from the place of our fort some forty league cou . towards the south , and tell i that there be one in the house of king Onathaqua which be call Barbu king onatha-or the beard man , and in the house of king 9^ Mathiaca another man who name they know not , which be not of their nation : whereupon i conceive ' that these may be some Christians . wherefore i send to all the king my neighbour to pray they , that if there be any Christian dwell in their country , they will find mean that he may be bring unto i , and that i will make they double recompense . they which love reward , take so much pain , that twa span-the two man , whereof we have speak , be bring yard bring unto the fort unto i . they be naked , their hair long unto their ham as the use to do , and be Spaniard bear , yet accustom to the fashion of the country the first sight they find our manner of strange . after that i have question of matter with they , i cause they to be apparel , and to cut their hair ; which they will not loose , but lap it up in a linen cloth , say that they will carry it into their country to be a testimony of the misery that they have endure in the Indies . in the hair of one of they be find a little gold hide , to ix 49 d unto Laudonniere by the savage . wear Savages so well that at apparel certain Calos a place upon you flat call the martyr near the cape of Florida . the king of Calos . great quantity ofgolde and silver . [ HL 338. ] plate of g > ld as broad as a savicer . the english voyage the value of five and twenty crown , which he give unto i . And examine they of the place where they have be , and how they come thither , they answer i that fifteen year past , three ship , in one of which they be , be cast away over against a place name Calos upon the flat which be call the martyr , and that the king of Calos recover the great part of the riches which be in the say ship , travel in such sort that the great part of the people be save , and many woman ; among which number there be three or four woman marry , remain there yet , and their child also , with this king of Calos . i desire to learn what this king be . they answer i , that he be the goodly and the tall indian of the country , a mighty man , a warrior , and have many subject under his obedience . they tell i moreover , that he have great store of gold and silver , so far forth that in a certain village he have a pit full thereof , which be at the least as high as a man , and as large as a ton : all which wealth the Spaniard full persuade themselves that they can cause i to recover , if i be able to march thither with a hundred shot , beside that which i may get of the common people of the country , which have also great store thereof . they further also advertise i , that the woman go to dance , do wear about their girdle plate of gold as broad as a saucer , and in such number ; that the weight do hinder they to dance at their ease ; and that the man wear the like also . the great part of these riches be have , as they say , out of the spanish ship , which common be cast away in this straight ; and the rest by the traffic which this king of Calos have with the other king of the country : final , that he be have in great reverence of his subject ; and that he make they believe that his sorcery and charm be the cause that make the earth bring forth her fruit : and that he may the easy persuade they that it be so , he retire himself once or twice a year to a certain house , accompany with two or three of his most familiar friend , where he use certain enchantment ; and if any man intrude himself to go to see what they do in this place , the king immediate cause he to be put to death . Moreover , they tell i , that one of these every year in the time of harvest^ this savage king Spaniard sacrifice one man , which be keep express for this n^^at purpose , and take out of the number of the Spaniard qomes-which by tempest be cast away upon that coast . one of these two declare unto i , that he have serve he a long time for a messenger ; and that often time by his commandment he have visit a king name Oathcaqua , distant from Calos four or king oath-five day journey , which always remain his faithful friend : but that in the midway there be a island houat ca-situate in a great lake of fresh water , name sarrope , sampe an about five league in bigness , abound with many island . sort of fruit , special in date , which grow on the abundance of palm tree , whereof they make a wonder traffic ; date . yet not so great as of a kind of root , whereof they a root of great make a kind of meal , so good to make bread of , t0 that it be unpossible to eat better , and that for fifteen brea league about , all the country be feed therewith : which be the cause that the inhabitant of the isle gain of their neighbour great wealth and profit : for they will not depart with this root without they be well pay for it . beside that , they be take for the most warlike man of all that country , as they make good proof when the king of Calos , have make alliance with Oathcaqua , be deprive of oathcaquaes daughter , which he have promise to he in manage . he tell i the whole matter in this sort : as Oathcaqua well accompany with his people carry one of his daughter , exceed beautiful , accord to the colour of the country , unto king Calos , to give she unto he for his wife , the inhabitant of this isle advertise of the matter , lay a ambush for he in a place where he shall pass , and so behave themselves , that Oathcaqua the g-eat victory among the floridians . the situation of Calos . cannaveral in 28 degree . the floridians great traitor and dissembler . the english voyage be discomfit , the betroth young spouse take , and all the damosel that accompany she ; which they carry unto their isle ; which thing in all the indian country they esteem to be the great victory : for afterward they marry these virgin , and love they above all measure . the Spaniard that make this relation , tell i that after this defeat he go to dwell with oathcaqua , and have be with he full eight year , even until the time that he be send unto i . the place of Calos be situate upon a river which be beyond the cape of Florida , forty or fifty league towards the southwest : and the dwell of Oathcaqua be on this side the cape towards the north , in a place which we call in the chart cannaveral , which be in 28 degree . about the five and twenty of January Paracoussy Satourioua my neighbour send i certain present by two of his subject , to persuade i to join with he , and to make war upon ouae utina which be my friend : and further beseech i to retire certain of my man which be with utina ; for who if it have not be , he have often time set upon he , and defeat he . he beseech i herein by diverse other king his ally , which for three week or a month space send messenger unto i to this end and purpose : but i will not grant unto they that they shall make war upon he ; yea rather contrariwise i endeavour to make they friend ; wherein they condescend unto i , so far forth that they be content to allow of any thing that i will set down : whereupon the two Spaniard which of long time know well the nature of the Indians , warn i that in any case i shall not trust unto they , because that when they show good countenance and the best cheer unto man , then be the time that they will surprise and betray they ; and that of their nature they be the great traitor and most deep dissembler of the world . beside i never trust they but upon good ground , as one that have discover a thousand of their craft and subtlety , aswell by experience as by read of the history of late year . Oure two bark be not so soon finish , but i send captain Vasseur to discover along the coast lie towards the north , and command he to sail unto a river , the king whereof be call Audusta , which be lord of that place , where those of the year 1562 inhabit . i send he two suit of apparel , with certain hatchet , knife , and other small trifle , the better to insinuate my [ three . 339. ] self into his friendship . and the better to win he , i send in the bark with captain Vasseur a soldier call Aimon , which be one of they which return home in the first voyage , hope that king Audusta may remember he . but before they be embark i command they to make inquiry what be become of another call Rouffi , which remain alone in those part when Nicolas Masson and those of the first voyage embark themselves to return into France . they understand at their arrival there , that a bark pass that way have carry away the same soldier : and afterward i know for a certainty that they be Spaniards which have carry he to Havana . the king Audusta send i back my bark full of mill , with a certain quantity of bean , two stag , some skin paint after their manner , and certain pearl of small value , because they be burn : and send i word that if i will dwell in his quarter , he will give i a great country : and that after he have gather his mill , he will spare i as much as i will have . in the mean while there come unto our fort a flock of stock-dove in so great number , and that for the space of seven week together , that every day we kill with harquebus shoot two hundred in the wood about our fort . after that captain Vasseur ' Nicolas Masson otherwise call Nicolas bar . king a adustas great humanity . pearl burn . Peter martyr write the cap . I. decade . 7. that the like flock of pigeon be in the isle oj be return , i cause the two bark to be furnish ikeLucayos . again with soldier and mariner , and send they to carry a present from i unto the widow of king Hiocaia , who dwelling be distant from our fort about twelve league northward . she courteous receive our man , send i back my bark full of mill and acorn with 53 the widow of king hioa-caia , or hihou-hacara . certain basket full of the leaf of Cassine , wherewith they make their drink . and the place where this widow dwell be the most plentiful of mill that be in this queen all the coast , and the most pleasant . it be think that name be Nia the queen be the most beautiful of all the Indians , and Cubacam . off they make most account : yea , and her subject honour she so much , that almost continual they bear she on their shoulder , and will not suffer she to go on foot . within a few day after the return of my bark , she send to visit i by her hiatiqui , which be as much thefift voyage to say , as her interpreter . now while i think i be up the river furnish with victual until the time that our ship of may . may come out of France ( for fear of keep my people idle ) i send my two bark to discover along the river , and up towards the head thereof , which go so far up that they be thirty league good beyond a Mathiaqua . place name Mathiaqua , and there they discover they the discovery entrance of a lake , upon the one side whereof no land can be see , accord to the report of the Indians , ride °whererf6 which have oftentimes climb on the high tree in no land can be the country to see land , and notwithstanding can not see . discern any : which be the cause that my man go no further , but return back ; and in come home the isle of go to see the island of Edelano situate in the midst Edelano . of the river , as fair a place as any that may be see through the world : for in the space of some three league , that it may contain in length and breadth , a man may see a exceed rich country , and marvellous people . at the come out of the village of Edelano to go unto the river side a man must pass through a alley about three hundred pace long and fifty pace broad : on both side whereof great tres be plant , the bough a excellent whereof be tie together like a arch , and meet together work of so artificial that a man will think it be a arbour nature . make of purpose , as fair i say , as any in all Christendom , although it be altogether natural . our man depart patica ' . from this p^ace row to eneguape , than to chily , from Coya . thence to patica , and last they come unto Coya : where leave their bark in a little creek of the river with man to guard they , they go to visit utina , which receive they very courteous : and when they depart from his house , he entreat they so earnest , that six of my man remain with he ; of which number there be one gentleman , name groutaid , which after he have abode there about two month , and take great pain to discover the country , with another which i have leave a great while there to that intent , come unto i to the fort , and tell i that he never see a fair country . among other thing , he report unto i that he have see a place name Hostaqua , and that the king thereof be so mighty , that he be able to bring three or four thousand savage to the field ; with who if i will join and enter into league , we may be able to reduce all the rest of the inhabitant unto our obedience : beside that this king know the passage unto the mountain of Apalatci , which the french man desire so great to attain unto , and where the enemy of Hostaqua make his abode ; which be easy to be subdue , if so be we will enter into league together . this king send i a plate of a minerail that come out of this mountain , out of the foot whereof there run a stream of gold or copper , as the savage think , out of which they dig up the sand with a hollow and dry cane of reed until the cane be full ; afterward they shake it , and find that there be many small grain of copper and silver among this sand : which give they to understand , that some rich i must needs be in the mountain . and because the king of Hostaqua or Oustaca able to bring three or four thousand savage to the field . the mountain of Apalatci . there be a mine of gold or rich cope in the mountain of Apalatci . the mountain be not pass five or six day journey from our fort , lie towards the northwest , i determine assoon as our supply shall come out of France , to [ three . 340. ] remove our habitation unto some river more towards the north , that i may be near thereunto . one of my soldier who name be Peter Gamby , which have Peter Gamby remain a long space before in this country to learn the language and traffic with the Indians , at the last the mlage come to the village of Edelano , where have get Edelano . gold wonderful together a certain quantity of gold and silver , and silver . purpose to return unto i , he pray the king of the village to lend he a canoa ( which be a vessel ! make of one whole piece of wood , which the Indians use to fish withal , and to row upon the river ) which this lord of Edelano grant he . 6ut be greedy of the riches which he have , he command two Indians , which he have charge to conduct he in the canoa , to murder he and bring he the merchandise and the gold which he have . which the two traitor villanous execute : for they knock he on the head with a hatchet , as he be blow of the fire in the canoa to seethe fish . utina send the Paracoussy utina send certain day afterward , to pray i to lend a dozen or fifteen of my shot , to jor be pe . jnvaje g enemy Potanou , and send i word , that this enemy once vanquish , he will make i passage , yea , and will conduct i unto the mountain in such sort , that no man shall be able to hinder i . than i assemble my man to demand their advice , as i be a good note , wont to do in all my enterprise . the great part be of opinion , that i shall do well to send succour unto this Paracoussy , because it will be hard for i to discover any further up into the country without his help : and that the Spaniard when they be employ in their conquest , do always enter into alliance with some one king to ruin another . notwithstanding , because i do always mistrust the Indians , and that the more after the last advertisement that the Spaniard have give i , i doubt lest the small number which utina demand may incur some danger ; wherefore i send he thirty shot under the charge of my lieutenant Ottigny , which stay not above two day with utina , while he prepare victual for his voyage , which ordinary and accord to the custom of the country be carry by woman and young boy , and by hermaphrodite . threehundr utina set forward with three hundred of his subject , Indians . have each of they their bow and quiver full of arrow , cause our thirty shot to be place in the foreward , and 56 1565-made they march all the day , until that the night approach , and have not go past half the way , they be enforce to lie all night in the wood , near a great lake , and there to encamp themselves : they separate themselves by six and six , make each of they a fire about the place where their king lie , for who guard they ordain a certain number of those archer , in who he put most confidence . assoon as day be come , the camp of the indian march within three league of Potanou : there king utina request my lieutenant to grant he four or five of his man to go and discover the country ; which depart immediately , and have not go far , but they perceive upon a lake , distant about three league from the village of a lake three Potanou , three Indians which fish in a canoa . now league distant the custom be that when they fish in this lake , they / w‘ have always a company of watchman , arm with bow potanou . and arrow to guard the fisher . our man be hereof advertise by those of the company , dare not pass any further , for fear of fall into some ambush : wherefore they return towards utina , which sudden send they back with a great company to surprise the fisher , before they may retire and advertise their king Potanou of the come of his enemy . which they can not execute so politic , but that two of they escape ; the three also do the best he can to save himself by swim , in which mean while he be stay with shot of arrow , and they draw he stark dead unto the bank side , where our Indians flay off the skin of his head , cut off both his arm in the high way , reserve his hair for the triumph , which their king hope to make for the defeat of his enemy . utina fear least Potanou advertise by the fisher which be escape , shall put himself in arm to withstand he valiant , ask counsel of his Jawa , which be as to say in their language as his magician , whether it be best to go any further . than his magician . magician make certain sign , hideous and fearful to behold , and use certain word ; which be end , he say unto his king , that it be not best to pass Potanou accom - any further , and that Potanou accompany with two pany with thousand Indians at the least stay in such and such Tndians^ a p^ace or to bid he battle : and beside this , ' that all the say Indians be furnish with cord to bind the prisoner which they make full account to take . this relation cause utina to be unwilling to pass any further : whereupon my lieutenant be as angry as ever he may be , because he have take so great pain without do of any thing of account , say unto he , that he will never think well of he nor of his people , if he will not hazard himself : and that if he will not do it , at the least , that he will give he a guide to conduct he and his small company to the the prediction place where the enemy be encamp . hereupon of the ma - utina be ashamed , and see the good affection of monsieur de Ottigny determine to go forward : and ' he fail not to find his enemy in the very place [ three . 341. ] which the magician have name : where the skirmish begin , which last three long hour : wherein without doubt utina have be defeat , unless our harquebusiers have not bear the burden and brunt of all the battle , and slay a great number of the soldier of Potanou , upon which occasion they be put to flight . wherewithal ! utina be content for the present , cause his people to retire and return homeward to the great discontentment of monsieur de Ottigny , which desire utina have 18 nothing more , than to pursue his victory . after he or 20 ktngt to be come home to his house he send messenger to his vassal . eighteen or twenty village of other king his vassal , and summon they to be present at the feast and dance which he purpose to celebrate because of his victory . in the mean while monsieur de Ottigny refresh himself for two day : and then take his leave of the Paracoussi , and leave he twelve of his man to see that Potanou , bethink himself of his late loss 58 shall not come to burn the house of utina , he set forward on his way to come unto i unto our fort , where he up and tell i how every thing have pass : and withal that he have promise the twelve soldier , that he will come back again to fetch they . then the king my neighbour all enemy to utina , be advertise of the return of my lieutenant , come to visit i with present and to inquire how thing have pass , pray i all to receive they into my favour , and to become enemy to utina , which notwithstanding i will not grant they for many reason that move i . the Indians be wont to leave their house and to retire themselves into the wood the space of three month , to wit January , February , and march : during which time by no mean a man can see one Indian . for when they go on hunt , they make little cottage in the wood , whereunto they retire themselves , live upon that which they take in hunt . this be the cause that during this time , we can get no victual by their mean : and have it not be that i have make good provision thereof , while my man have store , until the end of April ( which be the time when at the uttermost , we hope to have have succour out of France ) i shall have be great amaze . this hope be the cause that the soldier take no great care to look well unto their victual , although i divide equal among they that which i can get abroad in the country , without reserve unto my self any more than the least soldier of all the company . the month of May approach and no manner of succour come out of France , we fall into extreme want of victual , constrain to eat the root of the earth and certain sorrel which we find in the field . for although the savage be return by this time unto their village , yet they succour we with nothing but certain fish , without which assure we have perish with famine . beside they have give we before the great part of their maiz and of their bean for our merchandise . this famine hold we from the beginning 59 at custom of the Indians to leave their house for 3 or 4 month and to live in the wood . they look for succour out of France by the end of April at the uttermost . extreme famine for six week space . promise break . the english voyage of May until the midst of June . during which time the poor soldier and handicrafts-man become as feeble as may be , and be not able to work do nothing but go one after another in centinel unto the clift of a hill , situate very near unto the fort , to see if they may discover any french ship . in fine be frustrate of their hope , they assemble altogether , and come to beseech i to take some order that they may return into France , consider that if we let pass the season to embark our self , we be never like to see our country , where it can not be choose but that some trouble be fall out , see they have break their promise make unto we , and that no succour be come from thence . thereupon it be consult and resolve by all the company , that the bark Breton shall be trim up , whereof captain Vasseur have charge . but because the ship be not big enough to receive we all , some think good to build the brigandine two deck high , which our mutinous soldier have bring back , and that 25 man shall hazard themselves to pass therein into France . the rest be better advise say that it shall be far better to build a fair ship upon the keel of the galiote which i have cause to be make , promise to labour courageous thereupon . than i inquire of my shipwright to know in what space they can make this ship ready . they assure the whole company that be furnish with all thing necessary , they will make it ready by the 8. of August . immediate i dispose of the time to work upon it , i give charge to monsieur de Ottigny my lieutenant to cause timber necessary for the finish of both the vessel to be bring , and to monsieur de Arlac my standart-bearer to go with a bark a league ofif from the fort to cut down tree fit to make plank , and to cause the sawier which he carry with he to saw they : and to my sergeant of the company to cause fifteen or sixteen man to labour in make coal : and to master hance keeper of the artillery , and to the gunner to gather 1565. store of rosin to bray the vessel : wherein he use such diligence , that in less than 3 week he gather 2 hog - two hogshead head of the same together . there remain now but °frosen-the principal , which be to recover victual to sustain we while our work endure : which i undertake to do with you rest of my company and the mariner of the ship . to this end i embark my self make up the thirty [ hl 34.2 . ] in my great bark , to make a voyage of forty or fifty league , have with we no provision at all of victual : whereby it may easy be gather how simple those of our fort be provide . true it be that certain soldier be better husband than the rest , and have make some provision of mast , sell a little measure thereof for fifteen and twenty sou unto their companion . during our voyage we live of nothing else but raspice , of a certain round grain little and black , and of the root of palmito which we get by the river side : wherein after we have sail a long time in vain , i be constrain to return to the fort : where the soldier beginning to be weary of work , because of the extreme famine which do consume they , assemble themselves and declare unto i , that see we can get no victual of the Indians , it be expedient for the save of their life , to seize upon the person of one of the king of the country : assure themselves that one be take , the subject will not suffer our man to want victual . i make they answer that this enterprise be not rash to be attempt : but that we ought to have good regard unto the consequence that may ensue thereof . hereupon they reply unto i , that see the time be pass of our succour from France , and that we be resolve to abandon the country , that there be no danger to constrain the savage to furnish we with victual : which for the present t will not grant unto they , but promise they assure that i will send to advertise the Indians that they shall bring i victual for exchange of merchandise and apparel : which they also do for the space of certain day , during which pinocke a certain kind of fruit as big as cherry . the english voyage they bring of their mast and of their fish : which these Indians be traitorous , and mischievous of nature , and know our exceed strange famine , sell we at so dear a price , that for less than nothing they have get from we all the rest of our merchandise which remain ; . and which be worse , fear to be force by we and see that they have get all from we , they come no near to our fort then the shot of a harquebus . thither they bring their fish in their little boat , to which our poor soldier be constrain to go , and oftentimes ( as i have see ) to give away the very shirt from their back to get one fish . if at any time they show unto the savage the excessive price which they take , these villain will answer they rough and churlish : if thou make so great account of thy merchandise , eat it , and we will eat our fish : then fall they out a laugh and mock they with open throat . whereupon our soldier utter impatient , be oftentimes ready to cut they in piece , and to make they pay the price of their foolish arrogancy . notwithstanding consider the importance hereof , i take pain to appease the impatient soldier : for i will not by any mean enter into question with the savage , and it suffice i to delay the time . wherefore i devise to send unto utina to pray he to deal so far forth with his subject , as to succour i with mast and maiz : which he do very spare , send i 12 or 15 basket of mast , and two of pinock , which be a kind of little green fruit which grow among the weed in the river , and be as big as cherry : yea , and this be not but by give of they in exchange twice as much merchandise and apparel as they be worth . for the subject of utina perceive evident the necessity wherein we be , and begin to use the like speech unto we , as the other do : as it be common see that need alter man affection . while these thing be in do , a certain breathe space present it self for utina give i to understand that there be a king his 1565. subject who name be Astina , which he determine Astina a king . to take prisoner , and to chastise he for his disobedience : that for this cause , if i will give he aid with a certain number of my soldier , he will bring they to the village of Astina , where there be mean to recover mast and maiz . in the mean season he excuse himself unto i because he have send i no more maiz , and send i word that the little store that he have leave , be scarce sufficient for his seed-corn . now be somewhat relieve , as i think , by the hope which i have of this offer , i will not fade to send he the man which he desire of i , which nevertheless be very evil entreat : for he deceive they , and in stead of lead they against Astina , he cause they to march against his other enemy . my lieutenant which have the charge of this enterprise with captain Vasseur and my sergeant be determine to be revenge of utina and to cut he in piece 8c his people : and have it not be that they fear to do any thing against my will , without all doubt they will have put their enterprise in execution . therefore they will not pass any further without advertise i thereof . wherefore be come back again unto the fort , angry 8c prick deep to the quick for be so mock , they make their complaint unto i , declare unto i that they be almost dead for hunger . they tell the whole matter to the rest of the soldier , which be very glad that they have not enter into that action , 8c resolve , assemble themselves again together , to let i understand that they do persist in their first deliberation , which be , to punish the boldness and maliciousness of the savage , which they can no long endure , 8c be determine to take one of their king prisoner : which thing i be enforce to grant unto they , to you end to avoid a great mischief , and the sedition which i foresee [ in . 343. ] will ensue , if i have make refusal thereof . for , say they , what occasion have you to deny we , consider the necessity wherein we be , and the small account that they make of we . shall it not be lawful for we to punish they for the wrong which they do unto we , beside that we know apparent how little they respect we ? be not this sufficient although there be no necessity at all , since they thus delude we , and have break promise with we ? after i have therefore resolve with they to seize on the person of utina , which beside that he have give we occasion hereof , be also most able to help we to recover victual , i depart with fifty of my best soldier all embark in two bark and we arrive in the dominion of utina , distant from our fort about 40 or 50 league : then go on shore we draw towards his village situate 6 great utina take league from the river , where we take he prisoner , prisoner in his howbeit not without great cry and alarm , and lead r^mniere away our bark , have first signify unto and 50 of he be father in law and his chief subject , that in that soldier . i have take he , it be not for any desire that i have to do he any harm , but only to relieve my necessity and want of victual which oppress i , and that in case they will help i to some , i will find mean to set he again at liberty : that in the mean space i will retire my self into my bark ( for i fear lest they will there assemble themselves together , and that some mischief may thereof ensue ) where i will stay for he two day to receive his answer : notwithstanding that my meaning be not to have any thing without exchange of merchandise . this they promise they will do . and in very deed the very same evening , his wife accompany with all the woman of the village come unto the river brink , and cry unto i to enter into the bark , to see her husband and her son , which i hold both prisoner . i discover the next five os - six day five or six hundred indian archer , which draw hundred in - near unto the river side , and come to i to dian - signify unto i how that during the absence of their king , their enemy Potanou , be thereof advertise , 64 1565. be enter into their village , and have set all on fire . they pray i that i will succour they : never - the deep dis-thelesse in the mean while they have one part of their troop in ambush , with intent to set upon i if i ln , ans‘ have come on land , which be easy for i to discern . for see that i refuse so to do , they great doubt that they be discover , and seek by all mean to remove out of my mind that evil opinion which i have conceive of they . they bring i therefore fish in their little boat and of their meal of mast , they make also of their drink which they call cassine , which they send to utina and i . now albeit i have get this point of they that i hold their king prisoner , yet nevertheless i can not get any great quantity of victual for the present : the reason be , because they think that after i have draw victual from they , i will put their king to death . for they measure my will accord to their custom , the Indians whereby they put to death all the man prisoner that hillalltheman they take in war . and thus be out of all hope of his liberty , they assemble themselves in the great house , war . and have call all the people together they propose the election of a new king , at which time the father the election in law of utina set one of the king young son ofa king . upon the royal throne : and take such pain that every man do he homage by the major part of the voice . this election have like to have be the cause of great trouble among they . for there be a kinsman of the king near adjoin , which pretend a title to the kingdom , and in deed he have get one part of the subject : notwithstanding this enterprise can not take effect , forasmuch as by a common consent of the chief , it be consult and conclude , that the son be more meet to succeed the father then any other . now all this while i keep utina with i , to who i have give some of my apparel to clothe he , as i have likewise do unto his son . but his subject which before have a opinion that i will have kill he , ix 65 e the hatred among the savage king of Florida . note . [ HL 344 ] note . Rootes . Esquine . the english voyage be advertise of the good entertainment which i use towards he , send two man which walk along the river , and come to visit he , and bring we some victual . Theise two man at their come be receive by i with all courtesy , and entertain accord to the victual which i have . while these thing thus pass , there arrive from all quarter many savage of the country adjoin , which come to see utina , and seek by all mean to persuade i to put he to death , offer that if i will do so , they will take order that 1 shall want no victual . there be also a king my neighbour who name be Saturioua , a subtle and crafty man , and one that show by proof that he be great practise in affair . the king send ordinary messenger unto i , to pray i to deliver utina unto he : and to win i the more easy , he send twice seven or eight basket of Maiz or of mast , think by this way to allure i , and to make i come to composition with he : in the end notwithstanding when he see he lose his time , he cease to visit i with ambassage and victual : 8c in the mean while i be not able with you same store of victual which i have , so well to proportion out the travail upon the ship which we build to return into France , but that in the end we be constrain to endure extreme famine , which continue among we all the month of May : for in this latter season , neither Maiz nor bean , nor mast be to be find in the village , because they have employ all for to sow their field , insomuch that we be constrain to eat root , which the most part of our man pun in the mortar which i have bring with i to beat gunnepowder in , and the grain which come to we from other place : some take the wood of Esquine , beat it , and make meal thereof , which they boil with water , and eat it : other go with their harquebusy to seek to kill some foul . yea this misery be so great , that one be find that gather up among the filth of my house , all the fish bone that he can find , which he dry and beat into powder to make bread thereof . the effect of this hideous famine appear incontinent among we , for our bone eftsoon begin to cleave so near unto the skin , that the most part of the soldier have their skin peirce through with they in many part of their body : in such sort that my great fear be , lest the Indians will rise up against we , consider that it will have be very hard for we to have defend our self in such extreme decay of all our force , beside the scarcity of all victual , which fail we all at once . for the very river have not such plenty of fish as it be wont , and it seem that the land and water do fight against we . now as we be thus upon term of despair , about the end of the month of May , and the begin of June , i be new corn by advertise by certain Indians that be my neigh - en^ °f hour , that in the high country up above the river , there be new Maiz , and that that country be most ' forward of all . This cause i to take upon i to go thither with a certain number of my man , and i go up the river to a place call Enecaque : where i meet the village of the sister of utina in a village where she make we very Enecaque . good cheer and send we fish . we find that which be tell we to be true : for the maiz be now ripe : but by this good luck one shrewd turn happen unto i . for the most part of my soldier fall sick with eat moor of it then their weaken stomach can digest . we have also be the space of four day since we depart from our fort , without eat any thing , save little pinocke , and a little fish , which we a little green get of the fisher which we meet sometime along the fruit that river . and yet this be so little that certain soldier eat privy little whelp which be new whelp , cherry the next day i purpose to go into you lie of Edelano than he of to take the king which have cause one of my man to Edelano . be slay , as i have mention before : but be advertise of my depart out of my fort , and of the way which i take up the river , he fear that i go forth two carpen-ten killedfor gather the indian maiz . the village athore . Nia Cubacani a queen . the english voyage with a purpose to be revenge of the evil turn which he play : so that when i come thither , i find the house empty , for he be retire a little before with all his people : and i can not by any mean keep my soldier , be angry because they have lose one of their companion , from set the village on fire . at my departure from thence i pass back again by Enecaque , where i gather as much maiz as i can possible : which with great diligence i convey to our fort to succour my poor man , which i have leave in great necessity . they therefore see i a far off come , run to that side of the river where they think i will come on land : for hunger so pinch they to the heart , that they can not stay until the victual be bring they to the fort and that they well show assoon as i be come , and that i have distribute that little maiz among they , which i have give to each man , before i come out of the bark : for they eat it before they have take it out of the husk . but see my self in this extreme need , i take pain day by day to seek some village where there be some food . and as i travail this way and that way , it happen that two of my carpenter be kill by the two son of king Emola , and by one who name be Casti , as they go on walk to the village call athore . the cause of this murder be , because they can not refrain themselves as they walk through the field from gather a little maiz , which as they be do , they be take in the manner : whereof i be present advertise by a indian which a little before have bring i a present from Nia Cubacani queen of a village , and neighbour to our fort upon receipt of this advertisement , i send my sergeant with a number of soldier which find nothing else but the 2 dead corpse , which they bury and return without do any other exploit , because the inhabitant be flee away , fear they shall be punish for such a foul fact . as these thing thus pass , and that by this time we have almost drive out the month of May , two subject of king utina come unto i with a hermaphrodite , which show i that by this time the maiz be ripe in the great part of their quarter . whereupon utina signify unto i that in case i will carry he home to his house , he will take such good order that i shall have plenty of maiz and bean : and withal , that the field which he have cause to be sow for i , shall be reserve to my use . i consult with my man concern this matter , and find by the advice of all my company , that it be best to grant he his request , say , that he have mean to succour we with food sufficient to serve our turn for [ three . 34.5 . ] our embarkement , and that therefore i may do well to carry he home . wherefore i cause the two bark forthwith to be make ready , wherein i sail to Patica , a patica a place distant from his village 8 or 9 league , where i village . find no body , for they be get into the wood , and will not show themselves , albeit utina show himself unto they , for as much as they imagine that i shall be constrain to let he go . but see no body to show themselves , i be constrain to hazard one of my man which have be acquaint with the state of the country , to who i deliver the young son of utina , and command he to go with diligence to the village of utina , unto his father in law and his wife , to advertise they that if they will have their king again , they shall bring i victual unto the side of the little river whither i be go . at my man come every one make much of the little child , neither be there a man that think not himself well appaide to touch he . his father in law and his wife hear of these news come present towards our bark , and bring bread which they give unto my soldier , they hold i there three day , and in the mean while do all that they can to take i : which present i discover , and therefore stand diligent upon my guard . wherefore perceive they can not have their purpose , and that they be already desire of revenge root in the savage . the english voyage discover , they send to advertise i that as yet they can not help i to victual , and that the corn be not yet ripe . thus i be constrain to return and to carry back utina home , where i have much ado to save he from the rage of my soldier : which perceive the maliciousness of the Indians , go about to have murder he . Moreover it seem they be content that they have get the son , and that they care not great for the father . now my hope fail i on this side , i devise to send my man to the village where i think the maiz be by this time ripe ; i go to diverse place , and continue so do 15 day after , when as utina beseech i again to send he unto his village , assure himself that his subject will not stick to give i victual : and that in case they refuse so to do , he be content that i shall do what i think good with he . i undertake this voyage the second time with the two bark furnish as before . at my come unto the little river , we find his subject there , which fail not to come thither with some quantity of bread , bean , and fish , to give my soldier . nevertheless return again to their former practice they seek all mean to entrap i , hope to cry quittance for the imprisonment of their king , if they may have get the victory of i . but after that they see the small mean , which they have to annoy i , they return to entreaty , and offer that if i will give they their king with certain of my soldier , they will conduct they unto the village , and that the subject see he , will be more willing to give we victual . which thing notwithstanding i will not grant unto they ( mistrust their subtility , which be not so covert , but that one may espy day at a little hole ) until they have first give i two man in pledge with charge that by the next day they shall bring i victual . which thing they grant , and give i two man which i put in chain for fear they shall escape away , as i know well they be instruct to do . four day be spend in these conference , at the end whereof they declare unto i , that they can not full and whole perform their promise : and that the uttermost that they can do for the present , be to cause each subject to bring his burden of mill . to conclude , they be content to do so on condition that i will send they their two pledge within ten day . as my lieutenant be ready to depart , i warn he above all a necessary thing to take heed he fall not into the indian hand : admonition . because i know they to be very subtle and crafty to enterprise and execute any thing to our disadvantage . he depart therefore with his troop , and come to the small river whereinto we be accustom to enter to approach as near as we can unto the village of utina , be six french league distant from thence . there he go on shore , put his man in good array , and draw straight towards the great house that be the king , where the chief man of the country be assemble , which cause very great store of victual to be bring now one and then another , in do whereof they spend notwithstanding three or four day : in which mean while they gather man together , to set upon we in our retreat . they use therefore many mean to hold the we still in breath . for one while they demand their floridians pledge , another while ( see my lieutenant will not stt ill yield to they , until such time as they have bring the victual unto the boat ; accord to the agreement pass between we ) they signify unto he that the woman and young child be afiraide out of all measure to see fire in their match so near their harquebuss : and that therefore they most earnest beseech they to put they out , that they may more easy get people enough to carry the victual , and that they for their part will leave their bow and arrow , and will be content that their servant shall carry they . this second request be as flat deny they as the former : for it be a easy matter to smell out their intention . but while these thing be thus in handle , utina by no mean be to be [ three . 346. ] 71 see , but hide and keep himself secret in a little house apart , where certain choose man of i go to see he show themselves aggrieve with he for the long delay of his subject : whereunto he answer , that his subject be so much incense against we , that by no mean possible he be able to keep they in such obedience as he willing will have do , and that he can not hold they from wage of war against monsieur de Ottigny . that he also call to mind , that even while he be prisoner , at what time our man lead he into his country to obtain some victual , he see along the high way arrow stick up , at the end whereof long hair be fasten , which be a certain sign of open war proclaim , which arrow the captain also carry with he to the fort . he say further that in respect of the good will he bear to the captain , he forewarn his lieutenant that his subject be determine to cut down the tree , and cause they to fall a thwart the little river where the boat be , to keep they from depart thence , that they may fight with they at their ease , and that if it thus fall out , he assure he for his part he will not be there to meddle in the matter . and that which much moor augment the suspicion of war be , that as my messenger depart from utina , they hear the voice of one of my man , which during the voyage have always be among the Indians , and who as yet they will never render , until they have get their pledge home . this poor fellow cry out a main because two Indians will have carry he into the wood to have cut his throat : whereupon he be succour and deliver . Theise admonition be well understood , after ripe deliberation thereof Monsieur de Ottigny resolve to retire himself the seven and twenty of July . wherefore he set his soldier in order , and deliver to each of they a sack full of mill : and afterward he march towards his bark , think to prevent the enterprise of the savage . there be at the a alley of 3 or 4 hundred pace long . come forth of the village a great alley about three or four hundred pace long , which be cover on both side with great tree . my lieutenant dispose his man in this alley and set they in such order as they desire to march : for he be well assure that if there be any ambush , it will be at the come out of the tree . therefore he cause Monsieur de Arlac my ensign to march somewhat before with 8 harquebusier to discover whether there be any danger : beside he command one of my sergeant and corporal to march on the out side of the alley with four harquebusier while he himself conduct the rest of his company through it . now as he suspect , so it fall out : for monsieur de Arlac meet with two or three hundred Indians at the end of the alley , which salute he with a infinite number of their arrow , and with such fury that it be easy to see with what desire they seek to charge we . howbeit they be so well sustain in the first assault which my ensign give they , that they which fall down dead , do somewhat abate the choler of those which remain alive . this do my lieutenant haste to gain ground in such sort as i have already say . after he have march about four hundred pace , he be charge afresh with a new troop of savage which be in number about 300 , which assail he before , while the rest of the former set upon he behind . this second assault be so valiant sustain , that i may just say that monsieur de Ottigny so well discharge his duty , as be possible for a good captain to do . and so it stand they upon : for he have to deal with such kind of man , as know well how to fight and to obey their head which conduct they , and which know so well to behave themselves in this conflict , as if Ottigny have not prevent their practice , he have be in danger to have be defeat . their manner in this fight be , that when two hundred have shoot , they retire themselves and give place to the rest that be behind , and all a skirmish between the savage and the french . a second fresh charge of savage . theflorldians manner of fight . the while have their eye and foot so quick and ready , that assoon as ever they see the harquebus lay to the cheek , so soon be they on the ground , and eftsoon up to answer with their bow and to fly their way , if by chance they perceive we go about thefloridians to take they : for there be nothing that they fear so mefe fear . much , because of our sword and dagger . this conflict continue and last from nine of the clock in the morning , until the night depart they . and if Ottigny have not bethink himself to cause his man to break the arrow which they find in the way , and so to deprive the savage of the mean to begin again , without all doubt he shall have have very much to do : for by this mean they lack arrow , and so be constrain to retire themselves . during the time of the conflict they cry and make sign that they be the captain and lieutenant friend : and that they fight for none other cause but to be revenge on the soldier , which be their mortali enemy . my lieutenant be come unto his boat take a re-two slalne . view of his company , and find two man want which be kill , of who the one be call James sale , and the other name be Mesureur . he find two and twen - moreover 22 of they wound , which with much ado ty wound . causecj to be bring unto the boat . all the mill that he find among his company come but to two man burden , which he divide equal among they . for [ three . 34-7 - ] assoon as the conflict begin , every man be constrain to leave his sack to put his hand to his weapon . in this mean while i remain at the fort , and cause every man diligent to travel , hope that my lieutenant will bring we victual . but see the time consume away , i begin to suspect the truth of that which fall out , whereof i be assure immediate after at their return . see therefore my hope frustrate of|it on at side , i make my prayer unto God , and thank God for their he of his grace which he have show unto my poor deliverance , soldier which be escape : afterwards i think upon new mean to obtain victual , aswell for our return into France , as to drive out the time until our embark . i be advertise by certain of our company , which usual go on hunt into the wood and through the village , that in the village Sarauahi situate on the other side of the river , and two league distant from the fort , and in the village emoloa there be field wherein the mill be very forward , and that there be thereof in those part in great abundance . wherefore i cause my boat to be make ready , and send my sergeant thither with certain soldier , which use such diligence , that we have good store of mill . i send also to the river which the savage call Iracana , name by captain Ribault the river of Somme , where captain Vasseur and my sergeant arrive with two boat and their ordinary furniture , and find there a great assembly of the lord of the country , among who be athore the son of Satourioua , Apalou , and Tacadocorou , which be there assemble to make merry : because that in this place be the fair maid and woman of all the country . captain Vasseur in my name give certain small trifle to all the lord , to the queen , to the maid and woman of the village . whereupon the boat be forthwith lade with mill , after they have make our man as good cheer as they can devise . the queen send i two small mat so artificial wrought as it be unpossible to make better . now find our self by this mean sufficient furnish with victual , we begin each of we in his place , to travail and use such diligence , as the desire to see our native country may move we . but because two of our carpenter be slay by the Indians ( as heretofore i mention ) John de Hais , master Carpenter , a man very worthy of his vocation , repair unto i , and tell i that by reason of want of man he be not able to make i up the ship against the time that he have promise i : which speech cause such a mutiny among the soldier that very hardly he escape kill : howbeit i appease they aswell as i 75 the village Sarauahi . the village Emoloa . the river of Iracana call by Ribault the river of Somme . courtesy and liberality the best mean to deal with the savage . Most artificiali mat . the beat down of the house without the fort , y the palisade . the cause why the french lose Florida . eight king laudonniers friend and ally . the principali scope of planter in strange country . Florida a rich country . the english voyage can , and determine to work no more from thenceforth upon the ship , but to content our self to repair the brigandine which i have . so we begin to beat down all the house that be without the fort , and cause coal to be make of the timber thereof : likewise the soldier beat down the palisade which be towards the water side , neither be i ever able to keep they from do it . i have also determine to beat down the fort before my departure and to set it on fire , for fear lest some newcome guest shall have enjoy and possess it . in the mean while there be none of we to who it be not a extreme grief to leave a country , wherein we have endure so great travail and necessity , to discover that which we must forsake through our own countrymen default . for if we have be succour in time and place , and accord to the promise that be make unto we , the war which be between we and utina , have not fall out , neither shall we have have occasion to offend the Indians , which with all pain in the world i entertain in good amity , aswell with merchandise and apparel , as with promise of great matter , and with who i so behave myself , that although sometime i be constrain to take victual in some few village , yet i lose not the alliance of eight king and lord my neighbour , which continual succour and aid i with whatsoever they be able to afford . yea this be the principali scope of all my purpose , to win and entertain they , know how great their amity may advance our enterprise , and principal while i discover the commodity of the country , and seek to strengthen my self therein . i leave it to your cogitation to think how near it go to our heart , to leave a place abound in riches ( as we be thorough inform thereof ) in come whereunto , and do service unto our prince , we leave our own country , wife , child , parent , and friend , and pass the peril of the sea , and be therein arrive , as in a plentiful treasure of all our heart desire .the course which sir Francis Drake hold from [ he . 440. ] the haven of Guatulco in the south sea on the back side of Nueva Espanna , to the northwest of California as far as fourty three degree : and his return back along the say coast to thirty eight degree : where find a fair and goodly haven , he land , and stay there many week , and discover many excellent thing in the country and great show of rich minerail matter , and be offer the dominion of the country by the lord of the same , he take possession thereof in the behalf of her majesty , and name it Nova Albion . i keep our course from the isle of canon ( which lie in eight degree of northerly latitude , and within two league of the main of Nicaragua , where we calk and trim our ship ) along the coast of Nueva Espanna , until we come to the haven and town of Guatulco , which ( as we be inform ) have but seventeen Spaniards dwell in it , and we find it to stand in fifteen degree and fifty minute . assoon as we be enter this haven we land , and go present to the town , and to the town house , where we find a judge sit in judgement , he be associate with three other officer , upon three negro that have conspire the burn of the town : both which judge , and prisoner we take , and bring they a shippeboord , and cause the chief judge to write his letter to the town , to command all the townsman to avoid , that we may safe water there . 319 which be do , and they depart , we ransack the town , and in one house we find a pot of the quantity of a bushel full of royal of plate , which we bring to our ship . and here one Thomas Moone one of our company , take a spanish gentleman as he be fly out of the town , and search he , he find a chain of gold about he , and other jewel , which we take and so let he go . at this place our generali among other Spaniards , set a shore his Portugal pilot , which he take at the island of cape Verde , out of a ship of saint marie port of Portugal , and have set they a shore , we depart thence . our general at this place and time think himself both in respect of his private injury receive from the Spaniard , as also of their contempt and indignity offer to our country and prince in generail , sufficient satisfy , and revenge : and suppose that her majesty at his return will rest content with this service , purpose to continue no long upon the spanish coast , but begin to consider and to consult of the best way for his country . he think it not good to return by the strait , for two speciali cause : the one , lest the Spaniard shall there wait , and attend for he in great number and strength , who hand he be leave but one ship , can not possible escape . the other cause be the dangerous situation of the mouth of the strait of the south side , with continual ! storm rain and bluster , as he find by experience , beside the shoal and sand upon the coast , wherefore he think it not a good course to adventure that way : he resolve therefore to avoid these hazard , to go forward to the island of the Malucos , and therehence to sail the course of the Portugal by the cape of bona speranda . upon this resolution , he begin to think of his best way for the Malucos , and find himself , where he 320 now be , becalm , he see that of necessity he must be enforce to take a spanish course , namely to sail somewhat northerly to get a wind . we therefore set sail , and sail 800 league at the least for a good wind , and thus much we sail from the 16 of April after our old stile till the three of June . the five day of June be in forty three degree toward the pole arcticke , be speedy come out of the extreme heat , we find the air so cold , that our man be pinch with the same , complain of the extremity thereof , and the further we go , the more the cold increase upon we , whereupon we think it best for that time to seek land , and do so , find it not mountainous , but low plain land , and we draw back again without land , till we come within thirty eight degree towards the line . in which height it please God to send we into a fair and good bay , with a good wind to enter the same . in this bay we anchor the sevententh of June , and the people of the country , have their house close by the water side , show themselves unto we , and send a present to our generali . when they come unto we , they great wonder at the thing which we bring , but our generali ( accord to his naturali and accustom humanity ) courteous entreat they , and liberal bestow on they necessary thing to cover their nakedness , whereupon they suppose we to be god , and will not be persuade to the contrary : the present which they send unto our generali be feather , and call of net work . their house be dig round about with earth , and have from the uttermost brim of the circle cliff of wood set upon they , join close together at the top like a spire steeple , which by reason of that closeness be very warm . their bed be the ground with rush straw on it , and lie about the house , they have the fire in the midst . the man go naked , the woman take bulrush and ix 321 ten sir Francis Drake sail on the back side of America , to 43 degree of northerly latitude . 38 degree . [ HL 441. ] a description of the people and country of Nova Albion . the english voyage kemb they after the manner of hemp , and thereof make their loose garment , which be knit about their middle , hang down about their hip , have also about their shoulder a skin of deer , with the hair upon it . Theise woman be very obedient and serviceable to their husband . after they be depart from we , they come and visit we the second time , and bring with they feather and bag of tobacco for present : and when they come to the top of the hill ( at the bottom whereof we have pitch our tent ) they stay themselves , where one appoint for speaker , weary himself with make a long oration , which do , they leave their bow upon the hill and come down with their present . in the mean time the woman remain on the hill , torment themselves lamentable , tear their flesh from their cheek , whereby we perceive that they be about a sacrifice . in the mean time our generali , with his company , go to prayer , and to read of the scripture , at which exercise they be attentive and seem great to be affect with it : but when they be come unto we they restore again unto we those thing which before we have bestow upon they . the news of our be there be spread through the country , the people that inhabit round about come down , and among they the king himself , a man of a goodly stature , and comely personage , with many other tall and warlike man : before who coming be send two ambassador to our generali , to signify that their king be come , in do of which message , their speech be continue about half a hour . This end , they by sign request our generali to send something by their hand to their king , as a token that his come may be in peace : wherein our generali have satisfy they , they return with glad tiding to their king , who march to we with a princely majesty , the people cry continual after their manner , and as they draw near unto we , so do they 322 strive to behave themselves in their action with comeliness . in the fore front be a man of a goodly personage , who bear the sceptre , or mace before the king , whereupon hang two crown , a less and a big , with three chain of a merveilous length : the crown be make of knit work wrought artificial with feather of diverse colour ; the chain be make of a bony substance and few be the person among they that be admit to wear they : and of that number also the person be stint , as some ten , some twelve , etc next unto he which bear the sceptre , be the king himself , with his guard about his person , clad with conie skin , and other skin : after they follow the naked common these be like chain of Esurnoy in Canada and hochelage . sort of people , every one have his face paint , some with white , some with black , and other colour , and have in their hand one thing or other for a present , not so much as their child , but they also bring their present . in the mean time , our generali gather his man together , and march within his fence place , make against their approach , a very warlike show . they be troop together in their order , and a general salutation be make , there be present a generali silence . than he that bear the sceptre before the king , be inform by another , who they assign to that office , with a manly and lofty voice , proclaim that which the other speak to he in secret , continue half a hour : which end , and a generali amen as it be give , the king with the whole number of man , and woman ( the child except ) come down without any weapon , who descend to the foot of the hill , set themselves in order . in come towards our bulwark and tent , the sceptre bearer begin a song , observe his measure in a dance , and that with a stately countenance , who the king with his guard , and every degree of person follow , do in like manner sing and dance , save only 323 [ three . 442. ] the king resign his crown and kingdom to sir Francis drake . great riches in Nova Albion . the english voyage the woman which dance and keep silence . the general permit they to enter within our bulwark , where they continue their song and dance a reasonable time . when they have satisfy themselves , they make sign to our generali to sit down , to who the king , and diverse other make several oration , or rather supplication , that he will take their province and kingdom into his hand , and become their king , make sign that they will resign unto he their right and title of the whole land , and become his subject . in which to persuade we the better , the king and the rest , with one consent and with great reverence , joyful sing a song , do set the crown upon his head , enrich his neck with all their chain , and offer unto he many other thing , honour he by the name of Hioh , add thereunto as it seem a sign of triumph : which thing our generali thought not meet to reject , because he know not what honour and profit it may be to our country . wherefore in the name , and to the use of her majesty , he take the sceptre , crown and dignity of the say country in his hand , wish that the riches and treasure thereof may so convenient be transport to the enrich of her kingdom at home , as it abound in the same . the common sort of the people leave the king and his guard with our generali , scatter themselves together with their sacrifice among our people , take a diligent view of every person ; and such as please their fancy , ( which be the young ) they enclose they about offer their sacrifice unto they with lamentable weep , scratch , and tear the flesh from their face with their nail , whereof issue abundance of blood . but we use sign to they of dislike this , and stay their hand from force , and direct they upwards to the live God , who only they ought to worship . they show unto we their wound , and crave help of they at our hand , whereupon we give they lotion , plaster and ointment agree to 324 ... I578 , the state of their grief , beseech God to cure their disease . Every third day they bring their sacrifice unto we , until they understand our meaning , that we have no pleasure in they : yet they can not be long absent from we , but daily frequent our company to the hour of our departure , which departure seem so grievous unto they , that their joy be turn into sorrow . they entreat we , that be absent we will remember they , and by stealth provide a sacrifice , which we mislike . our necessary business be end , our generali great herd with his company travel up into the country to their °f deer . village , where we find herd of deer by a thousand in a company , be most large and fat of body . we find the whole country to be a warren of a abundance of strange kind of cony , their body in bigness as be stran&conies-the Barbary cony , their head as the head of we , the foot of a want , and the tail of a rat be of great length : under her chin on either side a bag , into the which she gather her meat when she have fill her belly abroad . the people eat their body , and make great account of their skin , for their king coat be make of they . Oure generali call this country , nova Albion , and Nova Albion . that for two cause : the one in respect of the white bank and cliff , which lie towards the sea : and the other , because it may have some affinity with our country in name , which sometime be so call . there be no part of earth here to be take up , gold and wherein there be not some speciali likelihood of gold or silver in the silver earth of Nova at our departure hence our generali set up a monument of our be there ; as also of her majesty right and title to the same , namely a plate nail upon a fair great post , whereupon be engrave her majesty name , the day and year of our arrival there , with the free give up of the province and people into her majesty hand , together with her highness picture and arm , in 325 a piece of six penny of current english money under the plate , where under be also write the name of our generali . it seem that the Spaniard hitherto have never be in this part of the country , neither do ever discover the land by many degree to the southward of this place . a notable discourse of m. John Chilton , touch the people , manner , mine , city , riches , force , and other memorable thing of new Spain , and other province in the west Indies , see and note by himself in the time of his travel , continue in those part , the space of seventeen or eighteen year . n the year of our lord 1561 , in the month of July , i John Chilton go out of this city of London into Spain , where i remain for the space of seven year , and from thence i sail into Nova Hispania , and so travel there , and by the south sea , unto Peru , the space of seventeen or eighteen year : and after that time expire , i return into Spain , and so in the year 1586 in the month of July , i arrive at the fbresayd city of London : where peruse the note which i have 360 1568. take in the time of my travel in those year , i have set down as follow . in the year 1568 , in the month of march , be 1568. desirous to see the world , i embark my self in the bay of Cadiz in Andaluzia , in a ship bind for the Cadiz .. isle of the canary , where she take in her lade , and set forth from thence for the voyage , in the month of June , the same year . within a month after , we fall with the isle of S. Domingo , and from thence direct to Nova Hispania , and come into the port of saint John San Juan de de ullua , which be a little island stand in the sea , ua-about two mile from the land , where the king maintaineth about 50 soldier , and captain , that keep the fort , and about 150 negro , who all the year long be occupy in carry of stone for building , and other use , and to help to make fast the ship that come in there , with their cable . there be build two bulwark at each end of a wall , that stand likewise in the say island , where the ship use to ride , make fast to the say wall with their cable , so near , that a man may leap ashore . from this port i journey by land to a town call Vera Cruz , stand by a river side , VeraCruz . where all the factor of the spanish merchant dwell , t111 - 4$6d which receive the good of such ship as come thither , and also lade the same with such treasure and merchandise as they return back into Spain . they be in number about four hundred , who only remain there , during the time that the spanish fleet discharge , and be load again , which be from the end of August to the begin of April follow . and then for the unwholesomeness of the place they depart thence sixteen league further up within the country , to a town call Xalapa , a very Jalapa six-healthfull soil . there be never any woman deliver ten lea&ues-of child in this port of Vera Cruz : for so soon as they perceive themselves conceive with child , they get they into the country , to avoid the peril of the infect air , although they use every morning to drive through the town above two thousand head of cattle , to take away 361 Pueblo de los angel eight league . the english voyage the ill vapour of the earth . from Xalapa seven league i come to another place , name Perota , wherein be certain house build of straw , call by the name of ventas , the inhabitant whereof be Spaniard , who accustom to harbour such traveller as be occasion to journey that way up into the land . it stand in a great wood of pine and cedar tree , the soil be very cold , by reason of store of snow which lie on the mountain there all the year long . there be in that place a infinite number of dear , of bigness like unto great mule , have also home of great length . from Perota nine league , i come to the Fuentes of Ozumba , which fuente be spring of water issue out of certain rock into the midst of the high way , where likewise be certain range , and house , for the use before mention . eight league ofif from this place i come to the city of the angel , so call by that name of the Spaniard , which inhabit there to the number of a thousand , beside a great number of Indians . this city stand in very plain field , have near adjoin to it many sumptuous city , as namely the city of Tlaxcalla , a city of two hundred thousand Indians , tributary to the king , although he exact no other tribute of they then a handful of wheat a piece , which amount to thirteen thousand hannege yearly , as have appear by the king book of account . and the reason why he content himself with this tribute , only for they , be , because they be the occasion that he take the city of Mexico , with who the tlaxcallians have war at the same time when the Spaniard come into the country . the governor of this city be a Spaniard , call among they the Alcalde maydr , who administer chief cause of justice both unto the Christians and Indians , refer small and light vice , as drunkenness and such like , to the judgement and discretion of such of the indian as be choose every year to rule among they , call by the name of alcalde . Theise Indians from fourteen year old 362 upward , pay unto the king for their yearly tribute one ounce of silver , and a hannege of maiz , which be value among they common at twelve real of plate . the widow among they pay half of this . the Indians both of this city , and of the rest , lie about Mexico , go clothe with mantle of linen cloth make of cotton wool , paint throughout with work of diverse and fine colour . it be distant from the city of the angel four Tlaxcalla league to the northward , and fourteen from Mexico . league there be another city a league from it , call Chetula , consist of more than sixty thousand Indians , tributary , angel . and there dwell not above twelve Spaniard there . from it , about two league , there be another , call Acassingo , of above fifty thousand Indians , and about eight or twelve Spaniard , which stand at the foot of the Vulcan of Mexico , on the east side . there be vukan be a beside these , three other great city , the one name ml that c < > n-tepiaca , a very famous city , Waxazingo , and tichama-chalcho : all these in time past belong to the kingdom ' of Tlaxcalla : and from these city they bring most of their Cochinilia into Spain . the distance from the Cochinilia . city of the angel , to the city of Mexico be twenty Pueblo de los league . this city of Mexico be the city of great angeles20 fame in all the Indies , have goodly and costly house in it , build all of lime and stone , and seven street ’ in length , and seven in breadth , with river run through every second street , by which they bring their provision in canoas . it be situate at the foot of certain hill , which contain in compass by estimation above twenty league , compass the say city on the one side , and a lake which be fourteen league about on the other side . upon which lake there be build many notable and sumptuous city , as the city of Tescuco , where the Spaniard build six frigate , at that time when they conquer Mexico , and where also Fernando Cortes make his abode five or six month in cure of the sickness of his people , which they have take at their come into the country . there dwell 363 his voyage from Mexico to Nueva Biscaia . [ Iii . 457. ] new Biscay . the silver mine of tamascaltepec . the valley of saint barthoh-mew . the haven where you ship of China in thephiuppinas arrive . Guaxaca . the english voyage in this city about sixty thousand Indians , which pay tribute to the king . in this city the say Fernando build the fine church that ever be build in the Indies , the name whereof be saint Peter . after i have continue two year in this city , be desirous to see further the country , i employ that which i have , and take my voyage towards the province of California , in the which be discover a certain country , by a Biscaine , who name be Diego the guiara , and call it after the name of his country , new Biscay , where i sell my merchandise for exchange of silver , for there be there certain rich mine discover by the aforesaid biskaine . go from Mexico i direct my voyage somewhat towards the southwest , to certain mine , call Tamascaltepec , and so travel forward the space of twenty day through desert place unhabit , till i come to the valley of saint Bartholomew , which join to the province of new Biscay . in all these place the Indians for the most part go naked , and be wild people . their common armour be bow and arrow : they use to eat up such Christians as they come by . from hence depart , i come to another province name Xalisco , and from thence to the port of Navidad , which be 120 league from Mexico , in which port arrive always in the month of April , all the ship that come out of the south sea from China , and then philippinas , and there they lie their merchandise ashore . the most part whereof be mantle mad of cotton wool , wax , and fine platter gild , make of earth , and much gold . the next summer follow , be in the year 1570 ( which be the first year that the pope Buis be bring into the Indies ) i undertake another voyage towards the province of sonsonate , which be in the kingdom of Guatimala , whither i carry diverse merchandise of Spain , all by land on mule back . the way thitherward from Mexico be to the city of the angel , and from thence to another city of Christians 80 league off , call Guaxaca , in which there dwell about counterfeit 3^4 Spaniard , and many Indians . all the Indians of this province pay their tribute in mantle of cotton wool , and Cochinilia , whereof there grow abundance throughout this country . near to this place there lie a port in the south sea , call Aguatulco , in the which there agwtuko . dwell not above three or four Spaniard , with certain negro , which the king maintain there : in which place sir Francis Drake arrive in the year 1579 , in the month of April , where i lose with his be there above a thousand ducat , which he take away , with much other good of other merchant of Mexico from one Francisco Gomes Rangifa , factor there for all the spanish merchant that then trade in the south sea : for from this port they use to embark all their good that go for Peru , and to the kingdom of Honduras . from Guaxaca i come to a town name Nixapa , which stand Nixapa . upon certain very high hill in the province of sapot - Sapotecas . ecas , wherein inhabit about the number of twenty Spaniard , by the king of Spain commandment , to keep that country in peace : for the Indians be very rebellious : and for this purpose he bestow on they the town and city that be within that province . from hence i go to a city call Tecoantepec , which be the far Tecoantepec . town to the eastward in all nova Hispania , which some time do belong to the mark de Valle , and because it be a very fit port , stand in the south sea , the king of Spain , upon a rebellion make by the say mark against he , take it from he , and do now possess it as his own . here in the year 1572 i see a piece of ordinance of brass , call a demy culverin , which come out of a ship call the Jesus of Lubec , which captain Hawkins leave in saint John de ullua , be in fight with the Spaniard in the year 1568 ; which piece they afterward carry 100 league by land over mighty mountain to the say city , to be embark there for the philippinas . leave Tecoantepec , i go still along by the south sea about 150 league in the desolate province of Soconusco , Soconusco . in which province there grow cacao , which the chris-365 1570. tian carry from thence into Nova Hispania , for that it will not grow in any cold country . the Indians of this country pay the king their tribute in cacao , give he four hundred cargas , and every carga be 24000 almond , which carga be worth in Mexico thirty piece of real of plate . they be man of great riches , and withal very proud : and in all this province throughout , there dwell not twenty Christians . i travel through Suchetepec . Guasacapan . another province call Suchetepec ; and thence to the province of Guasacapan : in both which province be very few people , the big town therein have not above two hundred Indians . the chief merchandise Guatimala . there , be cacao . hence i go to the city of Guatimala , which be the chief city of all this kingdom : in this city do inhabit about 80 Spaniard : and here the king have his governor , and council , to who all the people of the kingdom repair for justice . this city stand from the coast of the south sea 14 league within the land , and be very rich , by reason of the gold that they fetch out of the coast of Veragua . from this city to the eastward 60 sonsonate . league lie the province sonsonate , where i sell the merchandise i carry out of Nova Hispania . the chief san Salvador . city of this province be call saint Salvador , which lie 7 league from the coast of the south sea , and have a port Acaxutla . lie by the sea coast , call Acaxutla , where the ship arrive with the merchandise they bring from Nova Hispania ; and from thence lade back again the cacao : there dwell here to the number of threescore Spaniard . Nicoia a port where you ship which go to thephilippinas be build . [ Iii . 458. ] from sonsonate i travel to Nicoia , which be in the kingdom of Nicaragua , in which port the king build all the ship that travel out of the Indies to the Malucos . i go forward from thence to Costa rica , where the Indians both man and woman go all naked , and the land lie between Panama , and the kingdom of Guatimala : and for that the Indians there live as warrior , i dare not pass by land , so that here in a town call S. Salvador i bestow that which i carry in annile ( which be a kind of thing to die blow withal ) which i carry with i to the port of Cavallos , lie in Puerto the ca-the kingdom of Honduras , which port be a mighty huge a ruh gulf , and at the come in on the one side of it there * a : e it lie a town of little force without ordinance or any other strength , have in it house of straw : at which town the Spaniard use yearly in the month of August to unlade four ship which come out of Spain lade with rich merchandise , and receive in here again their lade of a kind of merchandise call annile and Cochinilia ( although it be not of such value as that of Nova Hispania ) and silver of the mine of Tomaangua , and gold of Nicaragua , and hide , and Salsa perilla , the best in all the Indies : all which merchandise they return , and depart from thence always in the month of April follow , take their course by the island of Jamaica , in which island there dwell on the west side of it certain Spaniard of no great number . from this place they go to the cape of saint Anthony , which be the uttermost part of the westward of the island of Cuba , and from thence to Havana lie hard by , which be descrip-the chief port that the king of Spain have in all the country of the Indies , and of great importance : for all the ship , both from Peru , Hunduras , porto rico , s. Domingo , Jamaica , and all other place in his Indies , arrive there in their return to Spain , for that in this port they take in victual and water , and the most part of their lade : here they meet from all the foresay place always in the begin of may by the king commandment : at the entrance of this port it be so narrow , that there can scarce come in two ship together , although it be above six fathom deep in the narrow place of it . in the north side of the come in there stand a tower , in which there watch every day a man to descry the sail of ship which he can see on the sea ; and as many as he discover , so many banner he set upon the tower , that the people of the town ( which stand within the port about a mile from the tower ) may understand thereof . under this tower there 367 lie a sandy shore , where man may easy go aland ; and by the tower there run a hill along by the water side , which easy with small store of ordinance subdu the town and port . the port within be so large that there may easy ride a thousand sail of ship without anchor or cable , for no wind be able to hurt they . there the smalforce inhabit within the town of Havana about three hundred of Havana . Spaniard , and about threescore soldier , which the king maintain there for the keep of a certain castle which he have of late erect , which have plant in it about twelve piece of small ordinance , and be compass round with a small ditch , wherethorow at their pleasure they may let in the sea . about two league from Havana there lie another town call Wanabacoa , in which there be dwell about a hundred Indians , and from this place 60 league there lie another town name Bahama , situate on the north side of the island . the chief city of this island of Cuba ( which be above 200 league in length ) be also call Sant Iago de Cuba , where dwell a bishop and about two hundred Spaniard ; which town stand on the south side of the island the commodi - about loo league from Havana . all the trade of this tie of Cuba . isiand js cattle , which they kill only for the hide that be bring thence into Spain : for which end the Spaniard maintain there many negro to kill their cattle , and foster a great number of hog , which be kill , and cut into small piece , they dry in the sun , and so make it provision for the ship which come for Spain . Having remain in this island two month , i take hombre de ship in a frigate , and go over to number de dios , dw ’ and from thence by land to Panama , which stand upon Panama . the south sea . from number de dios to Panama be 17 league distance : from which town there run a river which be call the river of Chagre , which run within 5 league of Panama , to a place call cruze , through which river they carry their good , and disembark they at the say cruze , and from thence they be convey on mule back to Panama by land ; where they again 368 embark they in certain small ship in the south sea for all the coast of Peru. in one of these ship i go to Potossi , and from thence by land to Cusco , and from Potosi . thence to Paita . here i remain the space of seven month , and then return into the kingdom of Guatimala , and arrive in the province of Nicoia , and Nicaragua . from Nicaragua i travel by land to a province call Nicamula ( which lie towards the north sea in certain high mountain ) for that i can not pass through the kingdom of Guatimala at that time for water , wherewith all the low country of the province of Soconusco , lie by the south sea , be drown with the rain that fall above in the mountain , endure always from April to September : which season for that cause they call their winter . from this province i come into another call de Vera Paz , in which the chief city be also Vera Paz. call after that name , where there dwell a bishop [ three . 459. ] and about forty Spaniard . among the mountain of this country towards the north sea , there be a province call la Candona , where be indian man of war which the king can not subdue , for that they have town and fort in a great lake of water above in the say mountain : the most part of they go naked , and some wear mantle of cotton wool . distant from this about 80 league , i come into another province call the province of Chiapa , wherein the chief city be call Sacatlan , chiapa 300 where there dwell a bishop and about a hundred a£ue^fr < he Spaniard . in this country there be great store of ‘ Cotten wool , whereof the Indians make fine linen cloth , which the Christians buy and carry into Nova Hispania . the people of this province pay their tribute to the king all in cotton wool and feather . fourteen league from this city there be another call Chiapa , where be the fine gennet in all the Indies , which be carry hence to Mexico , 300 league from it . from this city i travel still through hill and mountain , till i come to the end of this province , to ix 369 2 A Ecatepec an a hill call Ecatepec , which in English signify the ^ka he h w*nde : f°r they say , it be the high hill ‘ that ever be discover : for from the top of it may be discover both the north and the south sea ; and it be in height suppose to be nine league . they which travel over it , lie always at the foot of it over night , and begin their journey about midnight , to travel to the top of it before the sun rise the next day , because the wind blow with such force afterward , that it be impossible for any man to go up : from the foot of this Tecoantepec . hill to Tecoantepec , the first town of Nova Hispania , be about fifteen league . and so from hence i journey to Mexico . his journey to by and by after i come to Mexico ( which be in the panuco . year 1572 ) in the company of another Spaniard , which be my companion in this journey , we go together towards the province of Panuco , which lie upon the coast of the north sea , and within three day journey Mestitlan . we enter a city call Mestitlan , where there dwell twelve Spaniard : the indian inhabitant there be about thirty thousand . this city stand upon certain high mountain , which be very thick plant with town very wholesome and fruitful , have plentiful fountain of water run through they . the high way of these hill be all set with fruit , and tree of diverse kind , and most pleasant . in every town as we pass through , the Indians present we with victual . within twenty Clanchinolte - league of this place there be another city call clanchi-fec - noltepec , belong to a gentleman , where there inhabit about forty thousand Indians ; and there be among they eight or nine friar of the order of saint Augustine , who have there a monastery . within three day after we de-guaxutla . part from this place , and come to a city call Guaxutla , where there be another monastery of friar of the same order : there dwell in this town about twelve Spaniard . from this place forward begin a province call Guastecan . Guastecan , which be all plain ground without any Tancuylabo . hill . the first town we come unto be call tan-370 cuylabo , in which there dwell many Indians , high of stature , have all their body paint with blue , and wear their hair long down to their knee , tie as woman use to do with their hair-lace . when they go out of their door , they carry with they their bow and arrow , be very great archer , go for the most part naked . in those country they take neither gold nor silver for exchange of any thing , but only salt , which they great esteem , and use it for a saltaprind-principall medicine for certain worm which breed in 7 their lip and in their gum . after nine day travel c n 1 e ' from this place , we come to a town call tampice , tampice a which be a port town upon the sea , wherein there port tmne-dwell , i think , forty Christians , of which number while we abide there , the Indians kill fourteen , as they be gather of salt , which be all the trade that they have in this place : it stand upon the entry of the river of Panuco , which be a mighty great river ; and Panuco . be it not for a sand that lie at the mouth of it , ship of five hundred ton may go up into it above three score league . from hence we go to Panuco , fourteen league from tampice , which in time pass have be a goodly city , where the king of Spain have his governor : but by reason that the Indians there destroy the christian , it lie in a manner waste , containing in it not above ten Christians with a priest . in this town i fall sick , where i lie one and forty day , have no other sustenance than fruit and water , which water i send for above six league off within the country . here i remain till my companion come to i , which have depart from i another way , retain in my company only a slave , which i bring with i from Mexico . and the last day in easter week my companion come to i , find i in a very weak state , by reason of the unholesomenesse of the place . notwithstanding my weakness , i be set on a horse , and a indian behind i to hold i , we go forward on our voyage all that day till night . the 371 next day in the morning we pass over the river in a canoa ; and be on the other side , i go my self before alone : and by reason there meet many way trale by the wild beast , i lose my way , and so travel through a great wood about two league : and at length [ three . 460. ] fall into the hand of certain wild Indians , which be there in certain cottage make of straw ; who see i , come out to the number of twenty of they , with their bow and arrow , and speak unto i in their language , which i understand not : and so i make sign unto they to help i from my horse ; which they do by commandment of their lord , which be there with they ; and light down . they carry i under one of their cottage , and lay i upon a mat on the ground : and perceive that i can not understand they , they bring unto i a little indian wench of Mexico , of fifteen or sixteen year of age , who they command to ask i in her language from whence i come , and for what intent i be come among they : for ( say she ) do thou not know Christian , how that these people will kill and eat thou ? to who i answer , let they do with i what they will ; here now i be . Shee reply , say , thou may thank God thou be lean ; for they fear thou have the pock : otherwise they will eat thou . so i present to the king a little wine which i have with i in a bottle ; which he esteem above any treasure : for for wine they will sell their wife and child . afterwards the wench ask i what i will have , and whether i will eat any thing . i answer that i desire a little water to drink , for that the country be very hot : and she bring i a great Venice glass , gild , full of water . And marvel at the glass , i demand how they come by it . she tell Shallapa . i that the casique bring it from Shallapa , a great town distant 30 league from this place on the hill , whereas dwell certain Christians , and certain friar of the order of saint Augustine , which this casique with his people on a night slay ; and burn the friar monastery , 372 among other thing reserve this glass : and from thence also bring i . have now be conversant with they about three or four hour , they bid she ask i if i will go my way . i answer she , that i desire nothing else . So the casique cause two of his Indians to lead i forward in my way ; go before i with their bow and arrow , naked , the space of three league , till they bring i into a high way : and then make a sign unto i , they signify that in short time i shall come to a town where Christians inhabit , which be call S. Iago de los valle , stand in plain field , wall about with a mud wall : the number of the Christians that dwell therein , be not above four or five and twenty , unto which the king of Spain give Indians and town , to keep the country subject unto he . here the Christians have their mighty mule , which they carry for all the part of the Indies , and into Peru , for that all their merchandise be carry by this mean by land . in this town aforesaid , i find my company , which i have lose before , who make no other account of i but that i have be slay : and the Christians there likewise marvel to hear that i come from those kind of indian alive , which be a thing never see nor hear of before : for they take a great pride in kill a christian , and to wear any part of he where he have any hair grow , hang it about their neck , and so be account for valiant man . in this town i remain eighteen day , till i recover my health , and in the mean space there come one don Francisco de Pago , who the viceroy don Henrico Manriques have send for captain generali , to open and discover a certain way from the sea side to the mine of Sacatecas , which be from this place 160 league , for to transport their merchandise by that way , leave the way by Mexico , which be seven or eight week travel . so this captain take i and my company , with the rest of his soldier , to the number of forty , which he have bring with he , and five hundred 373 Sant Iago de los valle . mighty mule . don Henrico Manriques viceroy of Mexico . the mine of Sacatecas . the valley of saint Michael . Pueblo nuevo . mechuacan . copper mine . Campeche . [ Iii . 461. ] Merida . Rio de Tabasco . Indians , which we take out of two town in this province call Tanchipa , and Tamaclipa , all good archer , and naked man , and go thence to the river de las Palmas , which be of great bigness , part the kingdom of Nova Hispania and Florida : and go still along by this river the space of three day , seek passage to pass over ; and find none , we be at length enforce to cut timber to make a balsam or raft , which when we have make , we sit on it , the Indians swim in the water , and thrust it before they to the other side . within thirty day after , travel through wood , hill , and mountain , we come to the mine of Sacatecas , which be the rich mine in all the Indies , and from thence they fetch most silver : at which mine there dwell above three hundred Christians : and there our captain give we leave to depart . so we come to the valley of saint Michael towards Mexico ; and from thence to Pueblo novo ; and from that place to the province of mechuacan , after which name the chief city of that place be call : where there dwell a bishop , and above a hundred Spaniard in it : it abound with all kind of spanish fruit , and have wood full of nut tree , and wild vine . here be many mine of copper , and great store of cattle . it lie 60. league from Mexico , whither we come within four day after . the Indians of this country be very mighty and big man . afterwards i return another way to the province of sonsonate by Vera cruz , and so to Rio Alvarado , and from thence to the province of campeche , which lie on the south side of the bay of Mexico : the chief town of this province be call Merida , in which be a bishop and almost 100 Spaniard . the Indians of this province pay all their tribute in mantle of cotton wool and cacao . there be no port in all this province for a ship of 100 tun to ride in , but only in the river of Tabasco , by which river this city of Merida stand . the chief merchandise which they lade there in small frigate , be a certain 374 wood call campeche , ( wherewith they use to die ) as also hide and annile . by this there lie the province of lucatan , near the Honduras by the north sea coast , where there be also another bishop , and a town likewise name lucatan , where there dwell a few Spaniard . they have no force at all in all this coast to defend themselves withal , save only that the land be low , and there be no port to receive any ship , unless they be frigate , which carry from thence to the port of saint John de ullua , wax , cacao , honey , and also mantle of cotton wool , whereof they make there great store , and of which kind of merchandise there be great trade thence to Mexico : of the same also they pay their tribute to the king . the king have tribute bring he yearly out of the Indies into Spain between nine and ten million of gold and silver : for he receive of every Indian which be subject unto he ( except those which do belong to the Incommenderos , which be the child of those Spaniard , who first conquer the land , to who the king give and grant the government of the city and town subdue for three life ) twelve real of plate , and a hannege of maiz , which be a wheat of the country , ( five of they make a quarter of english measure ) and of every widow woman he have six real , and half a hannege lucatan . the greatness of the king of Spain tribute out of the west Indies . of maiz . and so if any indian have twenty child in his house , he pay for every one of they , be above fifteen year old , after that rate . this wheat be due bring to the governor of every province and city , be sell in Mexico by the king governor there every year ; so that the money receive for it , be put into the king treasury there , and so be yearly carry from thence into Spain . of the Spaniard which be owner of the mine of gold and silver , he receive the five part of it , which he call his quinta , which be take out the quinto . of the heap , there be his arm set on it ; for otherwise it may not be ' bring out of the land into Spain , under pain of death . the mark of silver , which be eight ounce , when it come out of the mine , not have 375 the mark of the king seal upon it , be worth three and forty real of silver be 64 plate , and so it be current : and when they will bring it for real of plate . Spain , they carry it to the king treasure house , where his seal be set upon it ; and so it be raise in value thereby to threescore and four real of plate : and so the king have for his custom of every mark of plate one and twenty real . from the year of 1570 , which be the year that the pope bull come into the Indies , as be afore mention , he have receive both of the Indians which be tributary unto he , and also of all other belong to the incommenderos , of every one be above twelve year of age , four real of every bull . also they carry other pardon with they into the Indies , for such as be dead , although a hundred year before the Spaniard come into the country : which pardon the friar in their preach persuade the poor Indians to take , tell they that with give four real of plate for a mass , they will deliver their soul out of purgatory . of the Christians likewise dwell there he have fourteen real for every bull : and there be certain bull bring thither for the christian beside the former , which serve for pardon all such fault wherein they have trespass either against the king , by keep back his custom , or one against another by any other injury ; for every hundred crown whereof a man conscience do accuse he that he have deceive the king or any other , he must give ten for a bull , and so after that rate for every hundred which he have any the revenue way steal , and so be pardon the fault . the revenue bukandpar - ul after manner yield unto his treasury don come yearly above three million of gold , as i have be yearly to three credible inform , although of late both the Spaniard million . and Indians do refuse to take the bull ; for that they perceive he do make a yearly custom of it : only each indian take one pardon for all his household , ( whereas in former time every indian use to take one for every person in his house ) and tear the same 376 into small piece , and give to every one of his household a little piece , say thus , they need now no more , see in that which they buy the year before they have above ten thousand year pardon . Theise piece they stick up in the wall of the house where they lie . both the Christians and Indians be weary with these infinite tax and custom , which of late he have impose upon they , more than in the year before : so as the people of both sort do rebel rebellion « twice in the time that i be among they , and will have set up another king of themselves ; for which exac-cause the king have command upon pain of death , that tion . they shall not plant either wine or oil there , but shall always stand in need of they to be bring out of Spain , although there will more grow there in four year , then there grow in Spain in twenty , it be so fertile a country . and the king to keep the country always in sub - [ he . 462. ] iection , and to his own use , have straight provide by reason law , upon pain or death , and loss or good , that none the of these country shall traffic with any other nation , tyainetofirbid although the people themselves do much now desire to firren traffic trade with any other then with they , and will undoubted do , if they fear not the peril ensue it thereupon . about Mexico , and other place in Nova Hispania , there grow a certain plant call maguei , which maguei . yield wine , vinegar , honey , and black sugar , and of the leaf of it dry they make hemp , rope , shoe which they use , and tile for their house : and at the end of every leaf there grow a sharp point like a awl , wherewith they use to bore or pierce through any thing . thus to make a end , i have here set down the sum of all the chief thing that i have observe and note in my seventeen year travel in those part . a relation of the commodity of Nova Hispania , and the manner of the inhabitant , write by Henry Hawks merchant , which live five year in the say country , and draw the same at the request of m. Richard Hakluyt esquire of Eiton in the county of Hereford , 1572. aint John de ullua be a island not high above the water , where as now the Spaniard upon m. John Hawkins be there , be in make a strong fort . in this place all the ship that come out of Spain with good for these part , do unlade : for they have none other port so good as this be . the come into this place have three channel , and the best of all be the northermost , which go by the main land : and on every side of the channel there be many small rock as big as a small barrel : they will make man stand in doubt of they , but there be no fear of they . there be another island there by , call the island of sacrifice , whereas the Spaniard do in time past unlade their good : and for that , they say , there be upon it spirit or devil , it be not frequent as it have be . in these place the north wind have so great dominion , that oftentimes it destroy many ship and bark . this place be give to great sickness . Theise island stand in 18 degree and a half , and about the same be great plenty of fish . five league from saint John de ullua be a fair river ; it lie northwest from the port , and go to a little town of the Spaniard call Vera Cruz , and with small vessel or bark , which they call frigate , they carry all their merchandise which come out of Spain , to the say town : and in like manner bring all the gold , silver , cochinilla , hide , and all other thing that the ship carry into Spain unto they . and the good being in 378 Vera Cruz , they carry they to Mexico , and to Pueblo de los angel , Sacatecas , and saint Martin , and diverse other place so far within the country , that some of they be 700 mile off , and some more , and some less , all upon horse , mule , and in wain draw with ox , and in car draw with mule . in this town of Vera Cruz within these twenty year , when woman be bring to bed , the child new bear incontinent die ; which be not so now in these day , God be thank . this town be incline to many kind of disease , by reason of the great heat , and a certain gnat or fly which they call a musquito , which bite both man and woman musquito . in their sleep ; and assoon as they be bite , incontinent the flesh swell as though they have be bite with some venomous worm . and this musquito or gnat do most follow such as be new come into the country . many there be that die of this annoyance . this town be situate upon the river aforesaid , and compass with wood of diverse manner and sort , and many fruit , as orange and limon , guiave , and diverse other , and bird in they , popinjay both small popinjay . and great , and some of they as big as a raven , and their tail as long as the tail of a fezant . there be also many other kind of bird of purple colour , and small monkey , marvellous proper . monkey . this hot or sick country continue five and forty mile towards the city of Mexico ; and the five and forty mile be pass , than there be a temperate country , and full of tillage : but they water all their corn with river which they turn in upon it . and they gather their wheat twice a year . and if they shall not wheat twice water the ground where as their corn be sow , the in a yeere-country be so hot it will burn all . before you come to Mexico , there be a great town call Tlaxcalla , which have in it above 16000 house - Tlaxcalla a hold . all the inhabitant thereof be free by the king free aty - 379 of Spain : for these be the occasion that Mexico be win in so short time , and with so little loss of [ three . 463. ] man . wherefore they be all gentleman , and pay no tribute to the king . in this town be all the cochinilia grow . Mexico . Mexico be a great city ; it have more than fifty thousand household , whereof there be not pass five or six thousand house of Spaniard : all the other be the people of the country , which live under the Spaniard law . there be in this city stately building , and many monastery of friar and nun , which the Spaniard have make . and the build of the Indians be somewhat beautiful outward , and within full of small chamber , with very small window , which be not so comely as the build of the Spaniard . this city stand in the midst of a great lake , and the water go through all or the most part of the street , and there come small boat , which they call canoas , and in they they bring all thing necessary , as wood , and coal , and grass for their horse , stone and lime to build , and corn . this city be subject to many earthquake , which oftentimes cast down house , and kill people . this city be very well provide of water to drink , and with all manner of victual , as fruit , flesh and fish , bread , hen and capon , guiny cock and hen , and all other fowl . there be in this city every week three fair or market , which be frequent with many people , aswell Spaniard as the people of the country . there be in these fair or market all manner of thing that may be invent , to sell , and in especial , thing of the country . the one of these fair be upon the Monday , which be call saint hypolitos fair , and saint James his fair be upon the Thursday , and upon Saturday be saint Johns fair . in this city be always the king governor or viceroy , and there be keep the term and parliament . and although there be other place of justice , yet this be above all : so that all man may appeal unto this 380 ! 572 , place , and may not appeal from this city , but only into Spain before the king : and it must be for a certain sum : and if it be under that sum , than there be no appellation from they . many river fall into this lake which the city stand in : but there be never any place find whither it go out . the indian know a way to drown the city , and way10 within these three year they will have practise the same : but they which shall have be the doer of ' it be hang : and ever since the city have be well watch both day and night , for fear lest at some time they may be deceive : for the indian love not the Spaniard . round about the town there be very many garden and orchard of the fruit of the country , marvellous fair , where the people have great recreation . the man of this city be marvellous vicious ; and in like manner the woman be dishonest of their body , more than they be in other city or town in this country . there be near about this city of Mexico many river crocodile . and stand water which have in they a monstrous kind of fish , which be marvellous raven , and a great devourer of man and cattle . he be wont to sleep upon the dry land many time , and if there come in the mean time any man or beast and wake or disquiet he , he speed well if he get from he . he be like unto a serpent , save that he do not fly , neither have he wing . there be west out of Mexico a port town which navigation be on the south sea , call Puerto de Acapulco , where as there be ship which they have ordinary for the navigation of China , which they have new find . this port be threescore league from Mexico . there be another port town which be call culiacan , on the south sea , which lie west and by north out of Mexico , and be 200 league from the same : and there the Spaniard make two ship to go seek the strait the northor gulf , which , as they say , be between the newfound - west-strei&ht . land and Greenland ; and they call it the Englishman 381 1572. straight : which as yet be never full find . they say , that straight lie not far from the main land of China , which the Spaniard account to be marvellous rich . towards the north from Mexico there be great store the more northward , the rich silver mine . of silver mine . there be great quantity of silver find in these mine towards the north , than there be any other part : and as the most man of experience say always , they find the rich mine the more northerly . Theise mine be common upon great hill and stony ground , marvellous hard to be labour and wrought . out of some of the mine the Indians find a certain paint earth . kind of earth of diverse colour , wherewith they paint themselves in time of their dance , and other pastime which they use . in this country of Nova Hispania there be also gold mine . mine of gold , although the gold be common find in river , or very near unto river . and now in these day there be not so much gold find as there have be heretofore . there be many great river , and great store of fish in they , not like unto our kind of fish . and there be marvellous great wood , and as fair tree as may be see , of diverse sort , and especial fir tree , that [ three . 464. ] NLesquiquez . may mast any ship that go upon the sea , oak and pineapple , and another tree which they call Mesquiquez : it bear a fruit like unto a peascod , marvellous sweet , which the wild people gather , and keep it all the year , and eat it in stead of bread . seven city by witchcraft not find of the seeker . the Spaniard have notice of seven city which old man of the indian show they shall lie towards the northwest from Mexico . they have use and use daily much diligence in seek of they , but they can find any one of they . they say that the witchcraft of the Indians be such , that when they come by these town they cast a mist upon they , so that they can see they . 382 they have understanding of another city which they call Copalla : and in like manner , at my be in the country , they have use much labour and diligence in the seek of it : they have find the lake on which it shall stand , and a canoa , the head whereof be wrought with copper curious , and can not find nor see any man nor the town which to their understanding shall stand on the same water , or very near the same . there be a great number of beast or cow in the country of Cibola , which be never bring thither by the Spaniard , but breed natural in the country . they be like unto our ox , save that they have long hair like a lion , and short home , and they have upon their shoulder a bunch like a camel , which be high than the rest of their body . they be marvellous wild and swift in run . they call they the beast or cow of Cibola . This Cibola be a city which the Spaniard find now of late , without any people in the same , goodly bnilding , fair chimney , window make of stone and timber excellent wrought , fair well with wheel to draw their water , and a place where they have bury their dead people , with many fair stone upon the grave . and the captain will not suffer his soldier to break up any part of these grave , say , he will come another time to do it . they ask certain people which they meet , whither the people of this city be go : and they make answer , they be go down a river , which be there by , very great , and there have build a city which be more for their commodity . this captain lack thing necessary for himself and his man , be fain to return back again , without find any treasure accord to his expectation : neither find they but few people , although they find beat way , which have be much haunt and frequent . the captain at his come back again , have a great 383 A.D. 1572. PedroMorales Eif Nicolas Burgignon write the like of Copalla . the strange ox of Cibola . Cibola abandon . a great river near Cibola . water congeal to salt . dog of India describe . Cacao a fruit currant as money . fruit . hot spring . the english voyage check of the governor , because he have not go forward , and see the end of that river . they have in the country , far from the sea side , stand water , which be salt : and in the month of April and may the water of they congeal into salt , which salt be all take for the king use and profit . their dog be all crooked back , as many as be of the country breed , and can run fast : their face be like the face of a pig or a hog , with sharp nose . in certain province which be call Guatimala , and Soconusco , there be grow great store of cacao , which be a berry like unto a almond : it be the best merchandise that be in all the Indies . the indian make drink of it , and in like manner meat to eat . it go current for money in any market or fair , and may buy any flesh , fish , bread or cheese , or other thing . there be many kind of fruit of the country , which be very good , as plantan , sapotes , guiave , pina , aluacatas , tunas , mamios , limon , orange , walnut very small and hard , with little meat in they , grape which the Spaniard bring into the country , and also wild grape , which be of the country , and be very small , quinse , peach , fig , and but few apple , and very small , and no pear : but there be melon and Calabasas or gourd . there be much honey , both of bee and also of a kind of tree which they call magueiz . this honey of magueiz be not so sweet as the other honey be , but it be better to be eat only with bread , than the other be ; and the tree serve for many thing , as the leaf make thread to sow any kind of bag , and be good to cover and thatch house , and for diverse other thing . they have in diverse place of the country many hot spring of water : as above all other , i have see one in the province of mechuacan . in a plain field without any mountain , there be a spring which have much water , and it be so hot , that if a whole quarter of beef be cast into it , within on half hour it will be as well sodden as it will be over a fire in half a day . i have see half a sheep 384 cast in , and immediate it have be sodden , and i have eat part of it . there be many hare , and some cony . there be no partridge , but abundance of quail . they have great store of fish in the south sea , and many oyster , and very great . the people do open the oyster , and take out the meat of they , and dry it as they do any other kind of fish , and keep they all the year : and when the time serve , they send they abroad into the country to sell , as all other fish . they have no salmon , nor trowt , nor peel , nor carp , tench , nor pike in all the country . there be in the country mighty high mountain , and hill , and snow upon they : they common burn ; and twice every day they cast out much smoke and ash at certain open place , which be in the top of they . there be among the wild people much manna . i have gather of the same , and have eat it , and it be good : for the apothecary send their servant at certain time , to gather of the same for purgation , and other use . there be in the mountain many wild hog , which all man may kill , and lion and tiger ; which tiger do much harm to man that travel in the wilderness . in this country , not long since , there be two poor man that find a marvellous rich i ; and when these man go to make a register of the same ( accord to the law and custom ) before the king officer , they think this mine not meet for such man as they be : and violent take the say mine for the king ; and give no part thereof unto the two poor man . and within certain day the king officer resort thither to labour in the i , and they find two great hare and cony . sea fish . [ he . 465. ] burn mountain . manna . wild hog , lion , and tiger . Mines discover , not find again . mighty hill be come together ; so they find no place to work in . and in the time while i be among they , which be five year , there be a poor sheep - the mthour hear , who keep his sheep , happen to find a well ^levaEs ™ of quicksilver ; and he go in like manner to manifest panna . the same , as the custom and manner be ; the king ix 385 2 b description of the indian person and manner . the people of Nueva espagna great coward . officer deal in like order as they do with the two poor man that find the rich i , take it quite from the shepherd : but when they go to fetch home the quicksilver , or part thereof , they can never find it again . so these thing have be declare unto the king , who have give commandment , that nothing be find in the field , as mine , and such like , shall be take away from any man . and many other thing have be do in this country , which man may count for great marvel . there be great abundance of sugar here , and they make diverse conserves , and very good , and send they into Peru , where as they sell they marvellous well , because they make none in those part . the people of the country be of a good stature , tawny colour , broad face , flat nose , and give much to drink both wine of Spain and also a certain kind of wine which they make with honey of magueiz , and root , and other thing which they use to put into the same . they call the same wine Puleo . they be soon drink , and give to much beastliness , and void of all goodness . in their drunkenness they use and commit sodomy ; and with their mother and daughter they have their pleasure and pastime . whereupon they be defend from the drink of wine , upon pain of money , aswell he that sell the wine as the indian that drink the same . and if this commandment be not , all the wine in Spain and in France be not sufficient for the west Indies only . they be of much simplicity , and great coward , void of all valour , and be great witch . they use diverse time to talk with the devil , to who they do certain sacrifice and oblation : many time they have be take with the same , and i have see they most cruel punish for that offence . the people be give to learn all manner of occupation and science , which for the most part they learn since the come of the Spaniard : i say all manner of 386 art . they be very artificiali in make of image with feather , or the proportion or figure of any man , in all kind of manner as he be . the fineness and excellency of this be wonder , that a barbarous people as they be , shall give themselves to so fine a art as this be . they be goldsmith , blacksmith , and coppersmith , carpenter , mason , shoemaker , tailor , saddler , embroiderers , and of all other kind of science : and they will do work so good cheap , that poor young man that go out of Spain to get their live , be not set on work : which be the occasion there be many idle people in the country . for the indian will live all the week with less than one groat ; which the Spaniard can do , nor any man else . they say , that they come of the lineage of a old man the Indians which come thither in a boat of wood , which they call a i&ioran ™ canoa . but they can tell whether it be before the ame* flood or after , neither can they give any reason of the flood , nor from whence they come . and when the Spaniard come first among they , they do certain sacrifice to a image make in stone , of their own invention . the stone be set upon a great hill , which they make of brick of earth : they call it their Cowa . and certain day in the year they do sacrifice , certain old man , and young child ; and only believe in the sun and the moon , say , that from they they the sun and have all thing that be needful for they . they have in m°one these part great store of cotton wool , with which they ^g0fC0ttm make a manner of linen cloth , which the Indians wear , ' both man and woman , and it serve for shirt and smock , and all other kind of garment , which they wear upon their body : and the Spaniard use it to all such purpose , especial such as can buy other . and if it be not for this kind of cloth , all manner of cloth that [ in . 466. ] go out of Spain , i say linen cloth , will be sell out of all measure . the wild people go naked , without any thing upon the wild in-them . the woman wear the skin of a dear before dian - 387 the pomp of owner of mine . the english voyage their privity , and nothing else upon all their body . they have no care for any thing , but only from day to day for that which they have need to eat . they be big man , and likewise the woman . they shoot in bow which they make of a cherry tree , and their arrow be of cane , with a sharp flint stone in the end of the same ; they will pierce any coat of mail : and they kill dear , and crane , and wild goose , duck and other foul , and worm , and snake , and diverse other vermin , which they eat . they live very long : for i have see man that have be a hundred year of age . they have but very little hair in their face , nor on their body . the indian have the friar in great reverence : the occasion be , that by they and by their mean they be free and out of bondage ; which be so ordain by Charles the emperor : which be the occasion that now there be not so much gold and silver come into Europe as there be while the indian be slave . for when they be in bondage they can not choose but do their task every day , and bring their master so much metal out of their mine : but now they must be well pay , and much entreat to have they work . so it have be , and be a great hindrance to the owner of the mine , and to the king quinto or custom . there be many mine of copper in great quantity , whereof they spend in the country as much as serve their turn . there be some gold in it , but not so much as will pay the cost of the fine . the quantity of it be such , and the mine be so far from the sea , that it will not be worth the fraught to carry it into Spain . on the other side , the king officer will give no licence to make ordinance thereof ; whereupon the mine lie unlaboured , and of no valuation . there be much lead in the country ; so that with it they cover church , and other religious house : wherefore they shall not need any of our lead , as they have have need thereof in time past . the pomp and liberality of the owner of the mine 388 be marvellous to behold : the apparel both of they and of their wife be more to be compare to the apparel of noble person then otherwise . if their wife go out of their house , as unto the church , or any other place , they go out with great majesty , and with as many man and maid as though she be the wife of some noble man . i will assure you , i have see a miner wife go to the church with a hundred man , and twenty gentlewoman and maid . they keep open house : who will , may come to eat their meat . they call man with a bell to come to dinner and supper . they be prince in keep of their house , and bountiful in all manner of thing . a good owner of mine must have at the least a thing neces-hundred slave to carry and to stamp his metal ; he sap‘°mines must have many mule , and man to keep the mine ; he must have mill to stamp his metal ; he must have 6 many wain and ox to bring home wood to fine the oar ; he must have much quicksilver , and a marvellous quantity of salt-brine for the metal ; and he must be at many other charge . and as for this charge of quicksilver , it be a new invention , which they find more profitable than to fine their oar with lead . howbeit the same be very costly : for there be never a hundred of quicksilver but cost at the least threescore pound sterling . and the mine fall daily in decay , and of less value : and the occasion be , the few Indians that man have to labour their mine . there be in new Spain a marvellous increase of cattle , the plenty of which daily do increase , and they be of a great growth catteli-then we be . you may have a great steer that have a hundred weight of tallow in his belly for sixteen shilling ; and some one man have 20000 head of cattle of his own . they sell the hide unto the merchant , who lade into Spain as many as may be well spare . they spend many in the country in shoe and boot , and in the mine : and as the country be great , so be the increase of the cattle wonder . in the island of Santo Domingo they common kill the beast for their hide 389 and tallow ; and the fowl eat the carcase : and so they do in Cuba and Porto Rico , whereas there be much sugar , and cana fistula , which daily they send into Spain . Sheene . they have great increase of sheep in like manner , and daily do intend to increase they . they have much wool . wool , and as good as the wool of Spain . they make cloth . cloth as much as serve the country , for the common people , and send much cloth into Peru. i have see cloth make in the city of Mexico , which have be sell for ten pezo a vare , which be almost four pound English , and the vare be less than our yard . they have wood . woad grow in the country , and alum , and brazil , and Prosili diverse other thing to die withal , so that they make all ‘ colour . in Peru they make no cloth : but hereafter our cloth will be little set by in these part , unless it be some fine cloth . the wool be common four shilling every rove , which be five and twenty pound : and in some place of the country that be far from the place where as they make cloth , it be worth nothing , and do serve but only to make bed for man to lie on . [ Iii . 467. ] they make hat , as many as do serve the country , very fine and good , and sell they better cheap , than they can be bring out of Spain , and in like manner send they into Peru. many people be set on work both in the one and in the other : they spin their wool as we do , and in steed hog grease of oil , they have hog grease : they twist not their thread its stead of oil . so much as we joej neither work so fine a thread . they make no kersy , but they make much cloth , which be course , and sell it for less than 12. penny the vare . it be call Sayall . silk of sun - they have much silk , and make all manner of sort dry sort . thereof , as taffeta , satin , velvet of all colour , and they be as good as the silk of Spain , save that the colour be not so perfect : but the black be better then the black that come out of Spain . Horses . they have many horse , and mere , and mule , which mule . the Spaniard bring thither . they have as good 390 jennet , as any be in Spain , and better cheap than jennet . they be in Spain . and with their mule they carry all their good from place to place . there be rain usual in this country , from the month of May , to the midst of October , every day , which time they call their winter , by reason of the say water . and if it be not for the water which fall in these hot season , their Maiz , which be the great part of their sustenance , will be destroy . This Maiz be the great maintenance which the indian Maize grain have , and also all the common people of the Spaniard . man and . and their horse and mule which labour , can be eat tn without the same . this grain be substantiali , and increases much blood . if the miner shall be without it , they can not labour their mine : for all their servant eat none other bread , but only of this Maize , and it be make in cake , as they make oaten cake , in some place of England . the indian pay tribute , be of the age of 20. year , 4. shilling of money , and a hanege of Maiz , AnHanegais which be worth 4. shilling more unto the king every a year . this be pay in all nova Hispania , of as many m a*e‘ as be of the age of 20. year , save the city of Tlascalla , which be make free , because the citizen thereof be the occasion that Cortes take Mexico in so little a time . and although at the first they be free from payment of tribute , yet the Spaniard now begin to usurp upon they , and make they to till a great field of Maiz , at their own cost every year for the king , which be as beneficial unto he , and as great cost unto they , as though they pay their tribute , as the other doe . the ship which go out of Spain with good for Peru , go to number de dios , and there discharge the say good : and from thence they be carry over the neck of a land , unto a port town in the south sea , call Panama , which be 17. league distant from number de dios . and there they do ship their good 391 again , and so from thence go to Peru. they be in go thither three month , and they come back again in 20. day . they have seidome foul weather , and few ship be lose in the south sea . four year past , to wit 1568 , there be a ship make out of Peru , Salomons to seek Salomons island , and they come somewhat to and^f , m^n t^ie out equinoctial , and find a island with ten south sea many black people , in such number that the Spaniard 1568. dare not go on land among they . and because they have be long upon the voyage , their people be very weak , and so go not on land , to know what commodity be upon it . and for want of victual , they arrive in Nova Hispania , in a port call Puerto de Navidad , and thence return back again unto Peru , whereas they be evil entreat , because they have not know more of the same island . they have in this port of Navidad ordinary their china find ship , which go to the island of China , which be cer-by the west , taine island which they have find within these 7. year . they have bring from thence gold , and much cinamom , and dish of earth , and cup of the same , so fine , that every man that may have a piece of they , will give the weight of silver for it . there be a mariner that bring a pearl as big as a dove egg from thence , 8c a stone , for which the viceroy will have give 3000. ducat . many thing they bring from thence , most excellent . there be many of these island , and the Spaniard have * this be to be not many of they as yet : * for the Portugal disturb understand of they much , and combat with they every day , say , it this discourse l part °* tneir conquest , and to the main land they be write , can come at any hand . there be goodly people in anno 1572. they , and they be great mariner , rich apparel in cloth of gold , and silver , and silk of all sort , and go apparel after the manner of the Turk . this report make such as come from thence . the man of the main land have certain traffic with some of these china ship ylander , and come thither in a kind of ship , which with one sail . they have wjth one saj ] ej anj bring open such marcban 0 392 dize as they have need of . and of these thing there have be bring into new Spain both cloth of gold and silver , and diverse manner of silk , and work of gold and silver , marvelous to be see . so by their say , there be not such a country in the whole world . the main land be from the island 190. league : and the island be not far from the Malucos northwards . and the people of those island , which the Spaniard have , say , that if they will bring their wife and child , that than they shall have among they what they will have . so there go woman daily , and the [ three . 468. ] king pay all the charge of the marry man and their wife , that go to those island . and there be no doubt but the trade will be marvelous rich in time to come . it be my fortune to be in company with one Diego Gutieres , who be the first pilot that ever go to that country of the phillippinas . he make report of many strange thing in that country , aswell riches , as other , and say , if there be any paradise upon earth , it be in that country : and add , that sit under a tree , you shall have such sweet smell , with such great content and pleasure , that you shall remember nothing , neither wife , nor child , nor have any kind of appetite to eat or drink , the odoriferous smell will be so sweet . this man have good live in Nova Hispania , notwithstanding he will return thither , with his wife and child , and as for treasure there be abundance , as he make mention . in this country of Nova Hispania there be many buck and do , but they have not so long home as they have here in England . the Spaniard kill they with handgun and with grayhound , and the Indians kill they with their bow and arrow , and with the skin they make chamoyce , such as we in Eng - chamoue . land make doublet and hose of , as good as the skin that spanish be dress in Flanders , and likewise they make marvelous leather . good spanish leather of they . there be a bird which be like unto a raven , but he have some of his feather white : voure c’ar 0 there be such abundance of they , that they eat all the rion . 393 wrong do to the indian punish . justice you cause of civil tie . the english voyage corrupt and dead flesh which be in the country . otherwise the abundance of carrion be so much , that it will make a marvelous corrupt air in all the country , and be so noisome , that no man can abide it . therefore it be command there shall none of they be kill . Theise bird be always about city , and town , where there be much flesh kill . the Indians be much favour by the justice of the country , and they call they their orphan . and if any Spaniard shall happen to do any of they harm , or to wrong he in take any thing from he , as many time they do , or to strike any of they , be in any town , whereas justice be , they be aswell punish for the same , as if they have do it one Spaniard to another . when a Spaniard be far from Mexico , or any place of justice , think to do with the poor indian what he list , consider he be so far from any place of remedy , he make the indian do what he command he , and if he will not do it , he beat and misuse he , accord to his own appetite . the indian hold his peace , until he find a opportunity , and then take a neighbour with he , and go to Mexico , although it be 20. league off , and make his complaint . this his complaint be immediate hear , and although it be a knight , or a right good gentleman , he be forthwith send for , and punish both by his good , and also his person be imprison , at the pleasure of the justice . this be the occasion that the Indians be so tame and civil , as they be : and if they shall not have this favour , the Spaniard will soon dispatch all the Indians , or the Indians will kill they . but they may call they dog , and use other evil word , as much as they will , and the indian must needs put it up , and go his way . the poor Indians will go every day two or three league to a fair or market with a child upon their neck , with as much fruit or root , or some kind of ware , as cotton wool , or cadis of all colour , as shall be not past worth a penny : and they will maintain they - 394 i572-selve upon the same . for they live with a marvelous small matter . they be in such poverty , that if you need to ride into the country , you shall have a indian to go with you all the day with your bed upon his back , for one royal of plate : and this you shall have from one town to another . here you be to understand , that all man that travel by the way , be always wont to carry their bed with they . they be great thief , and will steal all that they may , and you shall have no recom penny at their hand . the garment of the woman , be in this manner . The the apparel uppermost part be make almost like to a woman smock , of the Indians . save that it be as broad above as beneath , and have no sleeve , but hole on each side one to put out their arm . it be make of linen cloth make of cotton wool , and fill full of flower , of red cadis and blow , and other colour . this garment come down to the knee , and then they have another cloth make after the same manner , and that go round about their waste , and reach to their shoe , and over this a white fine sheet upon their head , which go down half the leg . their hair be make up round with a hair lace about their head . and the man have a small pair of breech of the same cotton wool , and their shirt which hang over their breech , and a broad girdle about their middle , and a sheet with flower upon their back , and with a knot upon one shoulder , and a hat upon their head , and a pair of shoe . and this be all their apparel , although it be a casique , which they use in all the country . the wall of the house of the Indians , be but plain , the house of but the stone be lay so close , that you shall not well Indians . perceive the joint between one stone and another , they be so fine cut : and by the mean that the stone be so workmanly do , and fine join together , there be some beauty in their wall . they be marvelous small [ ill . 469. ] and light , as pumy stone . they make their door 395 Mutezuma , and his riches . the english voyage very little , so that there can go in but one man at a time . their window , and room within their house be small , and one room they have reserve for their friend , when they come to talk one with another , and that be always fair mat , and keep marvelous clean , and hang full of image , and their chair stand there to sit in . they eat their meat upon the ground , and sleep on the ground upon a mat , without any bed , both the gentleman , and other . the indian strike their fire with one stick in another , aswell the tame people , as the wild . for they know not how to do it with a iron , and a stone . in Nova Hispania every io . or 12. league they have a contrary speech , save only about Mexico : so there be a number of speech in the country . Mutezuma which be the last king of this country , be one of the rich prince which have be see in our time , or long before . he have all kind of beast which be then in the country , and all manner of bird , and fish , and all manner of worm , which creep upon the earth , and all tree , and flower , and herb , all fashion in silver and gold , which be the great part of all his treasure , and in these thing have he great joy , as the old indian report . and unto this day , they say that the treasure of Mutezuma be hide , and that the Spaniard have it not . this king will give none of his people freedom , nor forgive any of they that shall pay he tribute , though he be never so poor . for if it have be tell he that one of his tributary be poor , and that he be not able to pay his tribute accord to the custom , than he will have he bind to bring at such time as tribute shall be pay , a quill full of louse , say , he will have none free , but himself . he have as many wife or concubine , as he will have , and such as like he . always whensoever he go out of his court to pass the time , he be bear upon 4. of his noble man shoulder set upon a table , some sav , of gold , and very rich dress with feather of diverse and 396 1572. many colour and flower . he wash all his body every Indians day , be it never so cold . and unto this day so do all tkem the indian , and especial the woman . se^ ever^ the Spaniard keep the indian in great subjection . they may have in their house no sword nor dagger , nor knife with any point , nor may wear upon they any manner of arm , neither may they ride upon any horse nor mule , in any saddle nor bridle , neither may they drink wine , which they take for the great pain of all . they have attempt diverse time to make insurrection , but they have be overthrow immediate by their own great and beastly cowardliness . there remain some among the wild people , that unto cannibal . this day eat one another . i have see the bone of a Spaniard that have be as clean burnish , as though it have be do by man that have no other occupation . and many time people be carry away by they , but they never come again , whether they be man or woman . they have in the sea island of red salt in great abun - island of salt . dance , whereas they lade it from place to place about the sea coast : and they spend very much salt with salt their hide , and fish : and in their mine they occupy great quantity . they have much allume , and as good as allume . any that be in all the Levant , so that they need none of that commodity . they have also of their own grow , much Cana fistula , and much Salsa perilla , which cassia fistula . be marvelous good for many kind of disease . Salsa peri^a - there be in Florida many jarrefalcon , and many Florida . other kind of hawk , which the gentleman of Nova Hispania send for every year . the Spaniard have two fort there , chief to keep out the Frenchman from plant there . the voyage make by m. John Hawkins esquire , [ hl 501. ] and afterward knight , captain of the Jesus of Lubek , one of her majesty ship , and generali of the Salomon , and other two bark go in his company , to the coast of Guinea , and the Indies of Nova Hispania , begin in An. Dom. 1564. Aster John Hawkins with the Jesus of Lubek , a ship of 700. and the Salomon a ship of 140. the tiger a bark of 50. and the swallow of 30. ton , be all well furnish with man to the number of one hundred threescore and ten , as also with ordinance and victuali requisite for such a voyage , depart out of Plymmouth the 18. day of October , in the year of our lord 1564. October 18. with a prosperous wind : at which depart , in cut the foresail , a marvelous misfortune happen to one of the officer in the ship , who by the pully of the sheet be slay out of hand , be a sorrowful beginning to they all . and after their set out ten league to the sea , he meet the same day with the minion a ship of the minion , queen majesty , whereof be captain David carlet , and also her consort the John baptist of London , be merune bind bind to Guinea also , who hail one the other after far guinea . the custom of the sea with certain piece of ordinance for joy of their meeting : which do , the minion depart from he to seek her other consort the Merlin of London , which be a stern out of sight , leave in m. Hawkins company the John Baptist her other consort . thus sail forward on their way with a prosperous wind until the 21. of the same month , at that time a great storm arise , the wind be at Northeast about nine a clock in the night , and continue so 23. hour together , in which storm m. Hawkins lose the company 9 good order for a fleet in a long voyage . a dreadful mischance by fire . the english voyage of the John Baptist aforesaid , and of his pinnace call the swallow , his other 3. ship be sore beat with a storm . the 23. day the swallow to his not small rejoice , come to he again in the night , 10. league to the northward of cape Finister , he have put roomer , not be able to double the cape , in that there rise a contrary wind at Southwest . the 25. the wind continue contrary , he put into a place in Galicia , call Ferroll , where he remain five day , and appoint all the master of his ship a order for the keep of good company in this manner : the small ship to be always ahead and aweather of the Jesus , and to speak twice a day with the Jesus at least : if in the day the ensign be over the poop of the Jesus , or in the night two light , then shall all the ship speak with she : if there be three light aboard the Jesus , then do she cast about : if the weather be extreme , that the small ship can keep company with the Jesus , than all to keep company with the Salomon , and forthwith to repair to the hand of Teneriffe , to the northward of the road of sirroes ; if any happen to any misfortune then to show two light , and to shoot off a piece of ordinance . if any lose company , and come in sight again , to make three yaw , and strike the Myson three time : serve God daily , love one another , preserve your victual , beware of fire , and keep good company . the 26. day the minion come in also where he be , for the rejoice whereof he give they certain piece of ordinance , after the courtesy of the sea for their welcome : but the minion man have no mirth , because of their consort the Merline , who at their departure from master Hawkins upon the coast of England they go to seek , and have meet with she , keep company two day together , and at last by misfortune of fire ( through the negligence of one of their gunner ) the powder in the gunner room be set on fire , which with the first blast strike out her poop , and therewithal ! lose three man , beside many sore burn ( which escape by the brigan-io dine be at her stern ) and immediady , to the great loss of the owner , and most horrible sight to the beholder , she sink before their eye . the 20. day of the month m. Hawkins with his consort and company of the minion , have now both the brigandine at her stern , weigh anchor , and set sail on their voyage , have a prosperous wind thereunto . the four of November they have sight of the hand of Madera , and the sixth day of Teneriffe , which they think to have be the canary , in that they suppose themselves to have be to the eastward of Teneriffe , and be not : but the minion be three or four league ahead of we , keep on her course to Teneriffe , have better sight thereof then the other have , and by that mean they part company . for m. Hawkins and his company go more to the west , upon which course have sail a while , he espy another hand , which he think to be Teneriffe , and be not able by mean of the fog upon the hill , to discern the same , nor yet to fetch it by night , go roomer until the morning , be the seven of November , which as yet he can not discern , but sail along the coast the [ m . 502. ] space of two hour , to perceive some certain mark of Teneriffe , and find no likelihood thereof at all , account that to be , as it be in deed , than he of the lie of palm : and so sail forward , espy another hand pflmes-called Gomera , and also Teneriffe , with the which he make , and sail all night , come in the morning the next day to the port of Adecia , where he find his pinnace which have depart from he the sixth of the month , be in the weather of he , and espy the pike of Teneriffe all a high , bear thither . at his arrival somewhat before he come to anchor , he hoist out his ship pinnace row a shore , intend to have send one with a letter to Peter de ponte , one of the governor of the hand , who dwell a league from the shore : but as he pretend to have land , sudden there appear upon the two point of the road , man level of base and harquebuss to they , with diverse other to the number of fourscore , with halberd , pike , sword and target , which happen so contrary to his expectation , that it do great amaze he , and the more , because he be now in their danger , not know well how to avoid it without some mischief . wherefore he determine to call to they for the better appease of the matter , declare his name , and profess himself to be a especial friend to Peter de ponte , and that he have sundry thing for he which he great desire . and in the mean time , while he be thus talk with they , whereby he make they to hold their hand , he will the mariner to row away , so that at last he get out of their danger : and then ask for Peter de ponte , one of his son be signior Nicolas de Ponte , come forth , who he perceive , desire to put his man aside , and he himself will leap a shore and common with he , which they do : so that after communication have between they of sundry thing , and of the fear they both have , master Hawkins desire to have certain necessary provide for he . in the mean space , while these thing be provide , he trim the main mast of the Jesus which in the storm aforesaid be spring : here he sojourn 7. day , refresh himself and his man . Santa Cruz. in the which time Peter de ponte dwell at saint Cruz , a city 20. league off , come to he , and give he as gentle a brief de - entertainment as if he have be his own brother . to scription of the speak somewhat of these hand , be call in old commodity of f t , c . , ’ s - , n • . • the Canarie time insulae fortunatae , by the mean of the nourish hand . thereof , the fruitfulness of they do sure exceed far all other that i have hear of : for they make wine better than any in Spain , they have grape of such bigness , that they may be compare to damson , and in taste inferior to none : for sugar , sucket , raisin of the sun , and many other fruit , abundance : for rosine and raw silk , there be great store , they want neither corn , pullet , cattle , nor yet wild foul : they have many camel also , which be young , be eat of the people for victual , and be old , they be use for carriage of necessary : who property be as he be teach to kneel at the take of his load , and unlade again : he nature be to engender backward contrary to other beast : of understanding very good , but of shape very deform , with a little belly , long misshape leg , and foot very broad of flesh , without a hoof , all whole , save the great toe , a back bear up like a molehill , a large and thin neck , with a little head , with a bunch of hard flesh , which nature have give he in his breast to lean upon . this beast live hardly , and be content with straw and stubble , but of force strong , be well able to carry 500 weight . in one of these hand call Fierro , there be by Fierro . the report of the inhabitant , a certain tree that rain continual , by the drop whereof the inhabitant and cattle be satisfy with water , for other water have they none in all the hand . and it rain in such abundance , that it be incredible unto a man to believe such a virtue to be in a tree , but it be know to be a divine matter , and a thing ordain by God , at who power therein we ought not to marvel , see he do by his providence as we read in the scripture , when the child of Israel be go into the land of promise , feed they with manna from heaven , for the space of 40. year . of the tree aforesaid we see in guinie many , be of great tree dropheight , drop continual , but not so abundant as ™ ater tn the other , because the leaf be narrow , and be like mme ' the leaf of a pear tree . about these hand be certain flit hand , which have be oftentimes see , and when man approach near they , they vanish : as the like have be of these hand now know by the report of the inhabitant , which be not find of long time one after the other : and therefore it shall seem he be not yet bear to who God have appoint the find of they . in this hand of Teneriffe there be a hill call the pike , because it be pike , which be in heighth by the pike of their report twenty league , have both winter and teneriffe-summer abundance of snow in the top of it : this pike cape Blanco . the english voyage may be see in a clear day fifty league off , but it show as though it be a black cloud a great heighth in the element . i have hear of none to be compare with this in heighth , but in the India i have see many , and in my judgement not inferior to the pike , and so the Spaniard write . the 15. of November at night we depart from Teneriffe , and the 20. of the same we have sight of ten caravel , that be fish at sea , with who we will have speak , but they fear we , flee into a place of Barbary , call Cape de las barbas . the twenty , the ship pinnace with two man in she , sail by the ship , be overthrow by the oversight of they that go in she , the wind be so great , that before they be espy , and the ship have cast about for they , she be drive half a league to leeward of the pinnace , and have lose sight of she , so that there be small hope of recovery , have not God help and the captain diligence be , who have well mark which way the pinnace be by the sun , appoint 24 of the lusty rower in the great boat , to row to the windward , and so recover , contrary to all man expectation , both the pinnace and the man sit upon the keel of she . the 25 he come to cape Blanco , which be upon the coast of Africa , and a place where the Portugal do ride , that fish there in the month of November especial , and be a very good place of fish , for pargoe , Mullet , and dog fish . in this place the Portugal have no hold for their defence , but have rescue of the barbarian , who they entertain as their soldier , for the time of their be there and for their fish upon that coast of Africa , do pay a certain tribute to the king of the moor . the people of that part of Africa be tawny , have long hair without any apparel , save before their privy member . their weapon in war be bow and arrow . the 26 we depart from saint Avis bay , within cape Blanco , where we refresh our self with fish , 14 and other necessary : and the 29 we come to cape cape Verde Verde , which lie in 14 degree , and a half . Theise in h degree . people be all black , and be call negro , without any apparel , save before their privity : of stature goodly man , and well like by reason of their food , which pass all other guyneans for kine , goat , pullin , rise , fruit , and fish . here we take fish with head like cony , and tooth nothing vary , of a jolly thickness , but not past a foot long , and be not to be eat without flay or cut off his head . to speak somewhat of the sundry sort of these guyneans : the people of cape Verde be call Leophares , and Leophares . count the goodly man of all other , save the congo , which do inhabit on this side the cape de buena esperanza . Theise Leophares have war against the leloffe , which be borderer by they : their weapon be bow and arrow , target , and short dagger , dart also , but vary from other negro : for whereas the other use a long dart to fight with in their hand , they carry five or six small one a piece , which they cast with . Theise man also be more civil than any other , because of their daily traffic with the Frenchman , and be of nature very gentle and love : for ca while we be there , we take in a Frenchman , who be one of the 19 that go to Brasile , in a bark of diepe , of 60 ton , and be a sea board of cape Verde , 200 league , the plank of their bark with a sea break out upon they so sudden , that much a do they have to save themselves in their boat : but by god providence , the wind be westerly , which be rare see there , they get to the shore , to the isle Brava , and in great penury get to cape Verde , where they remain six week , and have meat and drink of the same people . the say Frenchman have forsake his fellow , which be three league off from the shore , and wander with the negro too and fro , fortune to come to the water side : and commune with certain of his countryman , which be 15 the traffic of the french in our ship , by their persuasion come away with we : but his entertainment among they be such , that he desire it not : but through the importunate request of his countryman , consent at the last . here we stay but one night , and part of the day : for the 7 of December we come away , in that pretend to have take negro there perforce , the minion man give they there to understand of our come , and our pretence , wherefore they do avoid the snare we have lay for they . the 8 of December we anchor by a small island alcatrarse or call Alcatrarsa , wherein at our go a shore , we find ganet . nothing but sea-bird , as we call they ganet , but by the Portugal , call Alcatrarses , who for that cause give the say island the same name . herein half of our boat be lade with young and old fowl , who not be use to the sight of man , fly so about we , that we strike they down with pole . in this place the two ship ride , the two bark , with the sapy , their boat , go into a island of the sapy , call la Formio , to see if they can take any of they , and there land to the number of 80 in armour , and espy certain make to they , but they flee in such order into the wood , that it boot they not to follow : so go on their way forward till they come to a river , which they can not pass over , they espy on the otherside two man , who with their bow and arrow shoot terrible at they . whereupon we discharge certain harquebuss to they again , but the ignorant people weigh it not , because they know not the danger thereof : but use a marvellous cry in their fight with leap and turn their tail , that it be most strange to see , and give we great pleasure to [ three . 504. ] behold they . at the last , one be hurt with a harquebuz upon the thigh , look upon his wound and wit not how it come , because he can not see the pellet . here master Hawkins perceive no good to be do among they , because we can not 16 find their town , and also not know how to go into Rio grande , for want of a pilot , which be the Rio grande . very occasion of our come thither : and find so many shoal , fear with our great ship to go in , and therefore depart on our pretend way to the idol . the idol . the 10 of December , we have a north-east wind , with rain and storm , which weather continue two day together , be the occasion that the Salomon , and tiger lose our company : for whereas the Jesus , and pinnace anchor at one of the island call Sambula , island the twelve day , the Salomon and tiger come not thither till the 14. in this island we stay certain the cambase . day , go every day on shore to take the inhabitant , with burn and spoil their town , who before be sapy , and be conquer by the sambose , sapy . inhabitant beyond Sierra Leona . Theise Samboses have inhabit there three year before our come thither , and in so short space have so plant the ground , that they have great plenty of Mil , rise , root , pompion , Pullin , goat , of small fry dry , every house full of the country fruit plant by God providence , as Palmito tree , fruit like date , and sundry other in no place in all that country so abundant , whereby they live more delicious than other . Theise inhabitant have diverse of the sapy , which they take in the war as their slave , who only they keep to till the ground , in that they neither have the knowledge thereof , nor yet will work themselves , of who we take many in that place , but of the sambose none at all , for they flee into the main . all the sambose have white tooth as we have , far unlike to the sapy which do inhabit about Rio grande , for their tooth be all file , which they do for a bravery , to set out themselves , and do jag their flesh , both leg , arm , and body , as workemanlike , as a jerkinmaker with we pink a jerkin . Theise sapy be more civil than the sambose : for ten 17 b then Naples bury their dead with glide . the canoas of Africa . the firm of their town . the english voyage whereas the sambose live most by the spoil of their enemy , both in take their victual , and eat they also . the sapy do not eat man flesh , unless in the war they be drive by necessity thereunto , which they have not use but by the example of the sambose , but live only with fruit , and cattle , whereof they have great store . this plenty be the occasion that the sapy desire not war , except they be thereunto provoke by the invasion of the sambose , whereas the sambose for want of food be enforce thereunto , and therefore be not wont only to take they that they kill , but also keep those that they take , until such time as they want meat , and then they kill they . there be also another occasion that provoke the sambose to war against the sapy which be for covetousness of their riches . for whereas the sapy have a order to bury their dead in certain place appoint for that purpose , with their gold about they , the sambose dig up the ground , to have the same treasure : for the sambose have not the like store of gold , that the sapy have . in this island of Sambula we find about 50 boat call almadye , or canoas , which be make of one piece of wood , dig out like a trough but of a good proportion , be about 8 yard long , and one in breadth , have a beakhead and a stern very proportionable make , and on the out side artificial carve , and paint red and blow : they be able to carry twenty or thirty man , but they be about the coast able to carry threescore and upward . in these canoas they row stand upright , with a oar somewhat long than a man , the end whereof be make about the breadth and length of a man hand , of the large sort . they row very swift , and in some of they four rower and one to steer make as much way , as a pair of oar in the Thames of London . their town be pretty divide with a main street at the enter in , that go through their town , and another overthwart street , which make their town across way : their house be build in a rank very orderly in the face of the street , and they be make round , like a dove-cote , with stake set full of Palmito leave , in stead of a wall : they be not much more than a fathom large , and two of heighth , and thatch with Palmito leave very close , other some with reed , and over the roof thereof , for the better garnish of the same , there be a round bundle of reed , pretty contrive like a lover : in the inner part they make a loft of stick , whereupon they lie all their provision of victual : a place they reserve at their entrance for the kitchen , and the place they lie in be divide with certain mat artificial make with the rind of Palmito tree : their bedstead be of small staff lay along , and raise a foot from the ground , upon which be lay a mat , and another upon they when they listen : for other cover they have none . in the middle of the town there be a house large and high than the other , but in form alike , adjoin unto the which there be a place make of four good stancion of wood , and a round roof over it , the ground also raise round with clay a foot high , upon the which floor be straw many fine mat : this be the consultation-house , the like whereof be in all town , as the Portugal affirm : in which place , when they sit in counsel the king or captain sit in the midst , and the elder upon the floor by he : ( for they give reverence to their elder ) and the common sort sit round about they . there the consultation house or towne-howse . [ HL 5O5 - ] they sit to examine matter of theft , which if a man be take with , to steal but a Portugal cloth from another , he be sell to the Portugal for a slave . they consult also , and take order what time they shall go to war : and as it be certain report by the Portugal , they take order in gather of the fruit in the season of the year , and also of Palmito wine , which be gather by a Palmito be a hole cut in the top of a tree , and a gourde set for the mlde datereceive thereof , which fall in by drop , and yield fresh wine again within a month , and this divide part and portion-like to every man , by the judgement of the captain and elder , every man hold himself content : and this sure i judge to be a very good order : for otherwise , whereas scarcity of Palmito be , every man will have the same , which may breed great strife : but of such thing , as every man do plant for himself , the sour thereof reap it to his own use , so that nothing be common , but that which be unset by man hand . in their house there be more common passage of lizards like evat , and other great , of black and blue colour , of near a foot long , beside their tail , than there be with we of Mise in great house . the sapy and sambose also use in their war bow , and arrow make of reed , with head of iron poison a venomous with the juice of a Cucumber , whereof i have many in Cucumber . my hand . in their battle they have target-man , with broad wicker target , and dart with head at both end , of iron , the one in form of a two edge sword , a foot and a half long , and at the other end , the iron long of the same length make to counterpoise it , that in cast it may fly level , rather than for any other purpose as i can judge . and when they espy the enemy , the captain to cheer his man , cry hungry , and they answer heygre , and with that every man place himself in order , for about every target man three bowman will cover themselves , and shoot as they see advantage : and when they give the onset , they make such terrible cry , that they may be hear two mile off . for their belief , i can hear of none that they have , but in such as they themselves imagine to see in their dream , and so i dole like worship the picture , whereof we see some like unto devil . devil . in this island aforesaid we sojourn unto the one and twenty of December , where have take certain negro , and asmuch of their fruit , rise , and mill , as we can well carry away , ( whereof there be such store , that we may have lade one of our bark therewith ) we depart , and at our departure diverse of our man be desirous to go on shore , to fetch pomnion , 20 1 which have prove , they find to be very good , certain of the tiger man go also , among the which there be a carpenter , a young man , who with his fellow have fetch many , and carry they down to their boat , as they be ready to depart , desire his fellow to tarry while he may go up to fetch a few which he have the extreme lay by for he self , who be more liquorous than ne&^gence of circumspect , go up without weapon , and as he go up mfanie . alone , possible be mark of the negro that be upon the tree , espy he what he do , perceive he to be alone , and without weapon , dog he , and find he occupy in bind his pompion together , come behind he , overthrow he and straight cut his throat , as he afterwards be find by his fellow , who come to the place for he , and there find he naked . the two and twenty the captain go into the river , call Callowsa , with the two bark , and the John pinnace , and the Salomons boat , leave at anchor a wsa‘ in the river mouth the two ship , the river be twenty league in , where the Portugal road : he come thither the five and twenty , and dispatch his business , and so return with two caravel , load with negro . the 27. the captain be advertise by the Portugal of a town of the negro call Bymba , be in the way tie town as they return , where be not only great quantity of tm gold , but also that there be not above forty man , and a hundred woman and child in the town , so that if he will give the adventure upon the same , he may get a hundred slave : with the which tiding he be glad , because the Portugal shall not think he to be of so base a courage , but that he dare give they that , and great attempt : and be thereunto also the more provoke with the prosperous success he have in other island adjacent , where he have put they all to flight , and take in one boat twenty together , determine to stay before the town three or four hour , to see what he can do : and thereupon prepare his man in armour and weapon together , to the Portugal not to be trust . want of circumspection in our man . [ Iii . 506. ] m. field captain of the Salomon slay . the english voyage number of forty man well appoint , have to their guide certain Portugal , in a boat , who bring some of they to their death : we land boat after boat , and diverse of our man scatter themselves , contrary to the captain will , by one or two in a company , for the hope that they have to find gold in their house , ransack the same , in the mean time the negro come upon they , and hurt many be thus scatter , whereas if five or six have be together , they have be able , as their companion do , to give the overthrow to 40 of they , and be drive down to take their boat , be follow so hardly by a route of negro , who by that take courage to pursue they to their boat , that not only some of they , but other stand on shore , not look for any such matter by mean that the negro do flee at the first , and our company remain in the town , be sudden so set upon that some with great hurt recover their boat ; othersome not able to recover the same , take the water , and perish by mean of the oaze . while this be do , the captain who with a dozen man , go through the town , return , find 200 negro at the water side , shoot at they in the boat , and cut they in piece which be drown in the water , at who come , they run all away : so he enter his boat , and before he can put off from the shore , they return again , and shoot very fierce and hurt diverse of they . thus we return back some what discomfort , although the captain in a singular wise manner carry himself , with countenance very cheerful outward , as though he do little weigh the death of his man , nor yet the great hurt of the rest , although his heart1 inward be break in piece for it ; do to this end , that the Portugal be with he , shall not presume to resist against he , nor take occasion to put he to further displeasure or hindrance for the death of our man : have get by our go ten negro , and lose seven of our best man , whereof m. field captain of the Salomon , be one , and we have 27 of our man hurt . in the same hour while this be do , there happen at the same instant , a marvelous miracle to they in the ship , who ride ten league to seaward , by many shark or tiburon , who come about the ship : among which , one be take by the Jesus , and four by the Salomon , and one very sore hurt escape : and so it fall out of our man , whereof one of the Jesus man , and four of the Salomons be kill , and the five have twenty wound be rescue , and escape with much ado . the 28 they come to their ship , the Jesus , and the Salomon , and the 30 depart from thence to Taggarin . Taggarin . the first of January the two bark , and both the boat forsake the ship , and go into a river call river of the Casserroes , and the 6 have dispatch their busi - asserroe . ness , the two bark return , and come to Taggarin , where the two ship be at anchor . not two day after the come of the two ship thither , they put their water cask a shore , and fill it with water , to season the same , think to have fill it with fresh water afterward : and while their man be some on shore , and some at their boat , the negro set upon they in the boat , and hurt diverse of they , and come to the cask , and cut of the hoop of twelve butt , which lose we 4 or 5 day time , beside great want we have of the same : sojourn at Taggarin , the swallow go up the river about her traffic , where they see great town of the negro , and canoas , that have threescore man in a piece : there they understand by the Portugal , of a great battle between they of Sierra Leona side , and they of Taggarin : they of Sierra Leona , have prepare three hundred canoas to invade the other . the time be appoint not past six day after our departure from thence , which we will have see , to the intent we may have take some of a new assault by the negro . great town . very great canoas . the contagion they , have it not be for the death and sickness ofthecou-t of our man , which come by the contagiousness of the Jof Sierra place , which make we to make haste away . Leona . the english voyage the 18 of Januarie at night , we depart from Taggarin , be bind for the west Indies , before which departure certain of the Salomons man go on shore to fill water in the night , and as they come on shore with their boat be ready to leap on land , one of they espy a negro in a white coat , stand upon a rock , be ready to have receive they when they come on shore , have in sight of his fellow also eight or nine , some in one place leap out , and some in another , but they hide themselves straight again : whereupon our man doubt they have be a great company , and seek to have take they at more advantage , as God will , depart to their ship , not think there have be such a mischief pretend towards they , as then be in deed . which the next day we understand of a Portugal that come down to we , who have traffic with the negro , by who he understand , that the king of Sierra Leona have make all the power he can , to take some of we , partly for the desire he have to see what kind of people we be , that have spoil his people at the idol , whereof he have news before our come , and as i judge also , upon other occasion provoke by the Tangomangos , but sure we be that the army be come down , by mean that in the evening we see such a monstrous fire , make by the water place , that before be not see , which fire be the only mark for the Tangomangos to know where their army be always . if these man have come down in the evening , they have do we great displeasure , for that we be on shore fill water : but God , who work all thing for the best , will not have it so , and by he we escape without danger , his name be praise for it . the 29 of this same month we depart with all our ship from Sierra Leona , towards the west Indies , and for the space of eighteen day , we be becalm , have now and then contrary wind , and 24 some ternado , among the same calm , which happen to we very ill , be but reasonable water , for so great a company of negro , and our self , which pinch we all , and that which be worst , put we in such fear that many never think to have reach to the Indies , without great death of negro , and of themselves : but the almighty God , who never suffer his elect to perish , send we the sixteenth of February , the ordinary brise , which be the northwest wind , which never leave we , till we come to a island of the canybal , call Dominica , where we arrive Dominica the nine of march , upon a Saturday : and because it be the most desolate place in all the island , we can see no canybal , but some of their house where they dwell , and as it shall seem forsake the place for want of fresh water , for we can find none there but rain water , and such as fall from the hill , and remain as a puddle in the dale , whereof we fill for our negro . the canybal of that island , and also other adjacent be the most desperate warrior that be in the Indies , by the Spaniard canybal exreport , who be never able to conquer they , and they be molest by they not a little , when they be drive that to water there in any of those island : of very late , not two month past , in the say island , a caravel be drive to water , be in the night set upon by the inhabitant , who cut their cable in the hals , whereby they be drive a shore , and so take by they , and eat . the green dragon of Newhaven , whereof be captain one Bontemps , in march also , come to one of those island , call Granada , and be drive to water , can not do the same for the canybal , who fight with he very desperate two day . for our part also , if we have not light upon the desert place in all that island , we can not have miss , but shall have be great trouble by they , by all the Spaniard report , who make they devil in respect of i . the testigps island . Margarita island . Cumana . the english voyage the ten day at night , we depart from thence , and the fifteen have sight of nine island , call the testigo : and the sixteenth of a island , call Margarita , where we be entertain by the Alcalde , and have both beef and sheep give we , for the refresh of our man : but the governor of the island , will neither come to speak with our captain , neither yet give he any licence to traffic : and to displease we the more , whereas we have hire a pilot to have go with we , they will not only not suffer he to go with we , but also send word by a caravel out of hand , to Santo Domingo , to the viceroy , who do represent the king person , of our arrival in those part , which have like to have turn we to great displeasure , by the mean that the same viceroy do send word to cape de la Vela , and to other place along the coast , command they that by the virtue of his authority , and by the obedience that they owe to their prince , no man shall traffic with we , but shall resist we with all the force they can . in this island , notwithstanding that we be not within four league of the town , yet be they so afraid , that not only the governor himself , but also all the inhabitant forsake their town , assemble all the Indians to they and flee into the mountain , as we be partly certify , and also see the experience our self , by some of the Indians come to see we who by three Spaniards a horseback pass hard by we , go unto the Indians , have every one of they their bow , and arrow , procure they away , who before be conversant with we . here perceive no traffic to be have with they , nor yet water for the refresh of our man , we be drive to depart the twenty day , and the 2 and twenty we come to a place in the main call Cumana , whither the captain go in his pinnisse , speak with certain Spaniards , of who he demand traffic , but they make he answer , they be but 26 sir John Hawkins soldier new come thither , and be not able to by one negro : whereupon he ask for a water place , and they point he a place two league off , call Santa F^ , where we find marvelous goodly water , and commodious for the take in thereof : for that the fresh water come into the sea , and so our ship have aboard the shore twenty fathom water . near about this place , inhabit certain Indians , who the next day after we come thither , come down to we , present mill and cake of bread , which they have make of a kind of corn call Maiz , in bigness of a pease , the ear whereof be much like to a teasell , but a span in length , have thereon a number of grane . also they bring down to we hen , potato and pine , which we buy for bead , pewter whistle , glass , knife , and other trifle . Theise potato be the most delicate root that may be eat , and do far exceed our passenep or carat . their pine be of the bigness of two fist , the outside whereof be of the make of a pineapple , but it be soft like the rind of a Cucomber , and the inside eat like a apple , but it be more delicious than any sweet apple sugar . Theise Indians be of colour tawny like a olive , have every one of they both man and woman , hair all black , and no other colour , the woman wear the same hang down to their shoulder , and the man round , and without beard , neither man nor woman suffer any hair to grow in any part of their body , but daily pull it off as it grow . they go all naked , the man cover no part of their body but their yard , upon the which they wear a gourd or piece of cane , make fast with a third about their loin , leave the other part of their member uncover , whereof they take no shame . the woman also be uncover , save with a cloth which they wear a hand-breath , wherewith they cover their privity both before and behind . Theise people be very small feeder , for travel they carry but two 27 Santa Fe. [ Iii . 508. ] the description of the Indians of terra firma . small bottle of gourd , wherein they put in one then the use of juice of Sorrell whereof they have great store , and in sorrel . the o^er flower of their Maiz , which be moist , they eat , take sometime of the other . Theise man carry every man his bow and arrow , whereof some arrow be poison for war , which they keep in a cane together , which cane be of the bigness of a man arm , other some with broad head of iron wherewith they strike fish in the water : the experience whereof we see not once nor twice , but daily for the time we tarry there , for they be so good archer that armour of the Spaniard for fear thereof arm themselves and two^nche^ horse with quilt canvas of two inche thick , thick . and leave no place of their body open to their enemy , save their eye which they may not hide , and yet oftentimes be they hit in that so small a the make of scantling : their poison be of such a force , that a their poison . man be strike therewith die within four and twenty hour , as the Spaniard do affirm , and in my judgement it be like there can be no strong poison as they make it , use thereunto apple which be very fair and red of colour , but be a strong poison , with the which together with venomous bat , viper , adder and other serpent , they make a medley , and therewith anoint the same . the manner of the young woman . the indian woman delight not when they be young in bear of child , because it make they have hang breast which they account to be great deform in they , and upon that occasion while they be young , they destroy their seed , say , that it be fit for old woman . Moreover , when they be deliver of child , they go straight to wash themselves , without make any further ceremony for it , not lie in bed as our woman do . the bed which they have be make of gossopine cotton , and wrought artificial of diverse colour , which they carry about with they when they travel , and make the same fast to two tree , lie therein they and their woman . the people 28 1565. be sure gentle and tractable , and such as desire to live peaceable , or else have it be unpossible for the Spaniard to have conquer they as they do , and the more to live now peaceable , they be so many in number , and the Spaniard so few . from hence we depart the eight and twenty , and the next day we pass between the main land , and the island call Tortuga , a very low island , in the the of year of our lord God one thousand five hundred tortusa-sixty five aforesaid , and sail along the coast until the first of April , at which time the captain sail along in the Jesus pinnace to discern the coast , and see many caribe on shore , and some also in their canoas , which make token unto he of friendship , and show he gold , mean thereby that they will traffic for ware . whereupon he stay to see the manner of they , and so for two or three trifle they give such thing as they have about they , and depart : but the caribe be very importunate to have they come on shore , which if it have not be for want of ware to traffic with they , he will not have deny they , because the Indians which we see before be very gentle people , and such as do no man hurt . but as God will have it , he want that thing , which if he have have , will have be his confusion : for these be no such kind of people as we take they to be , but more devilish a thousand part and be eater and devourer of any man they can catch , as it be afterward declare unto we at Burboroata , by a caravel come out of Spain with certain soldier , and a captain generail send by the king for those eastward part of the Indians , who sail along in his pinnace , as our captain do to descry the coast , be by the caribe call a shore with sundry token make to he of friendship , and gold show as though they desire traffic , with the which the Spaniard be move , suspect no deceit at all , go ashore among they : who be no soon ashore , but with four or five Burbonata . the english voyage moor be take , the rest of his company be invade by they , save themselves by flight , but they that be take , pay their ransom with their life , and be present eat . and this be their practice to toll with their gold the ignorant to their snare : they be bloodsucker both of Spaniards , Indians , and all that light in their lap , not spare their own countryman if they can convenient come by they . their policy in fight with the Spaniards be marvelous : for they choose for their refuge the mountain and wood where the Spaniard with their horse can follow they , and if they fortune to be meet in the plain where one horseman may overrun 100 of they , they have a devise of late practise by they to pitch stake of wood in the ground , and also small iron pike to mischief their horse , wherein they show themselves politic warrior . they have more abundance of gold then all the Spaniard have , and live upon the mountain where the mine be in such number , that the Spaniard have much ado to get any of they from they , and yet sometime by assemble a great number of they , which happen once in two year , they get a piece from they , which afterward they keep sure enough . thus have escape the danger of they , we keep our course along the coast , and come the three of April to a town call Burboroata , where his ship come to a anchor , and he himself go a shore to speak with the Spaniard , to who he declare himself to be a Englishman , and come thither to trade with they by the way of merchandise , and therefore require licence for the same . unto who they make answer , that they be forbid by the king to traffic with any foreign nation , upon penalty to forfeit their good , therefore they desire he not to molest they any further , but to depart as he come , for other comfort he may not look for at their hand , because they be subject and may not go beyond the law . but he reply that his necessity be such , as he may not so do : for be in one of the queen armada of England , and have many soldier in they , he have need both of some refresh for they , and of victual , and of money also , without the which he can not depart , and with much other talk persuade they not to fear any dishonest part of his behalf towards they , for neither will he commit any such thing to the dishonour of his prince , not yet for his honest reputation and estimation , unless he be too rigorous deal withal , which he hope not to find at their hand , in that it shall as well redound to their profit as his own , and also he think they may do it without danger , because their prince be in amity one with another , and for our part we have free traffic in Spain and Flanders , which be in his dominion , and therefore he know no reason why he shall not have the like in all his dominion . to the which the Spaniard make answer , that it lie not in they to give any licence , for that they have a governor to who the government of those part be commit , but if they will stay ten day , they will send to their governor who be threescore league off , and will return answer within the space appoint , of his mind . in the mean time they be content he shall bring his ship into harbour , and there they will deliver he any victual he will require . whereupon the four day we go in , where be one day and receive all thing accord to promise , the captain advise himself , that to remain there ten day idle , spend victual and man wage , and perhaps in the end receive no good answer from the governor , it be mere folly , and therefore determine to make request to have licence for the sale of certain lean and sick negro which he have in his ship like to die upon his hand if he keep they ten day , have little or no refresh for they , whereas other man have they , they will be recover well enough . and 31 A.D. I565 . this request he be force to make , because he have not otherwise wherewith to pay for victual and for necessary which he shall take : which request be put in writing and present , the officer and town-dweller assemble together , and find his request so reasonable , grant he licence for thirty negro , which afterward they cause the officer to view , to the intent they shall grant to nothing but that be very reasonable , for fear of answer thereunto afterward . This be pass , our captain accord to their licence , think to have make sale , but the day past and none come to buy , who before make show that they have great need of they , and therefore wit not what to surmise of they , whether they go about to prolong the time of the governor his answer because they will keep themselves blameless , or for any other policy he know not , and for that purpose send they word , marvel what the matter be that none come to buy they . they answer , because they have grant licence only to the poor to buy those negro of small price , and their money be not so ready as other man of more wealth . more than that , as soon as ever they see the ship , they convey away their money by their wife that go into the mountain for fear , and be not yet return , and yet ask two day to seek their wife and fetch their money . notwithstanding , the next day diverse of they come to cheapen , but can not agree of price , because they think the price too high . whereupon the captain perceive they go about to bring down the price , and mean to buy , and will not confess if he have licence , that he may sell at any reasonable rate , as they be worth in other place , do send for the principal of the town , and make a show he will depart , declare himself to be very sorry that he have so much trouble they , and also that he have send for the governor to come down , see now his pretence be to depart , whereat they marveil much , and ask he what cause move he thereunto , see by their work he be in possibility to have his licence . to the which he reply , that it be not only a [ three . 510. ] licence that he seek , but profit , which he perceive be not there to be have , and therefore will seek further , and withal show he his write what he pay for his negro , declare also the great charge he be at in his ship , and man wage , and therefore to countervail his charge , he must sell his negro for a great price than they offer . so they doubt his departure , put he in comfort to sell better there then in any other place . and if it fall out that he have no licence that he shall not loose his labour in tarry , for they will buy without licence . whereupon , the captain be put in comfort , promise they to stay , so that he may make sale of his lean negro , which they grant unto . and the next day do sell some of they , who have buy and pay for they , think to have have a discharge of the customer , for the custom of the negro , be the king duty , they give it away to the poor for God sake , and do refuse to give the discharge in write , and the poor not trust their word , for fear , lest hereafter it may be demand of they , do refrain from buy any more , so that nothing else be do until the governor come down , which be the fourteenth day , and then the captain make petition , declare that he be come thither in a ship of the queen majesty of England , be bind to guinie , and thither drive by wind and weather , so that be come thither , he have need of sundry necessary for the reparation of the say navy , and also great need of money for the payment of his soldier , unto who he have promise payment , and therefore although he will , yet will not they depart without it , and for that purpose he request licence for the sale of certain of his negro , declare that although they be forbid to traffic with stranger , yet for that there ten 33 c be a great amity between their prince , and that the thing pertain to our queen highness , he think he may do their prince great service , and that it will be well take at his hand , to do it in this cause . the which allegation with diverse other put in request , be present unto the governor , who sit in counsel for that matter , grant unto his request for licence . but yet there fall out another thing which be the abate of the king custom , be upon every slave 30. ducat , which will not be grant unto . whereupon the captain perceive that they will neither come near his price he look for by a great deal , nor yet will abate the king custom of that they offer , so that either he must be a great loser by his ware , or else compel the officer to abate the same king custom which be too unreasonable , for to a high price he can not bring the buyer : therefore the sixteenth of April he prepare one hundred man well arm with bow , arrow , harquebuss and pike , with the which he march to the townewards , and be perceive by the governor , he straight with all expedition send messenger to know his request , desire he to march no further forward until he have answer again , which incontinent he shall have . so our captain declare how unreasonable a thing the king custom be , request to have the same abate , and to pay seven and a half per centum , which be the ordinary custom for ware through his dominion there , and unto this if they will not grant , he will displease they . and this word be carry to the governor , answer be return that all thing shall be to his content , and thereupon he determine to depart , but the soldier and mariner find so little credit in their promise , demand gage for the performance of the premise , or else they will not depart . and thus they be constrain to send gage , we depart , begin our traffic , and end the same without disturbance . thus have make traffic in the harbour until the 28. our captain with his ship intend to go out of the road , and purpose to make show of his departure , because now the common sort have employed their money , the rich man be come to town , who make no show that they be come to buy , so that they go about to bring down the price , and by this policy the captain know they will be make the more eager , for fear lest we depart , and they shall go without any at all . the nine and twenty we be at anchor without the road , a french ship call the green dragon of Newhaven , whereof be captain one Bon temps come in , who salute we after the manner of the sea , with certain piece of ordinance , and we resalute he with the like again : with who have communication , he declare that he have be at the mine in guinie , and 2% report off be beat off by the Portugal galley , and enforce to , . 1 ' , i 0 1 j the Minton tn come thither to make sale or such ware as he have : and further that the like be happen unto the minion : beside the captain Davie carlet and a merchant , with a dozen mariner betray by the negro at their first arrival thither , and remain prisoner with the Portugal ; and beside other misadventure of the loss of their man , happen through the great lack of fresh water , with great doubt of bring home the ship : which be most sorrowful for we to understand . thus have end our traffic here the 4. of may , [ three . 51 i . i we depart , leave the Frenchman behind we , the night before the which the caribe , whereof i have make mention before , be to the number of 200. come in their canoas to Burboroata , intend by night to have burn the town , and take the Spaniard , who be more vigilant because of our be there , than their custom be , perceive they come , raise the town , who in a moment be a horseback , by mean their custom be for all doubt to keep their horse horse keep ready saddle , in the night set upon they , and take one , read ? saddle - but the rest make shift for themselves , escape away . but this one , because he be their guide , and be the occasion that diverse time they have make invasion upon they , have for his travel a stake thrust through his fundament , and so out at his neck . the sixth of May aforesaid , we come to a island call Cura$ao , where we have think to have ancker , but can not find ground , and have let fall a anchor with two cable , be fain to weigh it again : and the seven sail along the coast to seek a harbour , and find none , we come to a anchor where we ride open in the sea in this place we have traffic for hide , and find great refresh both of beef , mutton and lamb , whereof there be such plenty , that save the skin , we have the flesh give we for nothing , the exceed plenty whereof be so abundant , that the worst in the ship think scorn not only of mutton , but also of ’ sodden lamb , which they disdain to eat unroast . the increase of cattle in this island be marvelous , which from a dozen of each sort bring thither by the governor , in 25. year he have a hundred thousand at the least , and of other cattle be able to kill without spoil of the increase 1500. yearly , which he kill for the skin , and of the flesh save only the tongue , the rest he leave to the foul to devour . and this i be able to affirm , not only upon the governor own report , who be the first that bring the increase thither , which so remain unto this day , but also by that i see my self in one field , where a hundred ox lie one by another all whole , save the skin and tongue take away . and it be not so marvelous a thing why they do thus cast away the flesh in all the island of the west Indies , see the land be great , and more than they be able to inhabit , the people few , have delicate fruit and meat enough beside to feed upon , which they rather desire , and the increase which pass man reason to believe , when they come to a great number : for in saint Domingo a island call by the 36 finder thereof Hispaniola , be so great quantity of cattle , and such increase thereof , that notwithstanding the daily kill of they for their hide , it be not possible to assuage the number of they , but they be devour by wild dog , who number be such by suffer they qreat first to range the wood and mountain , that they eat number of and destroy 60000. a year , and yet small lack find wme d » and - of they . and no marveile , for the say island be almost as big as all England , and be the first place that be find of all the Indies , and of long time inhabit before the rest , it ought therefore of reason to be most populous : and to this hour the viceroy and counsel royal abide there as in the chief place of all the Indies , to prescribe order to the rest for the king behalf , yet have they but one city and 13. village in all the same island , whereby the spoil of they in respect of the increase be nothing . the 15. of the foresay month we depart from Curasao , be not a little to the rejoice of our captain and we , that we have there end our traffic : but notwithstanding our sweet meat , we have sour sauce , for by reason of our ride so open at sea , what with blast whereby our anchor be a ground , three at once come home , and also with contrary wind blow , whereby for fear of the shore we be fain to hale off to have anchorhold , sometime a whole day and a night we turn up and down ; and this happen not once , but half a dozen time in the space of our be there . the 16. we pass by a island call Aruba , and Aruba . the 17. at night ancker six hour at the west end of Cabo de la vela , and in the morning be the 18. weigh again , keep our course , in the which time the captain sail by the shore in the pinnace , come to the Rancheria , a place where the Spaniard use to LaRanchena . fish for pearl , and there speak with a Spaniard , who tell he how far off he be from Rio de la Hacha , which 7 ? » de la because he will not overshoot , he anchor that night hac , in - m. Hawkins his letter to the treasurer of Rio de la Hacha . the english voyage again , and the 19 come thither ; where have talk with the king treasurer of the Indies resident there , he declare his quiet traffic in Burboroata , and show a certificate of the same , make by the governor thereof , and therefore he desire to have the like there also : but the treasurer make answer that they be forbid by the viceroy and council of saint Domingo , who have intelligence of our be on the coast , do send express commission to resist we , with all the force they can , insomuch that they dare not traffic with we in no case , allege that if they do , they shall loose all that they do traffic for , beside their body at the magistrate commandment . our captain reply , that he be in a armada of the queen majesty of England , and send about other her affair , but drive beside his pretend voyage , be enforce by contrary wind to come into those part , where he hope to find such friendship as he shall do in Spain , to the contrary whereof he know no reason , in that there be amity betwixt their prince . but see they will contrary to all reason go about to withstand his traffic , he will it shall not be say by he , that have the force he have , to be drive from his traffic perforce , but he will rather put it in adventure to try whether he or they shall have the better , and therefore will they to determine either to give he licence to trade , or else to stand to their own harm : so upon this it be determine he shall have licence to trade , but they will give he such a price as be the one half less than he have sell for before , and thus they send word they will do , and none otherwise , and if it like he not , he may do what he will , for they be not determine to deal otherwise with he . whereupon , the captain weigh their unconscionable request , write to they a letter , that they deal too rigorous with he , to go about to cut his throat in the price of his commodity , which be so reasonable rate , as they can not by a great deal have the like at any other man hand . but see they have send he this to his supper , he will in the morning bring they as good a breakfast . and therefore in the morning be the 21. of may , he shoot off a whole culverin to summon the town , and prepare one hundred man in armour , go a shore , have in his great boat two falcon of brass , and in the other boat double base in their nose , which be perceive by the townsman , they incontinent in battle array with their drum and ensign display , march from the town to the sand , of footman to the number of a hundred and fifty , make great brag with their cry , and weave we a shore , whereby they make a semblance to have fight with we in deed . but our captain perceive they so brag , command the two falcon to be discharge at they , which put they in no small fear to see , ( as they afterward declare ) such great piece in a boat . at every shot they fall flat to the ground , and as we approach near unto they , they break their array , and disperse themselves so much for fear of the ordinance , that at last they go all away with their ensign . the horseman also be about thirty , make as brave a show as may be , course up and down with their horse , their brave white leather target in the one hand , and their javelin in the other , as though they will have receive we at our land . but when we land , they give ground , and consult what they shall do , for little they think we will have land so bold : and therefore as the captain be put his man in array , and march forward to have encounter with they , they send a messenger on horseback with a flag of truce to the captain , who declare that the treasurer marveil what he mean to do to come a shore in that order , in consideration that they have grant to every reasonable request that he do demand : but the captain not well content with this messenger , march forward . the messenger pray he to stay his man , and say , if he will come apart from his man , the treasurer will come and speak with he , whereunto he do agree to commune together . the captain only with his armour without weapon , and the treasurer on horseback with his javelin , be afraid to come near he for fear of his armour , which he say be worse than his weapon , and so keep aloof commune together , grant in fine to all his request . which be declare by the captain to the company , they desire to have pledge for the performance of all thing , doubt that otherwise when they have make themselves strong , they will have be at defiance with we : and see that now they may have what they will request , they judge it to be more wisdom to be in assurance then to be force to make any more labour about it . so upon this , gage be send , and we make our traffic quiet with they . in the mean time while we stay here , we water a good breadth off from the shore , where by the strength of the fresh water run into the sea , the salt water be make fresh . in this river we see many crocodile of sundry bigness , but some as big as a boat , with 4. foot , a long broad mouth , and a long tail , who skin be so hard , that a sword will not pierce it . his nature be to live out of the water as a frog do , but he be a great devourer , and spare neither fish , which be his common food , nor beast , nor man , if he take they , as the proof thereof be know by a negro , who as he be fill water in the river be by one of they carry clean away , and never see after . his nature be ever when he will have his prey , to cry and sob like a christian body , to provoke they to come to he , and then he snatch at they , and thereupon come this proverb that be apply unto woman when they weep , lachrymae Crocodili , the meaning whereof be , that as the crocodile when he cry , go then about most to deceive , so do a woman most common when she weep . of these the master of the Jesus watch one , and by the bank side strike he with a pike of a bill in the side , and after three or four time turn in sight , he sink down , and be not afterward see . in the time of our be in the river guinie , we see many of a monstrous bigness , among the which the captain [ three . 513. ] be in one of the bark come down the same , shoot a falcon at one , which very narrow he miss , and with a fear he plunge into the water , make a stream like the way of a boat . now while we be here , whether it be of a fear that the Spaniard doubt we will have do they some harm before we depart , or for any treason that they intend towards we , i be not able to say ; but then come thither a captain from some of the other town , with a dozen soldier upon a time when our captain and the treasurer clear all thing between they , and be in a communication of a debt of the governor of Burboroata , which be to be pay by the say treasurer , who will not answer the same by any mean . whereupon certain word of displeasure pass betwixt the captain and he , and part the one from the other , the treasurer possible doubt that our captain will perforce have seek the same , do immediate command his man to arm , both horseman and footman : but because the captain be in the river on the back side of the town with his other boat , and all his man unarm and without weapon , it be to be judge he mean he little good , have that advantage of he , that come upon the sudden , he may have mischieve many of his man : but the captain have understanding thereof , not trust to their gentleness , if they may have the advantage , depart aboard his ship , and at night return again , and demand among other talk , what they mean by assemble their man in that order , and they answer , that their captain be come to town do muster his man accord to his accustom manner . but it be to be judge to be a cloak , in that come for that purpose he may have do it soon , but the truth be , they be not of force until then , whereby to enterprise any matter against we , by mean of pike and harquebuss , whereof they have want , and be now furnish by our captain , and also 3. falcon , which have get in other place , they have secret convey thither , which make they the bold , and also for that they see now a convenient place to do such a feat , and time also serve thereunto , by the mean that our man be not only unarm and unprovide , as at no time before the like , but also be occupy in hew of wood , and least think of any harm : these be occasion to provoke they thereunto . and i suppose they go about to bring it to effect , in that * 1 with another gentleman be in the town , think of no harm towards we , and see man assemble in armour to the treasurer house , whereof i marveil , and revoke to mind the former talk between the captain and he , and the unreadiness of our man , of who advantage may have be take , depart out of the town immediate to give knowledge thereof , but before we come to our man by a flightshot , two horseman ride a gallop be come near we , be send , as we do guess , to stay we lest we shall carry news to our captain , but see we so near our man they stay their horse , come together , and suffer we to pass , belike because we be so near , that if they have go about the same , they have be espy by some of our man which then immediate will have depart , whereby they shall have be frustrate of their pretence : and so the two horseman rid about the bush to espy what we do , and see we go , to the intent they may shadow their come down in post , whereof suspicion may be have , feign a simple excuse in ask whether he can sell any wine , but that seem so simple to the captain , that stand in doubt of their courtesy , he return in the morning with his three boat , appoint with base in their nose , and his man with weapon accord , where as before he carry none : and thus dissemble all injury conceive of both part , the captain go ashore , leave pledge in the boat for himself , and clear all thing between the treasurer and he , save for the governors debt , which the one 1565. by no mean will answer , and the other , because it be not his due debt , will not molest he for it , but be content to remit it until another time , and therefore depart , cause the two bark which ride near the shore to weigh and go under sail , which be do because that our captain demand a testimoniali of his good behaviour there , can not have the same until he be under sail ready to depart : and therefore at night he go for the same again , and receive it at the treasurer hand , of who very courteous he take his leave and depart , shoot off the base of his boat for his farewell , and the townsman also shoot off four falcon and 30. harquebuss , and this be the first time that he know of the conveyance of their falcon . the 31. of may we depart , keep our course to Hispaniola , and the four of June we have sight of a island , which we make to be Jamaica , marvel that by the vehement course of the sea we shall be drive so far to leeward : for set our course to the west end of Hispaniola we fall with the middle of Jamaica , notwithstanding that to all man sight it show a headland , but they be all deceive by the cloud that lie upon the land two day together , in such sort that we think it to be the head land of the say island . and a Spaniard be in the ship , who be a merchant , and inhabitant in Jamaica , have [ three . 514. ] occasion to go to guinie , and be by treason take of the negro , and afterward buy by the Tangomangos , be by our captain bring from thence , and have his passage to go into his country , who perceive the land , make as though he know every place thereof and point to certain place which he name to be such a place , and such a man ground , and that behind such a point be the harbour , but in the end he point so from one point to another , that we be a leeboord of all place , and find our self at the west end of Jamaica before we be aware of it , and be once to leeward , there be no get up again , the deceitful ! force of the current . the english voyage so that by trust of the Spaniard knowledge , our captain seek not to speak with any of the inhabitant , which if he have not make himself sure of , he will have do as his custom be in other place : but this man be a plague not only to our captain , who make he loose by overshoot the place 2000 pound by hide , which he may have get , but also to himself , who be three year out of his country , and in great misery in guinie , both among the negro and Tangomangos , and in hope to come to his wife and friend , as he make sure account , in that at his go into the pinnace , when he go to shore he put on his new clothes , and for joy fling away his old , can not afterward find any habitation , neither there nor in all Cuba , which we sail all along , but it fall out ever by one occasion or other , that we be put beside the same , so that he be fame to be bring into England , and it happen to he as it do to a duke of Samaria , when the Israelite be besiege , and be in great misery with hunger , and be tell by the prophet Elizaeus , that a bushel ! of flower shall be sell for a sickle , will not believe he , but think it unpossible : and for that cause Elizaeus prophesy he shall see the same do , but he shall not eat thereof : so this man be absent three year , and not ever think to have see his own country , do see the same , go upon it , and yet be it not his fortune to come to it , or to any habitation , whereby to remain with his friend accord to his desire . thus have sail along the coast two day , we depart the seven of June , be make to believe by the Spaniard that it be not Jamaica , but rather Hispaniola , of which opinion the captain also be , because that which he make Jamaica seem to be but a piece of the land , and thereby take it rather to be Hispaniola , by the lie of the coast , and also for that be ignorant of the force of the current , he can not believe he be so far drive to leeward , and therefore set his course to Jamaica , and after certain day not find the same , perceive then certain that the island which he be at before be Jamaica , and that the cloud do deceive he , whereof he marvel not a little : and this mistake of the place come to as ill a pass as the overshoot of Jamaica : for by this do he also overpass a place in Cuba , call Santa Cruz , where , as he be inform , be great store of hide to be have : and thus be disappoint of two of his port , where he think to have raise great profit by his traffic , and also to have find great refresh of victual and water for his man , he be now disappoint great , and such want he have of fresh water , that he be force to seek the shore to obtain the same , which he have sight of after certain day overpass with storm and contrary wind , but yet not of the main of Cuba , but of certain island in number two hundred , whereof the most part be desolate of inhabitant : by the which island the captain pass in his pinnace , can find no fresh water until he come to a island big than all the rest , call the isle of pina , where we ancker with our ship the 16. of June , and find water , which although it be neither so toothsome as run water , by the mean it be stand , and but the water of rain , and also be near the sea be brackish , yet do we not refuse it , but be more glad thereof , as the time then require , than we shall have be another time with fine conduit water . thus be reasonable water we be desirous to depart , because the place be not very convenient for such ship of charge as they be , because there be many shoal to leeward , which also lie open to the sea for any wind that shall blow : and therefore the captain make the more haste away , which be not unneedful : for little soon be their anchor weigh , and foresail set , but there arise such a storm , that they have not much to spare for double out of the shoal : for one of the bark not be full ready as the rest , be fain for haste to cut the cable in 45 two hundred island for the most part not inhabit . the hawse , and loose both anchor and cable to save her self . the cape of thus the 17. of June , we depart and on the 20. we ^cuba^^ ' in west end of Cuba , call cape S. Antony , of where for the space of three day we double along , till we come beyond the shoal , which be 20. league beyond saint Anthony . and the ordinary brise take we , which be the north-east wind , put we the 24. from the shore , and therefore we go to the northwest to fetch Florida . wind , and also to the coast of Florida to have the help of the current , which be judge to have set to the eastward : so the 29. we found our self in 27. degree , and in the sounding of Florida , where we keep our self the space of four day , sail along the coast as near as we can , in ten or twelve fathom water , have all the while no sight of land . [ Iii . 515. ] the five of July we have sight of certain island of the isle of sanj3 call the Tortugas ( which be low land ) where great store of the captain go in with his pinnace , and find such bird . a number of bird , that in half a hour he jade she with they ; and if they have be ten boat more , they may have do the like . Theise island bear the name of tortoise , because of the number of they , which there do breed , who nature be to live both in the water and upon land also , but breed only upon the shore , in make a great pit wherein they lie egg , to the number of three or four hundred , and cover they with sand , they be hatch by the heat of the sun ; and by this mean come the great increase . of these we take very great one , which have both back and belly all of bone , of the thickness of a inch : the fish whereof we prove , eat much like veil ; and find a number of egg in they , taste also of they , but they do eat very sweet . here we anchor six hour , and then a fair gale of wind spring , we weigh anchor , and make sail towards Cuba , whither we come the sixth a hill call day , and weather as far as the table , be a hill the table . so call , because of the form thereof : here we lay off and on all night , to keep that we have get to windward , intend to have water in the morning , if we can have do it , or else if the wind have come large , to have ply to windward to Havana , the port of which be a harbour whereunto all the fleet of they ha ™ 1 ™ - Spaniard come , and do there tarry to have one the company of another . this hill we think to have be the table , make account ( as it be indeed ) that Havana be but eight league to windward , but by the persuasion of a french man , who make the captain believe he know the table very well , and have be at Havana , say that it be not the table , and that the table be much high , and near to the sea side , and that there be no plain ground to the eastward , nor hill to the westward , but all be contrary , and that behind the hill to the westward be Havana . to which persuasion credit be give by some , and they not of the worst , the captain be persuade to go to leeward , and so sail along the seven and eight day , find no habitation , nor no other table ; and then perceive his folly to give ear to such prater , be not a little sorry , both because he do consider what time he shall spend year he can get so far to windward again , which will have be , with the weather which we have , ten or twelve day work , and what it will have be long he know not , and ( that which be worst ) he have not above a day water and therefore know not what shift to make : but in fine , because the want be such , that his man can not live with it , he determine to seek water , and to go further to leeward , to a place ( as it be set in the card ) call Rio de los puercos , which he be in doubt of , both whether it be inhabit , and whether there be water or not , and whether for the shoald he may have such access with his ship , that he may convenient take in the same . and while we be in these trouble , and keep our way to the place aforesaid , almighty God our guide ( who will not suffer 47 we to run into any further danger , which we have be like to have incur , if we have range the coast of Florida along as we do before , which be so dangerous ( by report ) that no ship escape which come thither , ( as the Spaniard have very well prove the same ) send we the eight day at night a fair westerly wind , whereupon the captain and company consult , determine not to refuse God gift , but every man be content to pinch his own belly , whatsoever have happen ; and take the say wind , the nine day of July get to the table , and sail the same night , unaware overshoot Havana ; at which place we think to have water : but the next day , not know that we have overshoot the same , sail along the coast , seek it , and the eleven day in the morning , by certain know mark , we understand that we have overshoot it 20 league : in which coast range , we find no convenient water place , whereby there be no remedy but to disemboque , and to water upon the coast of Florida : for , to go further to the eastward , we can not for the shoald , which be very dangerous ; and because the current shoot to the north-east , we doubt by the force thereof to be set upon they , and therefore dare not approach they : so make but reasonable way the day aforesaid , and all the night , the twelve day in the morning we fall with the island upon the cape of Florida , which we can scant double by the mean that fear the shoald to the eastwards , the state of and doubt the current come out of the west , the current of which be not of that force we make account of ; for 011 of our feel little or none till our fell with the cape , and then feel such a current , that bear all sail against the same , yet be drive back again a great pace : the experience whereof we have by the Jesus pinnace , and the Salomons boat , which be send the same day in the afternoon , while the ship be becalm , to see if they can find any water upon the island aforesaid ; who spend a great part of the day in row thither , be further offend than they deem it to be , and in the mean time a fair gale of wind spring at sea , the ship depart , make a sign to they to come away , who although they see they depart , because they be so near the shore , will not lose all the labour they have take , but determine to keep their way , and see if there be any water to be have , make no account but to find the ship well enough : but they spend so much time in fill the water which they have find , that the night be come before they can make a end . and have lose the sight of the ship , they row what they can , but be whole ignorant which way they shall seek they again ; as indeed there be a more doubt than they know of : for when they depart , the ship be in no current ; and sail but a mile further , they find one so strong , that bear all sail , it can not prevail against the same , but be drive back : whereupon the captain send the Salomon , with the other two bark , to bear near the shore all night , because the current be less there a great deal , and to bear light , with shoot off a piece now and then , to the intent the boat may better know how to come to they . the Jesus also bear a light in her top gallant , and shoot off a piece also now and then , but the night pass , and the morning be come , be the thirteenth day , and no news can be hear of they , but the ship and bark cease not to look still for they , yet they think it be all in vain , by the mean they hear not of they all the night past ; and therefore determine to tarry no long , seek for they till noon , and if they hear no news , than they will depart to the Jesus , who perforce ( by the vehemency of the current ) be carry almost out of sight ; but as God will have it , now time be come , and they have tack about in the pinnace top , have sight of they , and take they up : they in the boat , be to the number of one and twenty , have sight of the ship , ten 49 d [ three . 516. ] and see they tack about ; whereas before at the first sight of they they do great rejoice , be now in a great perplexity than ever they be : for by this they think themselves utter forsake , whereas before they be in some hope to have find they . Truly God wrought marvellous for they , for they themselves have no victual but water , and be sore oppress with hunger , be not of opinion to bestow any further time in seek the ship then that present noon time ; so that if they have not at that instant espy they , they have go to the shore to have make provision for victual , and with such thing as they can have get , either to have go for that part of Florida where the french man be plant ( which will have be very hard for they to have do , because they want victual to bring they thither , be a hundred and twenty league off7 ) or else to have remain among the floridians ; at who hand they be put in comfort by a french man , who be with they , that have remain in Florida at the first find thereof , a whole year together , to receive victual sufficient , and gentle entertainment , if need be , for a year or two , until which time God may have provide for they . but how contrary this will have fall out to their expectation , it be hard to judge , see those people of the cape of Florida be off more savage and fierce nature , and more valiant than any of the rest ; which the Spaniard well prove , who be five hundred man , who intend there to land , return few or none of they , but be enforce to forsake the same : and of their cruelty mention be make in the book of the decade , of a friar , who take upon he to persuade the people to subjection , be by they take , and his skin cruel pull over his ear , and his flesh eat . in these island they be a shore , find a dead man , dry in a manner whole , with other head and body of man : so that these sort of man be eater of the flesh of man , aswell as the cannibal . but to return to our purpose . the fourteen day the ship and bark come to the Jesus , bring they news of the recovery of the man , which be not a little to the rejoice of the captain , and the whole company : and so then altogether they keep on their way along the coast of Florida , and the fifteen day come to a anchor , and so from six and twenty degree to thirty degree and a half , where the french man abide , range all the coast along , seek for fresh water , anker every night , because we will overshoot no place of fresh water , and in the day time the captain in the ship pinnace sail along the shore , go into every creek , speak with diverse of the floridians , because he will understand where the french man inhabit ; and not find they in eight and twenty degree , as it be declare unto he , marvel thereat , and never leave sail along the coast till he find they , who inhabit in a river , by they call the river of May , and stand in thirty degree and better . in range this coast along , the captain find it to be all a island , and therefore it be all low land , and very scant of fresh water , but the country be marvellous sweet , with both marsh and meadow ground , and goodly wood among . there they find sorel to grow as abundant as grass , and where their house be , great store of maiz and mill , and grape of great bigness , but of taste much like our english grape . also deer great plenty , which come upon the sand before they . their house be not many together , for in one house a hundred of they do lodge ; they be make much like a great barne , and in strength not inferior to we , for they have stanchion and rafter of whole tree , and be cover with palmito-leaves , have no place divide , but one small room for their king and queen . in the midst of this house be a hearth , where they make great fire all night , and they sleep upon certain piece of wood m. Hawkins range all the coast of Florida . the river of May . Florida find to be cut into island . Sorell . the commodity of Florida . the house of Florida . [ HL 5I7 - ] hew in for the bow of their back , and another place make high for their head , which they put one by another all along the wall on both side . in their house they remain only in the night , and in the day they desire the field , where they dress their meat , and make provision for victual , which they provide only for a meal from hand to mouth . there be one the\ manner of thing to be marvel at , for the make of their fire , ^in^lorida ™ and not one^7 ^7 ^ut a^so negro do the same , ” m a‘ which be make only by two stick , rub they one against another : and this they may do in any place they come , where they find stick sufficient for the purpose . in their apparel the man only use dear skin , wherewith some only cover their privy member , othersome use the same as garment to cover they before and behind ; which skin be paint , some yellow and red , some black and russet , and every man accord to his own fancy . they do not omit to paint their body also with curious knot , or antic work , as every man in his own fancy devise , which paint , to make it continue the better , they use with a thorn to prick their flesh , and dent in the same , whereby the paint may have better hold . in their war they use a slight colour of paint their face , thereby to make themselves show the more fierce ; which after their war end , they wash away again . in their war they use bow and arrow , whereof their bow be make of a kind of yew , but black then we , and for the most part pass the strength of the negro or Indians , for it be not great inferior to we : their arrow be also of a great length , but yet of reed like other Indians , but vary in two point , both in length and also for nock and feather , which the other lack , whereby they shoot very steady : the head of the same be viper tooth , bone of fish , flint stone , pike point of knife , which they have get of the french man , break the same , and put the point of they in their arrow head : some of they have their head of silver , othersome that have want of these , put in a kind of hard wood , notch , which pierce as far as any of the rest . in their fight , be in the wood , they use a marvellous policy for their own safeguard , which be by clasp a tree in their arm , and yet shoot notwithstanding : this policy they use with the french man in their fight , whereby it appear that they be people of some policy : and although they be call by the Spaniard Gente triste , that be to say , bad people , mean thereby , that they be not man of capacity : yet have the french man find they so witty in their answer , that by the captain own report , a counseller with we can not give a more profound reason . the woman also for their apparel use paint skin , but most of they gown of moss , somewhat long than our moss , which they sow together artificial , and make the same surplesse wise , wear their hair down to their shoulder , like the Indians . in this river of may aforesaid , the captain enter with his pinnace , find a french ship of fourscore tun , and two pinnace of fifteen tun a piece , by she , and speak with the keeper thereof , they tell he of a fort the french two league up , which they have build , in which their fa ? - . captain monsieur Laudonniere be , with certain soul - £aujmnierei diers therein . to who our captain send to understand of a watering-place , where he may convenient take it in , and to have licence for the same , he straight , because there be no convenient place but up the river five league , where the water be fresh , do send he a pilot for the more expedition thereof , to bring in one of his bark , which go in with other boat provide for the same purpose , anchor before the fort , into the which our captain go ; where he be by the generali , with other captain and soldier , very gentle entertained , who declare unto he the time of their be there , which be fourteen month , with the extremity they be drive to for want of victual , have bring very little with they ; in which place they be two hundred man at their first come , have in short space eat all the maiz they can buy of the inhabitant about they , and therefore be drive certain of they to serve a king of the floridians against other his enemy , for mill and other victual : which have get , can not serve they , be so many , so long bread make a time : but want come upon they in such sort , that ofakorn . be fajne to gather acorn , which be stamp small , and often wash , to take away the bitterness of they , they do use for bread , eat withal sundry time , root , whereof they find many good and wholesome , and such as serve rather for medicine then for meat alone . but this hardness not content some of they , who will not take the pain so much as to fish in the river before their door , but will have all thing put in their mouth , they do rebel against the captain , take away first his armour , and afterward imprison he : and so to the number of fourscore of they , depart with a bark and a pinnace , spoil their store of victuali , and take away a great part thereof with they , and so go to the island of Hispaniola and Jamaica a rove , where they spoil and peel the Spaniard ; and have take two caravel [ three . 518. ] lade with wine and casavi , which be a bread make of root , and much other victual and treasure , have not the grace to depart therewith , but be of such haughty stomach , that they think their force to be such that no man dare meddle with they , and so keep harbour in Jamaica , go daily ashore at their pleasure . but God which will not suffer such evil doer unpunished , do indurate their heart in such sort , that they linger the time so long , that a ship and galliass be make out of Santa Domingo come thither into the harbour , and take twenty of they , whereof the most part be hang , and the rest carry into Spain , and some ( to the number of five and twenty ) escape in the pinnace , and come to Florida ; where at their land they be put in prison , and incontinent four of the chief being condemn , at the request of the soldier , do pass the harquebusier , and then be hang upon a gibbet . this lack of threescore man be a great discourage and weaken to the rest , for they be the best soldier that they have : for they have now make the inhabitant weary of they by their daily crave of maiz , have no ware leave to content they withal , and therefore be enforce to rob they , and to take away their victual perforce , which be the occasion that the floridians ( not well content therewith ) do take certain of their company in the wood , and slay they ; whereby there grow great war betwixt they and the Frenchman : and therefore they be but a few in number dare not venture abroad , but at such time as they be enforce thereunto for want of food to do the same : and go twenty harquebusier in a company , be set upon by eighteen king , have seven or eight hundred man , which with one of their bow slay one of their man , and hurt a dozen , and drive they all down to their boat ; who policy in fight be to be marvel at : for have shoot at diverse of their body which be arm , and perceive that their arrow do not prevail against the same , they shoot at their face and leg , which be the place that the Frenchman be hurt in . thus the Frenchman return , be in ill case by the hurt of their man , have not above forty soldier leave unhurt , whereby they may ill make any more invasion upon the floridians , and keep their fort withal : which they must have be drive unto , have not God send we thither for their succour ; for they have not above ten day victuali leave before we come . in which perplexity our captain see they , spare they out of his ship twenty barrel of meal , and four pipe of bean , with diverse other victual and necessary which he may convenient spare : and to help they the better homeward , whither they be bind before our come , at their request 55 the occasion of the fall out with the floridians . the french great relieve by m. Hawkins . we spare they one of our bark of fifty tun . notwithstanding the great want that the Frenchman have , the ground do yield victual sufficient , if they will have take pain to get the same ; but they be soldier , desire to live by the sweat of other man brow : for while they have peace with the floridians , they have fish sufficient , by wear which they make to catch the same : but when they grow to war , the floridians take away the same again , and then will not the Frenchman take the pain to make any more . the ground yield natural grape in great store , for in twenty the time that the Frenchman be there , they make 20 hogshead of it hogshead of wine . also it yield root pass good , Florida like dear marvellous store , with diverse other beast , and to the wine of fowl , serviceable to the use of man . Theise be thing Orleans . wherewith a man may live , have corn or maiz wherewith to make bread : for maiz make good savoury bread , and cake as fine as flower . also it make good meal , beat and sodden with water , and eat like pap wherewith we feed child . it make also good beverage , sodden in water , and nourishable ; which the Frenchman do use to drink of in the morning , and it assuage their thirst , so that they have no need to drink all the day after . and this maiz be the great lack they have , because they have no labourer to sow the same , labourer and therefore to they that shall inhabit the land it be “ inhabit new to have labourer to till and sow the ground : for country . they have victual of their own , whereby they neither rob nor spoil the inhabitant , may live not only quiet with they , who natural be more desirous of peace then of war , but also shall have abundance of victual proffer they for nothing : for it be with they as it be with one of we , when we see another man ever take away from we , although we have enough beside , yet than we think all too little for our self : for sure we have hear the Frenchman report , and i know it by the Indians , that a very little content they : for the indian with the head of maiz roast , will travel a whole 56 day , and when they be at the Spaniard find , they give they nothing but sodden herb and maiz : and in this order i see threescore of they feed , who be lade with ware , and come fifty league off . the floridians when they travel , have a kind of herb tobacco and the dry , who with a cane and a earthen cup in the end , at virtue with fire , and the dry herb put together , do suck * through the cane the smoke thereof , which smoke satisfi their hunger , and therewith they live four or five day without meat or drink , and this all the Frenchman use for this purpose : yet do they hold opinion withal , that it cause water and flame to void from their stomach . the commodity of this land be more than be yet know to any man : for beside the land it self , whereof there be more than any king Christian be able to inhabit , it flourish with meadow , pasture ground , with wood of cedar and cypress , and other sort , as better can not be in the world . they have for apothecary herb , tree , root and gum great store , as storax liquida , turpintine , gum , myrrh , and frankincense , with many other , whereof i know not the name . colour both red , black , yellow , and russet , very perfect , wherewith they so paint their body , and dear skin which they wear about they , that with water it neither fade away , nor alter colour . gold and silver they want not : for at the frenchmens first come thither they have the same offer they for little or nothing , for they receive for a hatchet two pound weight of gold , because they know not the estimation thereof : but the soldier be greedy of the same , do take it from they , give they nothing for it : the which they perceive , that both the Frenchman do great esteem it , and also do rigorous deal with they , by take the same away from they , at last will not be know they have any more , neither dare they be the same for fear of be take away : so that save at their first come , they can get none of they : and how they come by this gold and silver the 57 [ three . 519. ] the variety of commodity in Florida . colour . gold and silver . this copper be find perfect gold , call by the savage , a.d. the english voyage 1565. French man know not as yet , but by guess , who have travel to the southwest of the cape , have find the same dangerous , by mean of sundry bank , as we also have find the same : and there find mast which be wrack of Spaniard come from Mexico , judge that they have get treasure by they . for it be most true that diverse wrack have be make of Spaniard , have much treasure : for the Frenchman have travel to the capeward a hundred and fifty two span - mile , do find two Spaniard with the floridians , which yard live they bring afterward to their fort , whereof one be floiidaans . '^ in a caravel come from the Indies , which be cast away fourteen year ago , and the other twelve year ; of who fellow some escape , othersome be slay by the inhabitant . it seem they have estimation of piece of gold their gold and silver , for it be wrought flat and grave , gr^en which they wear about their neck ; othersome make you on tan . rounj a pancake , with a hole in the midst , to bolster up their breast withal , because they think it a deformity to have great breast . as for mine either of gold or silver , the Frenchman can hear of none they have upon the island , but of copper , whereof as yet also they have not make the proof , because they be but few man : but it be not unlike , but that in the main where be high hill , may be gold and silver aswell as in Mexico , because it be all one main . the Frenchman obtain pearl of they of great bigness , but they be black , by mean of roast of they , Sycroa phyra . for they do not fish for they as the Spaniard doe , but for their meat : for the Spaniard use to keep daily afish some two or three hundred Indians , some of they that be of choice a thousand : and their order be to go in canoas , or rather great pinnace , with thirty man in a piece , whereof the one half , or most part pearl . be diverse , the rest do open the same for the pearl : for it be not suffer that they shall use drag , for that will bring they out of estimation , and mar the bed of they . the oyster which have the small 58 sort of pearl be find in seven or eight fathom water , but the great in eleven or twelve fathom . the floridians have piece of unicorn home which unicorn they wear about their neck , whereof the Frenchman obtain many piece . of those unicorn they have many ; for that they do affirm it to be a beast with ma . one horn , which come to the river to drink , put the same into the water before he drink . of this unicorns horn there be of our company , that have get the same of the Frenchman , bring home thereof to show . it be therefore to be presuppose that there be more commodity aswell as that , which for want of time , and people sufficient to inhabit the same , can not yet come to light : but i trust God will reveal the same before it be long , to the great profit of they that shall take it in hand . of beast in this country beside beast . dear , fox , hare , polecat , cony , ounce , and leopard , i be not able certain to say : but it be think that there be lion and tiger as well as unicorn ; lion especial ; if it be true that be say , of the enmity between they and the unicorn : for there be no beast but have his enemy , as the cony the polecat , a sheep the wolf , the elephant the rinoceros ; and so of other beast the like : insomuch , that whereas the one be , the other can not be miss . And see i have make mention of the beast of this country , it shall not be from my purpose to speak also of the venomous beast , as crocodile , whereof there be great abundance , adder of great bigness , whereof our man kill some of a yard and a half long . also i hear a miracle of one of these adder , upon the which a falcon seize , the say adder falcon in do clasp her tail about she ; which the french captain flori^a-seeing , come to the rescue of the falcon , and take she slay the adder ; and this falcon be wild , he do reclaim she , and keep she for the space of two month , at which time for very want of meat he be fain to cast she off . on these adder the Frenchman do feed , to no little admiration of we , and affirm they the english voyage same to be a delicate meat . and the captain of the Frenchman see also a serpent with three head and four foot , of the bigness of a great spaniel , which for want of a harquebuz he dare not attempt to slay . of fish also they have in the river , pike , roch , salmon , trout , and diverse other small fish , and of great fish , some of the length of a man and long , be of bigness accord , have a snout much like a sword of a yard long . there be also of sea fish , which we see come along the coast fly , which be of the bigness of a smell , the big sort whereof have four wing , but the other have but two : of these we see come out of Guinea a hundred in a company , which be chase by the gilt-head , otherwise call the bonito , do to avoid they the better , take their flight out of the water , but yet be they not able to fly far , because of the dry of their wing , which serve they not to fly but when they be moist , and therefore when they can fly no further they fall into the water , and have wet their wing , take a new flight again . Theise bonito be of bigness like a carp , and in colour like a makarell , but it be the swift fish in swim that be , and follow her prey very fierce , not only in the water , but also out of the water : for as the fly fish take her flight , so do this bonito leap after they , and take they sometime above the water . there be some of those bonito , which be gall by a fisgig , do follow our ship come out of Guinea 500 league . there be a sea-foul also that chase this fly fish aswell as the bonito : for as the fly fish take her flight , so do this foul pursue to take she , which to behold be a great pleasure than hawk , for both the flight be as pleasant , and also more often than a hundred time : for the fowl can fly no way , but one or other light in her paw , the number of they be so abundant . there be a innumerable young fry of these fly fish , which common keep about the ship , and be not so big as butterfly , and yet by fly do avoid the unsatiableness of the bonito . of the big sort of these fish we take many , which both night and day fly into the sail of our ship , and there be not one of they which be not worth a bonito : for be put upon a hook drable in the water , the bonito will leap thereat , and so be take . also , we take many with a white cloth make fast to a hook , which be tie so short in the water , that it may leap out and in , the greedy bonito think it to be a fly fish leap thereat , and so be deceive . we take also dolphin dolphin . which be of very goodly colour and proportion to behold , and no less delicate in taste . fowl also there be many , both upon land and upon sea : but concern they on the land i be not able to name they , because my abode be there so short . but for the fowl of the fresh river , these two i note to be the chief , whereof the Flemengo be one , have all Flemings . red feather , and long red leg like a herne , a neck accord to the bill , red , whereof the upper neb hang a inch over the nether ; and a egript , which the egript . be all white as the swan , with leg like to a hearn-shaw , and of bigness accord , but it have in her tail feather of so fine a plume , that it pass the ostrich his feather . of the sea-foul above all other not common in England , i note the pellicane , which the pellicane . be feign to be the love bird that be ; which rather than her young shall want , will spare her heart blood out of her belly : but for all this lovingness she be very deform to behold ; for she be of colour russet : notwithstanding in guinea i have see of they as white as a swan , have leg like the same , and a body like a hearne , with a long neck , and a thick long beak , from the nether jaw whereof down to the breast pass a skin of such a bigness , as be able to receive a fish as big as one thigh , and this her big throat and long bill do make she seem so ugly . here i have declare the estate of Florida , and the commodity therein to this day know , which although it may seem unto some , by the mean that the plenty of gold and silver , be not so abundant as in other place , that the cost bestow upon the same mean to will not be aye to quit the charge : yet be i of the °p’ni°n > that by that which i have see in other Florida and island of the Indians , where such increase of cattle Virginia . have be , that of twelve head of beast in five and twenty year , do in the hide of they raise a thousand pound profit yearly , that the increase of cattle only will raise profit sufficient for the same : for we may consider , if so small a portion do raise so much gain in such short time , what will a great do in many year ? and sure i may this affirm , that the ground of the indian for the breed of cattle , be not in any point to be compare to this of Florida , which all the year long be so green , as any time in the summer with we : which sure be not to be marvel at , see the country stand in so watery a climate : for once a day without fail they have a shower of rain ; which by mean of the country it self , which be dry , and more fervent hot than we , do make all thing to flourish therein . and because there be not the thing we all seek for , be rather desirous of present gain , i do therefore affirm the attempt thereof to be more requisite for a prince , who be of power able to go through with the same , rather than for any subject . from thence we depart the 28 of July , upon our [ three . 521. ] voyage homeward , have there all thing as may be most convenient for our purpose : and take leave of the Frenchman that there still remain , who with diligence determine to make as great speed after , as they can . thus by mean of contrary wind oftentimes , we prolong our voyage in such manner that victual scant with we , so that we be diverse time ( or rather the most part ) in despair of ever come home , have not God of his goodness better 62 provide for we , than our deserve . in which state of great misery , we be provoke to call upon he by fervent prayer , which move he to hear we , so that we have a prosperous wind , which do set we so far shoot , as to be upon the bank of newfound land , on saint bartholomews eve , and we sound thereupon , find ground at a hundred and thirty fathom , be that day somewhat becalm , and take a great number of fresh codfish , which great relieve we : and be very glad thereof , the next day we depart , and have linger little gale for the space of four or five day , at the end of which we see a couple of french ship , and have of they so much fish as will serve we plentiful for all the rest of the way , the captain pay for the same both gold and silver , to the just value thereof , unto the chief owner of the say ship , but they not look for any thing at all , be glad in themselves to meet with such good entertainment at sea , as they have at our hand . after which departure from they , with a good large wind the twenty of September we come to Padstow in Cornwall , God be thank , ThuirarrwaU in safety , with the loss of twenty person in all the tn p^5*0 ™ ™ voyage , and with great profit to the venture or the say eptemi , er^ voyage , as also to the whole realm , in bring home 1565. both gold , silver , pearl and other jewel great store . his name therefore be praise for evermore . amen . the name of certain gentleman that be in this voyage . ' m. John Hawkins . m. John Chester , { sir William Chesters son . m. Anthony Parkhurst . " m. Fitzwilliam . m. Thomas Woorley . m. Edward Lacie , { with diverse other . the register and true account of all herein express have be approve by i John spark the young , who go upon the same voyage , and write the same . it the discovery of Guiana . n Thursday the 6. of February in the year 1595. we depart England , and the Sunday follow have sight of the north cape of Spain , the wind for the most part continue prosperous : we pass in sight of the burling , and the rock , and so onward for the canary , and fall with Fuerte ventura the 17 of the same month , where we spend two or three day , and relieve our com-348 pany with some fresh meat . from thence we coast by the grand Canaria , and so to tenerif , and stay there for the lion whelp your lordship ship , and for captain Amy as Preston and the rest . but when after 7. or 8. day we find they not , we depart and direct our course for Trinidad with my own ship , and a small theyleof bark of captain cross only ( for we have before lose Trinitia , i-sight of a small Galego on the coast of Spain , which come with we from Plymouth : ) we arrive at Trinidad the 22. of march , cast anchor at point Curiapan , which the Spaniard call punta de Gallo , which be situate in 8. degree or there about : we abide there 4. or 5. day , and in all that time we come not to the speech of any indian or Spaniard : on the coast we see a fire , as we sail from the point Caroa towards Curiapan , but for fear of the Cunapan . Spaniards none dare come to speak with we . i my self coast it in my barge close aboard the shore and land in every cove , the better to know the island , while the ship keep the channel . from Curiapan after a few day we turn up Northeast to recover that place which the Spaniard call Puerto de los espannole , and the inhabitant Conquerabia , and as before ( revictual my barge ) i leave the ship and keep by the shore , the better to come to speech with some of the inhabitant , and also to understand the river , water place , and port of the island , which ( as it be rude do ) my purpose be to send your lordship after a few day . from Curiapan i come to a port and seat of Indians call Parico , where we Parico . find a fresh water river , but see no people . from thence i row to another port , call by the natural Piche , and by the Spaniard Tierra de Brea : in the way Tierra de between both be diverse little brook of fresh water and one salt river that have store of oyster upon the branch of the tree , and be very salt and well taste . all their oyster grow upon those bough and spray , and not on the ground : the like be common see in other place of the west Indies , and else where . this tree be describe by Andrew Thevet in his french 349 antarctic , and the form figure in the book as a plant very strange , and by Pliny in his 12. book of he naturali history . but in this island , as also in Guiana there be very many of they . at this point call Tierra de Brea or Piche there be that abundance of stone pitch , that all the ship of the world may be therewith load from thence , and we make trial of it in trim our ship to be most excellent good , and melt not with the sun as the pitch of Norway , and therefore for ship trade the south part [ three . 632. ] very profitable . from thence we go to the mountain foot call anniperima , and so pass the river Carone on which the spanish city be seat , we meet with our ship at Puerto de los Espannolles or Conquerabia . this island of Trinidad have the form of a sheephook , and be but narrow , the north part be very mountainous , the soil be very excellent and will bear sugar , ginger , or any other commodi tie that the Indies yield . it have store of dear , wild pork , fruit , fish and foul : it have also for bread sufficient maiz , cassavi , and of those root and fruit which be common every where in the west Indies . it have diverse beast which the Indies have not : the Spaniard confess that they find grain of gold in some of the river , but they have a purpose to enter Guiana ( the magazin of all rich metal ) care not to spend time in the search thereof any further . this island be call by the people thereof cairi , jand in it be diverse nation : those about Parico be call laio , those at Punta de Carao be of the Arwacas , and between Carao and Curiapan they be call Salvajos , between Carao and Punta de galera be the Nepojos , and those about the spanish city term themselves carinepagote : of the rest of the nation , and of other port and river i leave to speak here , be impertinent to my purpose , and mean to describe they as they be situate in the particular plot and description of the island , three part whereof i coast with my barge , that i may the better describe it . 35° meet with the ship at Puerta de los espannole , we find at the land place a company of Spaniards who keep a guard at the descent , and they offer a sign of peace , i send captain Whiddon to speak with they , who afterward to my great grief i leave bury in the say island after my return from Guiana , the death of be a man most honest and valiant . the Spaniard seem to be desirous to trade with we , and to enter into term of peace , more for doubt of their own strength then for aught else , and in the end upon pledge , some of they come aboard : the same evening there stale also aboard we in a small Canoa two Indians , the one of they be a casique or lord of the people call Cantyman , who have the year before bene with captain Whiddon , and be of his acquaintance . by this Cantyman we understand what strength the Spaniard have , how far it be to their city , and of don Antonio de Berreo the governor , who be say to be slay in his second attempt of Guiana , but be not . while we remain at Puerto de los espannole some Spaniards come aboard we to buy linen of the company , and such other thing as they want , and also to view our ship and company , all which i entertain kind and feast after our manner : by mean whereof i learn of one and another as much of the estate of Guiana as i can , or as they know , for those poor soldier have be many year without wine , a few draught make they merry , in which mood they vaunt of Guiana and of the riches thereof , and all what they know of the way and passage , my self seem to purpose nothing less than the entrance or discovery thereof , but breed in they a opinion that i be bind only for the relief of those English which i have plant in Virginia , whereof the bruit be come among they ; which i have perform in my return , if extremity of weather have not force i from the say coast . 351 8 Englishman betray by Antony Berreo . the english voyage i find occasion of stay in this place for two cause : the one be to be revenge of Berreo , who the year before 1594. have betray eight of captain Whiddons man , and take they while he depart from they to seek the Edward Bonaventure , which arrive at Trinidad the day before from the east Indies : in who absence Berreo send a Canoa aboard the pinnace only with Indians and dog invite the company to go with they into the wood to kill a dear , who like wise man in the absence of their captain follow the indian , but be no soon one harquebus shoot from the shore , but berreos soldier lie in ambush have they all , notwithstanding that he have give his word to captain Whiddon that they shall take water and wood safe : the other cause of my stay be , for that by discourse with the Spaniard i daily learn more and more of Guiana , of the river and passage , and of the enterprise of Berreo , by what mean or fault he fail , and how he mean to prosecute the same . while we thus spend the time i be assure by another casique of the north side of the island , that Berreo have send to Margarita and Cumana for soldier , mean to have give i a cassado at part , if it have be possible . for although he have give order through all the island that no indian shall come aboard to trade with i upon pain of hang and quarter , ( have execute two of they for the same , which i afterward find ) yet every night there come some with most lamentable complaint of his cruelty , how he have divide the island and give to every soldier a part , that he make the ancient casique which be lord of the country to be their slave , that he keep they in chain , and drop their naked body with burn bacon , and such other torment , which i find afterward to be true : for in the city after i enter the same there be 5. of you lord or little king ( which they call casique in the west Indies ) in one chain 352 1595-almost dead of famine , and waste with torment : these [ he . 633. ] be call in their own language Acarewana , and now of late since english , french and spanish be come among they , they call themselves captain , because they perceive that the chief of every ship be call by that name . those five captain in the chain be call wannawanare , Carroaori , maquarima , tarroo-panama , and aterima . so as both to be revenge of the former wrong , as also consider that to enter Guiana by small boat , to depart 400. or 500 mile from my ship , and to leave a garrison in my back interest in the same enterprise , who also daily expect supply out of Spain , i shall have savour very much of the ass : and therefore take a time of most advantage i set upon the corpse du guard in the evening , and have put they to the sword , send captain calfield onward with 60. soldier , and my self follow with 40. more and so take their new city which they call S. Joseph by break of day : they abide the city of not any fight after a few shot , and all be dismiss \'a^e^ntm but only Berreo and his companion , i bring they Berreo with i aboard , and at the instance of the Indians , i prisoner . set their new city of saint Joseph on fire . the same day arrive captain George Gifford with your lordship ship , and captain Keymis who i lose on the coast of Spain , with the Galego , and in they diverse gentleman and other , which to our little army be a great comfort and supply . we then haste away towards our purpose discovery , and first i call all the captain of the island together that be enemy to the Spaniard ; for there be some which Berreo have bring out of other country , and plant there to eat out and waste those that be naturali of the place , and by my indian interpreter , which i carry out of England , i make they understand that i be the servant of a queen , who be the great casique of the north , and a virgin , and have more casiqui under she then there be tree in ten 353 z sir W. Ralegh pass 400. mile towards Guiana . the english voyage that island : that she be a enemy to the Castellani in respect of their tyrannic and oppression , and that she deliver all such nation about she , as be by they oppress , and have free all the coast of the northern world from their servitude , have send i to free they also , and withal to defend the country of Guiana from their invasion and conquest . i show they her majesty picture which they so admire and honour , as it have be easy to have bring they idolatrous thereof . the like and a more large discourse i make to the rest of the nation both in my pass to Guiana , and to those of the border , so as in that part of the world her majesty be very famous and admirable , who they now call Ezrabeta Cassipuna Aquerewana , which be as much as Elizabeth , the great princess or great commander . this do we leave Puerto de los espannole , and return to Curiapan , and have Berreo my prisoner i gather from he as much of Guiana as he know . This Berreo be a gentleman well descend , and have long serve the spanish king in Milan , Naples , the low country and elsewhere , very valiant and liberali , and a gentleman of great assuredness , and of a great heart : i use he accord to his estate and worth in all thing i can , accord to the small mean i have . i send captain Whiddon the year before to get what knowledge he can of Guiana , and the end of my journey at this time be to discover and enter the same , but my intelligence be far from truth , for the country be situate above 600. English mile further from the sea , than i be make believe it have be , which afterward understand to be true by Berreo , i keep it from the knowledge of my company , who else will never have be bring to attempt the same : of which 600. mile i pass 400. leave my ship so far from i at anchor in the sea , which be more of desire to perform that discovery , then of reason , especial have 354 * 595-such poor and weak vessel to transport our self in ; for in the bottom of a old Galego which i cause to be fashion like a galley , and in one barge , two whirry , and a shipboat of the lion whelp , we carry 100 person and their victual for a month in the same , be all drive to lie in the rain and weather , in the open air , in the burn sun , and upon the hard board , and to dress our meat , and to carry all manner of furniture in they , wherewith they be so pester and unsavoury , that what with victual be most fish , with wet clothes of so many man thrust together , and the heat of the sun , i will undertake there be never any prison in England , that can be find more unsavoury and loathsome , especial to my self , who have for many year before be diet and care for in a sort far more differ . if captain Preston have not be persuade that he shall have come too late to Trinidad to have find we there ( for the month be expire which i promise to tarry for he there ere he can recover the coast of Spain ) but that it have please God he may have join with we , and that we have enter the country but some ten day soon ere the river be overflow , we have adventure either to have go to the great city of Manoa , or at least take so many of the other city [ in . 634. i and town near at hand , as will have make a royal return : but it please not God so much to favour i at this time : if it shall be my lot to prosecute the same , i shall willing spend my life therein , and if any else shall enable thereunto , and conquer the same , i assure he thus much , he shall perform more than ever be do in Mexico by Cortes , or in Peru by Pizarro , whereof the one conquer the empire of Mutezuma , the other of Guascar , and Atabalipa , and whatsoever prince shall possess it , that prince shall be lord of more gold , and of a more beautiful empire , and of more city and people , then either the king of Spain , or the great Turk . 3S5 but because there may arise many doubt , and how this empire of Guiana be become so populous , and adorn with so many great city , town , temple , and treasure , i think good to make it know , that the emperor now reign be descend from those magnificent prince of Peru , of who large territory , of who policy , conquest , edifice , and riches Pedro de Cieza , Francisco Lopez , and other have write large discourse : for when Francisco Pizarro , Diego Almagro and other conquer the say empire of Peru , and have put to death Atabalipa son to Guaynacapa , which Atabalipa have former cause his elder brother Guascar to be slay , one of the young son of Guaynacapa flee out of Peru , and take with he many thousand of those soldier of the empire call Orejones , and with those and many other which follow he , he vanquish all that tract and valley of America which be situate between the great river of Amazones , and Baraquan , otherwise call Orenoque and Marannon . the empire of Guiana be direct east from Peru towards the sea , and lie under the equinoctial line , and it have more abundance of gold then any part of Peru , and as many or more great city than ever Peru have when it flourish most : it be govern by the same law , and the emperor and people observe the same religion , and the same form and policy in government as be use in Peru , not differ in any part : and i have be the stateliness assure by such of the Spaniard as have see Manoa the of Manoa . Imperial city of Guiana , which the Spaniard call el Dorado , that for the greatness , for the riches , and for the excellent seat , it far exceed any of the world , at least of so much of the world as be know to the spanish nation : it be found upon a lake of salt water of 200. league long like unto mare Caspium . and if we compare Fran. Lopez , it to that of Peru , and but read the report of Francisco LoPez and othersj iter will seem more than credible : and 120* ’ ? because we may judge of the one by the other , i think good to insert part of the 120. chapter of 356 Lopez in his generail history of the Indies , wherein he describe the court and magnificence of Guaynacapa , ancestor to the emperor of Guiana , who very word be these . todo el servicio de sum casa , mesa , y cozina , era de oro , y de piata , y quando menos de plata , y cobre por mass rezio . Tenia en sum recamara estatuas huecas de oro , que parecian gigantes , y las figuras all propio , you tamanno the quanto animales , ave , arbole , y yerva produze la tierra , y de quanto piece cria la mar y aguas de sus reynos . Tenia assi mesmo sogas , costale , cestas , y trox de oro y plata , rimeros de palos de oro , que pareciessen lenna raiada para quemar . en fin no avia cosa en sum tierra , que no la tuviesse de oro contrahecha : in an dizen , que tenian los Ingas un vergel en una Isla cerca de la Puna , donde se yuan a holgar , quando querian mar , que tenia la ortaliza , las flores , y arbole de oro y plata , invention y grandeza hasta entonce nunca vista . Allende de todo esto tenia infinitissima cantitad de plata , y oro por labrar en el Cuzco , que se perdio por la muerte de Guascar , ca los indios lo escondieron , viendo que los espannole se lo tomavan , y embiavan a espanna . that be , all the vessel of his house , table and kitchen be of gold and silver , and the mean of silver and copper for strength and hardness of metal . he have in his wardrobe hollow statue of gold which seem giant , and the figure in proportion and bigness of all the beast , bird , tree , and herb , that the earth bring forth : and of all the fish that the sea or water of his kingdom breed . he have also rope , budget , chest and trough of gold and silver , heap of billet of gold , that seem wood mark out to burn . final , there be nothing in his country , whereof he have not the counterfeit in gold : yea and they say , the Ingas have a garden of pleasure in a island near Puna , where they go to recreate themselves , when they will take the air of the sea , which have all kind of garden-herb , flower and tree of gold and silver , a invention , and magnificence till then never see . beside all this , he have a infinite quantity 357 of silver and gold unwrought in Cuzco which be lose by the death of Guascar , for the indian hide it , see that the Spaniard take it , and send it into Spain . and in the 117. chapter Francisco Pizarro cause the gold and silver of Atabalipa to be weigh after he have take it , which Lopez set down in these word follow . hallaron cinquenta y do will marcos de bvena plata , y un millon y trezientos y veinte y sey will , y quinientos pesos de oro , which be : they find fifty and [ three . 635. ] two thousand mark of good silver , and one million , and three hundred twenty and six thousand and five hundred pezo of gold . now although these report may seem strange , yet if we consider the many million which be daily bring out of Peru into Spain , we may easy believe the same : for we find that by the abundant treasure of that country the spanish king vex all the prince of Europe , and be become , in a few year , from a poor king of Castille , the great monarch of this part of the world , and likely every day to increase , if other prince forslow the good occasion offer , and suffer he to add this empire to the rest , which by far exceed all the rest : if his gold now endanger we , he will then be unresistable . such of the Spaniard as afterward endeavour the conquest thereof ( whereof there have be many , as shall be declare hereafter ) think that this Inga ( of who this emperor now live be descend ) take his way by the river of Amazones , by that branch which be call papamene : for by that way follow Orellana ( by the commandment of Gonzalo Pizarro , in the year 1542 ) who name the river also bear this day , which be also by other call Marannon , although Andrew Thevet do affirm that between Marannon and Amazones there be 120 league : but sure it be that those river have one head and beginning , and the Marannon , which Thevet describe , be but a branch of Amazones or Orellana , of which i will speak more in another place . it be attempt by Ordas ; but it be now little less than 70 358 year since that Diego Ordas , a knight of the order of saint Iago attempt the same : and it be in the year 1542 that Orellana discover the river of Amazones ; but the first that ever see Manoa be Juan Martinez master of the munition to Ordas . at a port call morequito in Guiana there lie at this day a great anchor of Ordas his ship ; and this port be some 300 mile within the land , upon the great river of Orenoque . i rest at this port four day : twenty day after i leave the ship at Curiapan . the relation of this Martinez ( who be the first that discover Manoa ) his success and end be to be see in the chancery of saint Juan de Puerto rico , whereof Berreo have a copy , which appear to be the great encouragement aswell to Berreo as to other that former attempt the discovery and conquest . Orellana after he fail of the discovery of Guiana by the say river of Amazones , pass into Spain , and there obtain a patent of the king for the invasion and conquest , but die by sea about the island , and his fleet sever by tempest , the action for that time proceed not . Diego Ordas follow the enterprise , and depart Spain with 600 soldier , and 30 horse , who arrive on the coast of Guiana , be slay in a mutiny , with the most part of such as favour he , as also of the rebellious part , insomuch as his ship perish , and few or none return , neither be it certain know what become of the say Orgas , until Berreo find the anchor of his ship in the river of Orenoque ; but it be suppose , and so it be write by Lopez , that he perish on the sea , and of other writer diverse conceive and report . and hereof it come that Martin enter so far within the land , and arrive at that city of Inga the emperor ; for it chance that while Ordas with his army rest at the port of morequito ( who be either the first or second that attempt Guiana ) by some negligence , the whole store of powder provide for the service be set on fire ; and Martinez have the chief charge , be condemn by the generali Ordas to be execute forthwith : 359 1595 - Juan Martinez the first that ever see Manoa . Fran. Lopez hist . gen . de las Ind. cap . 87 - diego de Ordas go forth with 600 soldier 1531. Martinez be much favour by the soldier , have all the mean possible procure for his life ; but it can not be obtain in other sort then this : that he shall be set into a canoa alone without any victuali , only with his arm , and so turn loose into the great river : but it please God that the canoa be carry down the stream , and that certain of the guianians meet it the same evening : and have not at any time see any christian , nor any man of that colour , they carry Martinez into the land to be wonder at , and so from the great city town to town , until he come to the great city of of Manoa or Manoa ? the seat and residence of Inga the emperor . °ra ° ' the emperor after he have behold he , know he to be a christian ( for it be not long before that his brethren Guascar and Atabalipa be vanquish by the Spaniard in Peru ) and cause he to be lodge in his palace , and well entertain . he live seven month in Manoa , but be not suffer to wander into the country any where . he be also bring thither all the way blindfold , lead by the Indians , until he come to the entrance of Manoa it self , and be fourteen or fifteen day in the passage . he avow at his death that he enter the city at noon , and then they uncover his face , and that he travel all that day till night through the city , and the next day from sun rise to sun set year he come to the palace of Inga . after that Martinez have live seven month in Manoa , and begin to understand the language of the country , Inga ask he whether he desire to return into his own country , or will willing abide with he . but Martinez not desirous to stay , obtain the favour of Inga to depart : with who he send diverse guianians to conduct he to the river of Orenoque , all load with as much gold as they can carry , which he give to Martinez at his departure : but when he be [ three . 636. ] arrive near the river side , the borderer which be call Orenoqueponi rob he and his Guianians of all the treasure ( the borderer be at that time at war , which Inga have not conquer ) save only of two 360 great bottle of gourd , which be fill with bead of gold curious wrought , which those Orenoqueponi thought have be no other thing than his drink or meat , or grain for food , with which Martinez have liberty to pass : and so in canoas he fall down from the river of Orenoque to Trinidad , and from thence to Margarita , and also to saint Juan de puerto rico , where remain a long time for passage into Spain , he die . in the time of his extreme sickness , and when he be without hope of life , receive the sacrament at the hand of his confessor , he deliver these thing , with the relation of his travel , and also call for his calabaza or gourd of the gold bead which he give to the church and friar to be pray for . This Martinez be he that christen the city of Manoa by the name of el Dorado , and as Berreo inform i , upon this occasion : those Guianians , and also the borderer , and all other in that tract which i have see , be marvellous great drunkard ; in which vice , i think no nation can compare with they : and at the time of their solemn feast , when the emperor carowse with his captain , tributary , and governor , the manner be thus : all those that pledge he be first strip naked , and their body anoint all over with a kind of white balsamum ( by they call curca ) of which there be great plenty , and yet very dear among they , and it be of all other the most precious , whereof we have have good experience : when they be anoint all over , certain servant of the emperor , have prepare gold make into fine powder , blow it through hollow cane upon their naked body , until they be all shine from the foot to the head : and in this sort they sit drink by twenty , and hundred , and continue in drunkenness sometime six or seven day together . the same be also confirm by a letter write into Spain , which be intercept , which m. Robert Duddeley tell i he have see . upon this sight , and for the abundance of gold which he see in the city , the image of gold in their temple , the plate , armour , and shield of gold 361 the author of the name of el Dorado . the substance of this report be in the end of the navigation of the great river of Marannon , write by Gonzalo Fernando de Oviedo to cardinali bembo . Ramusio . fol. ^ . fol . 416. sir Robert Duddeley . which they use in the war , he call it el Dorado . after the death of Ordas and Martinez , and after Orellana , who be employ by Gonzalo Pizarro , one Pedro de Osua a knight of Navarre attempt Guiana , take his way from Peru , and build his brigandine upon a river call Oia , which rise to the southward of Quito , and be very great . this river fall into Amazones , by which Osua with his company descend , and come out of that province which be call Mutylonez : and it seem to i that this empire be reserve for her majesty and the english nation , by reason of the hard success which all these and other Spaniard find in attempt the same , whereof i will speak brief , though impertinent in some read sort to my purpose . This Pedro de Osua have among ^An^ta h*s troop a Biscain , call Agiri , a man mean bear , ' who bear no other office than a sergeant or alferez : but after certain month , when the soldier be grieve with travel , and consume with famine , and that no entrance can be find by the branch or body of Amazones , this Agiri raise a mutiny , of which he make himself the head , and so prevail , as he put Osua to the sword , and all his follower , take on he the whole charge and commandment , with a purpose not only to make himself emperor of Guiana , but also of Peru , and of all that side of the west Indies : he have of his party seven hundred soldier , and of those many promise to draw in other captain and company , to deliver up town and fort in Peru : but neither find by you say river any passage into Guiana , nor any possibility to return towards Peru by the same Amazon , by reason that you descent of the river make so great a current , he be enforce to disemboque at the mouth of the say Amazones , which can not be less than a thousand league from the place where they embark : from thence he coast the land till he arrive at Margarita to the north of Mompatar , which be at this day call Puerto de Tyranno , for that he there slay don Juan de villa Andreda , governor of Margarita , who be father to don 362 Juan Sarmiento , governor of Margarita when sir John Burgh land there , and attempt the island . Agiri put to the sword all other in the island that refuse to be of his party , and take with he certain Simerones , and other desperate companion . from thence he go to Cumana , and there slay the governor , and deal in all as at Margarita : he spoil all the coast of Caracas , and the province of Venezuela , and of Rio de la hacha ; and as i remember , it be the same year that sir John Hawkins sail to saint Juan de ullua in the Jesus of Lubeck : for himself tell i that he meet with such a one upon the coast that rebel , and have sail down all the river of Amazones . Agiri from thence land about sancta Marta , and sack it also , put to death so many as refuse to be his follower , purpose to invade Nuevo reyno de Granada , and to sack Pamplon , Merida , Lagrita , Tunxa , and the rest of the city of Nuevo reyno , and from thence again to enter Peru : but in a fight in the say Nuevo reyno he be overthrow , and find no way to escape , he first put to the sword his own child , foretell they that they shall not live to be defame or upbraid by the Spaniard after his death , who will have term they the child of a traitor or tyrant ; and that sithence he can not make they prince , he will yet deliver they from shame and reproach . Theise be the end and tragedy of Ordas , Martinez , Orellana ; Ozua , and Agiri . also soon after Ordas follow Jeronimo Ortal de Saragossa with 130 soldier , who fail his entrance by sea , be cast with the current on the coast of Paria , and people about saint Miguel de Neveri . it be then attempt by don Pedro de Silva , a portague of the family of Ruigomes de Silva , and by the favour which ruigome have with the king , he be set out , but he also shoot wide of the mark ; for be depart from Spain with his fleet , he enter by Marannon and Amazones , where by the nation of the river , and by the Amazon he be utter overthrow , and himself and all his 363 A.D. 1595-the voyage of sirlohnDurgh to the west Indies . [ HL 637. ] 1534-gomar . cap . 84. in 86. don Pedro de Silva . don Gonzales Xlmenes de Casada . army defeat , only seven escape , and of those but two return . after he come Pedro Hernandez de Serpa , and land at Cumana in the west Indies , take his journey by land towards Orenoque , which may be some 120 league : but year he come to the border of the say river , he be set upon by a nation of the indian call Wikiri , and overthrow in such sort , that of 300 soldier , horseman , many Indians , and negro , there return but 18. other affirm , that he be defeat in the very entrance of Guiana , at the first civil town of the empire call Macureguarai . captain Preston in take saint Iago de Leon ( which be by he and his company very resolute perform , be a great town , and far within the land ) hold a gentleman prisoner , who die in his ship , that be one of the company of Hernandez de Serpa , and save among those that escape , who witness what opinion be hold among the Spaniard thereabouts of the great riches of Guiana , and el Dorado the city of Inga . another Spaniard be bring aboard i by captain Preston , who tell i in the hear of himself and diverse other gentleman , that he meet with berreos campmaster at Caracas , when he come from the border of Guiana , and that he see with he forty of most pure plate of gold curious wrought , and sword of Guiana deck and inlay with gold , feather garnish with gold , and diverse rarity which he carry to the spanish king . after Hernandez de Serpa , it be undertake by the adolantado , don Gonzales Ximenes de Casada , who be one of the chief in the conquest of Nuevo reino , who daughter and heir don Antonio de Berreo marry . Gonzales seek the passage also by the river call Papamene , which rise by Quito in Peru , and run southeast 100 league , and then fall into Amazones , but he also fail the entrance , return with the loss of much labour and cost . i take one captain George a Spaniard that follow Gonzales in this enterprise . 364 1595-Gonzales give his daughter to Berreo , take his oath Antonio and honour to follow the enterprise to the last of his berreo-substance and life , who since , as he have swear to i , have spend 300000 ducat in the same , and yet never can enter so far into the land as my self with that poor troop or rather a handful of man , be in all about 100 gentleman , soldier , rower , boat-keeper , boy , and of all sort : neither can any of the forepass undertaker , nor Berreo himself , discover the country , till now late by conference with a ancient king call Carapana , he get the true light thereof : for Berreo come about 1500 mile year he understand aught , or can find any passage or entrance into any part thereof , yet he have experience of all these forename , and diverse other , and be persuade of their error and mistake . Berreo seek it by the river Cassamar , which fall into a great river call Pato : Pato fall into Meta , and Meta into Baraquan , which be also call Orenoque . he take his journey from Nuevo reyno de Granada where he dwell , have the inheritance of Gonzales Ximenes in those part : he be follow with 700 horse , he drive with he 1000 head of cattle , he have also many woman , Indians , and slave . how all these river cross and encounter , how the country lie and be border , the passage of Ximines and Berreo , my own discovery , and the way that i enter , with all the rest of the nation and river , your lordship shall receive in a large chart or map , which i have not yet finish , and which i shall most humble pray your lordship to secret , and not to suffer it to pass your own hand ; for by a draught thereof all may be prevent by other nation : for i know it be this very year seek by the french , although by the way that they now take , i fear it not much . it be also tell i year i depart England , that Villiers a new wrick the admiral be in preparation for the plant of Amazones , to which river the french have make diverse ^v^ofAm voyage , and return much gold , and other rarity . i m “ 0 365 ’ speak with a captain of a french ship that come from thence , his ship ride in Falmouth the same year that my ship come first from Virginia . there be another this year in Helford that also come from thence , and have be fourteen month at a anchor in Amazones , which be both very rich . [ Iii . 638. ] although , as i be persuade , Guiana can be enter that way , yet no doubt the trade of gold from thence pass by branch of river into the river of Amazones , and so it do on every hand far from the country it self ; for those Indians of Trinidad have plate of gold from Guiana , and those canibal of Dominica which dwell in the island by which our ship pass yearly to the west Indies , also the Indians of Paria , those Indians call Tuearis , Chochi , apotomio , Cumanagotos , and all those other nation inhabit near about the mountain that run from Paria through the province of Venesuela , and in Maracapana , and the canibal of Guanipa , the Indians call Assawai , Coaca , aiai , and the rest ( all which shall be describe in my description as they be situate ) have plate of gold of Guiana . and upon the river of Amazones , Thevet write that the people wear croissant of gold , for of that form the guianians most common make they : so as from Dominica to Amazones , which be above 250 league , all the chief Indians in all part wear of those plate of Guiana . undoubted those that trade Amazones return much gold , which ( as be aforesaid ) come by trade from Guiana , by some branch of a river that fall from the country into Amazones , and either it be by the river which pass by the nation call tisnado , or by Carepuna . i make inquiry among the most ancient and best travel of the Orenoqueponi , and i have knowledge of all the river between Orenoque and Amazones , and be very desirous to understand the truth of those warlike woman , because of some it be believe , of other not . and though i digress from my purpose , yet i will set down that which have be 366 deliver i for truth of those woman , and i speak with a casique or lord of people , that tell i he have be in the river , and beyond it also . the nation of the seat of the these woman be on the south side of the river in - Amazon , the province of Topago , and their chief strength and retract be in the island situate on the south side of the entrance some 60 league within the mouth of the say river . the memory of the like woman be very ancient aswell in Africa as in Asia : in Africa those that have Medusa for queen : other in Scythia near the river of Tanais and Thermodon : we find also that Lampedo and marthesia be queen of the Amazon : in many history they be verify to have be , and in diverse age and province : but they which be not far from Guiana do accompany with man but once in a year , and for the time of one month , which i gather by their relation , to be in April : and that time all king of the border assemble , and queen of the Amazon ; and after the queen have choose , the rest cast lot for their Valentines . this one month , they feast , dance , and drink of their wine in abundance ; and the moon be do , they all depart to their own province . if they conceive , and be deliver of a son , they return he to the father ; if of a daughter they nourish it , and retain it : and as many as have daughter send unto the begetter a present ; all be desirous to increase their own sex and kind : but that they cut off the right dug of the breast , i do not find to be true . it be far tell i , that if in these war they take any prisoner that they use to accompany with those also at what time soever , but in the end for certain they put they to death : for they be say to be very cruel and bloodthirsty , especial to such as offer to invade their territory . Theise Amazones have likewise great store of these plate of gold , which they recover by exchange chief for a kind of green stone , which the Spaniard call Piedras hijada , and we use for spleen 367 stone : and for the disease of the stone we also esteem they . of these i see diverse in Guiana : and common every king or casique have one , which their wife for the most part wear ; and they esteem they as great jewel . but to return to the enterprise of Bereo , who ( as i have say ) depart from Nuevo reyno with 700 horse , beside the provision above rehearse , he descend by the river call Cassanar , which rise in Nuevo reyno out of the mountain by the city of Tuvia , from which mountain also spring Pato ; both which fall into the great river of Meta : and Meta rise from a mountain join to Pamplon in the same Nuevo reyno de Granada . Theise , as also [ he - 639. i guaiare , which issue out of the mountain by Timana , fall all into Baraquan , and be but of his head ; for at their come together they lose their name ; and Baraquan far down be also rebaptize by the name of Orenoque . on the other side of the city and hill of Timana rise Rio grande , which fall in the sea by sancta Marta . by Cassonar first , and so into Meta , Berreo pass , keep his horseman on the bank , where the country serve they for to march , and where otherwise , he be drive to embark they in boat which he build for the purpose , and so come with the current down the river of Meta , and so into Baraquan . after he enter that great and mighty river , he begin daily to lose of his company both man and horse ; for it be in many place violent swift , and have forcible eddy , many sand , and diverse island sharp point with rock : but after one whole year , journey for the most part by river , and the rest by land , he grow daily to few number ; for both by sickness , and by encounter with the people of those region , through which he travel , his company be much waste , especial by diverse encounter with the amapaians : and in all this time he never can learn of any passage into 368 Guiana , nor any news or fame thereof , until he come to a further border of the say Amapaia , eight day journey from the river Caroli , which be the further river that he enter . among those of Amapaia , Guiana be famous , but few of these people accost Berreo , or will trade with he the first three month of the six , which he sojourn there . This Amapaia be also marvellous rich in gold ( as both Berreo confess and those of Guiana with who i have most conference ) and be situate upon Orenoque also . in this country Berreo lose 60 of his best soldier , and most of all his horse that remain in his former year travel : but in the end , after diverse encounter with those nation , they grow to peace ; and they present Berreo with ten image of fine gold among diverse other plate and croissant , which , as he swear to i and diverse other gentleman , be so curious wrought , as he have not see the like either in Italy , Spain , or the low-countreys : and he be resolve , that when they come to the hand of the spanish king , to who he have send they by his campmaster , they will appear very admirable , especial be wrought by such a nation as have no iron instrument at all nor any of those help which our goldsmith have to work withal . the particular name of the people in Amapaia which give he these piece , be call anebas , and the river of Orenoque at that place be above 12 english mile broad , which may be from his out fall into the sea 700 or 800 mile . this province of Amapaia be a very low and a mar-ish ground near the river ; and by reason of the red water which issue out in small branch through the fenny and boggy ground , there breed diverse poisonful worm and serpent ; and the Spaniard not suspect , nor in any sort foreknow the danger , be infect with a grievous kind of flux by drink thereof ; and even the very horse poison therewith : insomuch as at the end of the 6 month , that they abide there , ten 369 2 A A.D. ’595 - of all their troop , there be not leave above 120 soldier , and neither horse nor cattle : for Berreo hope to have find Guiana by 1000 mile near than it fall out to be in the end : by mean whereof they sustain much want and much hunger , oppress with grievous disease , and all the misery that can be imagine . i demand of those in Guiana that have travel Amapaia , how they live with that tawny or red water when they travel thither : and they tell i that after the sun be near the middle of the sky , they use to fill their pot and pitcher with that water , but either before that time , or towards the set of the sun it be dangerous to drink of , and in the night strong poison . i learn also of diverse other river of that nature among they , which be also ( while the sun be in the meridian ) very safe to drink , and in the morning , evening , and night wondered dangerous and infective . from this province Berreo haste away assoon as the spring and beginning of summer appear , and seek his entrance on the border of Orenoque on the south side ; but there run a ledge of so high and impassable mountain , as he be not able by any mean to march over they , continue from the east sea into which Orenoque fall , even to Quito in Peru : neither have he mean to carry victuali or munition over those craggy , high , and fast hill , be all woody , and those so thick and spiny , and so full of prickle , thorn , and brier , as it be impossible to creep through they : he have also neither friendship among the people , nor any interpreter to persuade or treat with they : and more , to his disadvantage , the casique and king of Amapaia have give knowledge of his purpose to the guianians , and that he seek to sack and conquer the empire , for the hope of their so great abundance and quantity of gold : he pass by the mouth of many great river , which fall into Orenoque both from the north and south , which i forbear to name for tediousness , and 370 .. IS95 " because they be more please in describe then read . Berreo affirm that there fall a hundred river many into Orenoque from the north and south , whereof the least be as big as Rio grande , that pass in° > en°iue ' between Popayan and Nuevo reyno de Granada ( Rio grande being esteem one of the renown river in all the west Indies , and number among the great river of the world : ) but he know not the name of any of these , but Caroli only ; neither from what nation they descend , neither to what province they lead ; for he have no mean to discourse with the inhabitant at any time : neither be he curious in these thing , be utter unlearned , and not know the east from the west . but of all these i get some knowledge , and of many more , partly by my own travel , and the rest by conference : of some one i learn one , of other the rest , have with i a indian that speak many language , and that of Guiana natural . i seek out all the age man , and such as be great traveller , and by the one and the other i come to understand the situation , the river , the kingdom from the east sea to the border of Peru , and from Orenoque southward as far as Amazones or Marannon , and the religion of Maria Tamball , and of all the king of province , and captains of town and village , how they stand in term of peace or war , and which be friend or [ in . 640. ] enemy the one with the other , without which there can be neither entrance nor conquest in those part , nor elsewhere : for by the dissension between Guascar and Atabalipa , Pizarro conquer Peru , and by the hatred that the tlaxcallians bear to Mutezuma , Cortes be victorious over Mexico ; without which both the one and the other have fail of their enterprise , and of the great honour and riches which they attain unto . now Berreo begin to grow into despair , and look for no other success than his predecessor in this enter-37 i 1595-the province of Emeria inhabit by gentle Indians . Carapana . the english voyage prize , until such time as he arrive at the province of Emeria towards the east sea and mouth of the river , where he find a nation of people very favourable , and the country full of all manner of victuali . the king of this land be call Carapana , a man very wise , subtle , and of great experience , be little less than a hundred year old : in his youth he be send by his father into the island of Trinidad , by reason of civil war among themselves , and be breed at a village in that island , call Parico ; at that place in his youth he have see many Christians , both french and spanish , and go diverse time with the Indians of Trinidad to Margarita and Cumana in the west Indies ( for both those place have ever be relieve with victuali from Trinidad ) by reason whereof he grow of more understanding , and note the difference of the nation , compare the strength and arm of his country with those of the christian , and ever after temporize so , as whosoever else do amiss , or be waste by contention , Carapana keep himself and his country in quiet and plenty : he also hold peace with the caribe or cannibal his neighbour , and bid free trade with all nation , whosoever else have war . Berreo sojourn and rest his weak troop in the town of Carapana six week , and from he learn the way and passage to Guiana , and the riches and magnificence thereof ; but be then utter disable to proceed , he determine to try his fortune another year , when he have renew his provision , and regathered more force , which he hope for as well out of Spain as from Nueva reyno , where he have leave his son , don Antonio Ximenes to second he upon the first notice give of his entrance , and so for the present embark himself in canoas , and by the branch of Orenoque arrive at Trinidad , have from Carapana sufficient pilot to conduct he . from Trinidad he coast Paria , and so recover Mar - 372 garita : and have make relation to don Juan ser-miento the governor , of his proceed , and persuade he of the riches of Guiana , he obtain from thence fifty soldier , promise present to return to carapana , and so into Guiana . but Berreo mean nothing less at that time ; for he want many provision necessary for such a enterprise , and therefore depart from Margarita , seat himself in Trinidad , and from thence send his campmaster , and his sergeantmajor back to the border to discover the near passage into the empire , as also to treat with the borderer , and to draw they to his party and love ; without which , he know he can neither pass safe , nor in any sort be relieve with victuali or ought else . Carapana direct his company to a king call more - morequito . quito , assure they that no man can deliver so much of Guiana as morequito can , and that his dwelling be but five day journey from macureguarai , the first civil town of Guiana . now your lordship shall understand , that this morequito , one of the great lord or king of the border of Guiana , have two or three year before be at Cumana and at Margarita , in the west Indies , with great store of plate of gold , which he carry to exchange for such other thing as he want in his own country , and be daily feast , and present by the governor of those place , and hold among they some two month , in which time one vides governor vides the goof Cumana win he to be his conductor into ™ ' nou_r_ °f Guiana , be allure by those croissant and image pe^tor " of gold which he bring with he to trade , as also Berreo in the by the ancient fame and magnificence of el Dorado : conquest of whereupon vides send into Spain for a patent to this - Guiana . cover and conquer Guiana , not know of the precedence of berreos patent , which , as Berreo affirm , be sign before that of vides : so as when vides understand of Berreo , and that he have make entrance into that territory , and forgo his desire and hope , it 373 be very think that vides practise with morequito to hinder and disturb Berreo in all he can , and not to suffer he to enter through his signory , nor any of his company ; neither to victuali , nor guide they in any sort ; for vides governor of Cumana , and Berreo , be become mortali enemy , aswell for that Berreo have get Trinidad into his patent with Guiana , as also in that he be by Berreo prevent in the journey of Guiana it self : howsoever it be , i know not , but morequito for a time dissemble his disposition , suffer Spaniard , and a friar ( which Berreo have send to discover Manoa ) to travel through his country , mature - give they a guide for Macureguaray , the first town g^ray . civq [ anj apparel people , from whence they have other guide to bring they to Manoa the great city of Inga : and be furnish with those thing which they have learn of Carapana be of most price in ten span - Guiana , go onward , and in eleven day arrive at at Maiea1 Manoa , as Berreo affirm for certain ; although i [ three . 641 ' ] can not be assure thereof by the lord which now govern the province of morequito , for he tell i that they get all the gold they have , in other town on this side Manoa , there be many very great and rich , and ( as he say ) build like the town of Christians , with many room . when these ten Spaniard be return , and ready Aromaia . to put out of the border of Aromaia , the people of morequito set upon they , and slay they all but one that swim the river , and take from they to the value of forty thousand pezo of gold : and one of they only live to bring the news to Berreo , that both his nine soldier and holy father be benight in the say province . i my self speak with the captain of morequito that slay they , and be at the place where it be execute . Berreo enrage herewithal , send all the strength he can make into Aromaia , to be revenge of he , his people , and country . but morequito suspect the same , flee over Orenoque , 374 * 595-and through the territory of the saima , and wikiri , Salma and recover Cumana , where he think himself very safe , with vides the governor . but Berreo send for he in the king name , and his messenger find he in the house of one Fashardo on the sudden year he be suspect , so as he can not then be convey away , vides dare not deny he , aswell to avoid the suspicion of the practice , as also for that a holy father be slay by he and his people . morequito offer Fashardo the weight of three quintal in gold , to let he escape : but the poor guianian , betray on all side , be deliver to the campmaster of Berreo , and be present execute . morequito after the death of this morequito , the soldier of execute • Berreo spoil his territory , and take diverse prisoner , among other they take the uncle of morequito , call Topiawari , who be now king of Aromaia ( who son i bring with i into England ) and be a man of great understanding and policy : he be above a hundred year old , and yet of a very able body . the Spaniard lead he in a chain seventeen day , and make he their guide from place to place between his country and Emeria , the province of Carapana aforesaid , and he be at last redeem for a hundred plate of gold , and diverse stone call Piedras hijada , or spleen-stone . now Berreo for execute of morequito , and other cruelty , spoil , and slaughter do in Aromaia , have lose the love of the Orenoqueponi , and of all the borderer , and dare not send any of his soldier any further into the land then to Carapana , town °f which he call the port of Guiana : but from thence by the help of Carapana he have trade further into the G^ana , i country , and always appoint ten Spaniard to reside in carapanas town , by who favour , and by be conduct by his people , those ten search the country thereabouts , aswell for mine , as for other trade and commodity . they also have get a nephew of Morequito* who 375 some feme Spaniards be now seat in Dissequebe . they have christen , and name don Juan , of who they have great hope , endeavour by all mean to establish he in the say province . among many other trade , those Spaniard use canoas to pass to the river of Barema , Pawroma , and Dissequebe , which be on the south side of the mouth of Orenoque , and there buy woman and child from the cannibal , which be of that barbarous nature , as they will for three or four hatchet sell the son and daughter of their own brethren and sister , and for somewhat more , even their own daughter . hereof the Spaniard make great profit : for buy a maid of twelve or thirteen year for three or four hatchet , they sell they again at Margarita in the west Indies for fifty and a hundred pezo , which be so many crown . the master of my ship , John Dowglas , take one of the canoas which come lade from thence with people to be sell , and the most of they escape ; yet of those he bring , there be one as well favour , and as well shape as ever i see any in England , and afterward i see many of they , which but for their tawny colour may be compare to any of Europe . they also trade in those river for bread of Cassavi , of which they buy a hundred pound weight for a knife , and sell it at Margarita for ten pezo . they also recover great store of cotton , Brasill wood , and those bed which they call Hamacas or Brasill bed , wherein in hot country all the Spaniard use to lie common , and in no other , neither do we our self while we be there . by mean of which trade , for ransom of diverse of the guianians , and for exchange of hatchet and knife , Berreo recover some store of gold plate , eagle of gold , and image of man and diverse bird , and dispatch his campmaster for Spain , with all that he have gather , therewith to levy soldier , and by the show thereof to draw other to the love of the enterprise . and have send diverse image aswell of man as beast , bird and fish , so curious wrought 376 in gold , he doubt not but to persuade the king to yield to he some further help , especial for that this land have never be sack , the mine never wrought , and in the Indies their work be well spend , and the gold draw out with great labour and charge . he also dispatch messenger to his son in Nuevo reyno to levy all the force he can , 8c to come down the river Orenoque to Emeria , the province of Carapana , [ three . 642. ] to meet he : he have also send to saint Iago de Leon on the coast of the Caracas , to buy horse and mule . after i have thus learn of his proceed past and purpose , i tell he that i have resolve to see Guiana , and that it be the end of my journey , and the cause of my come to Trinidad , as it be indeed , ( and for that purpose i send Jacob Whiddon the year before to get intelligence with who Berreo himself have speech at that time , and remember how inquisitive Jacob Whiddon be of his proceed , and of the country of Guiana ) Berreo be strike into a great melancholy and sadness , and use all the argument he can to dissuade i , and also assure the gentleman of my company that it will be labour lose , and that they shall suffer many misery if they proceed . and first he deliver that i can not enter any of the river with any bark or pinnace , or hardly with any ship boat , it be so low , sandy , and full of flat , and that his company be daily ground in their canoas , which draw but twelve inch water . he further say , that none of the country will come to speak with we , but will all fly ; and if we follow they to their dwelling , they will burn their own town : and beside that , the way be long , the winter at hand , and that the river begin once to swell , it be impossible to stem the current , and that we can not in those small boat by any mean carry victuali for half the time , and that ( which indeed most discourage my company ) the king and lord of all the border of Guiana have decree that none of 377 they shall trade with any Christians for gold , because the same will be their own overthrow , and that for the love of gold the Christians mean to conquer and dispossess they of all together . many and the most of these i find to be true , but yet i resolve to make trial of all whatsoever happen , direct captain George Gifford my viceadmiral to take the lion whelp , and captain Calfield his bark the fwer of to turn to the eastward , against the mouth of a river Capuri . call Capuri , who entrance i have before send captain Whiddon , and John Dowglas the master , to discover , who find some nine foot water or better upon the flood , and five at low water , to who i have give instruction that they shall anchor at the edge of they shall , and upon the best of the flood to thrust over , which shall John Dowglas bwoy and beckon for they before : but they labour in vain ; for neither can they turn it up altogether so far to the east , neither do the flood continue so long , but the water fall year they can have pass the sand ; as we after find by a second experience : so as now we must either give over our enterprise , or leave our ship at adventure four hundred mile behind we , must run up in our ship boat , one barge , and two whery . but be doubtful how to carry victual for so long a time in such baby , or any strength of man , especial for that Berreo assure we that his son must be by that time come down with many soldier , i send away one king , master of the lion whelp , with his shipboat , to try another branch of a river in the bottom of the bay of Guanipa , which be call Amana , to prove if there be water to be find for either of the small ship to enter . but when he come to the mouth of Amana , he find it as the rest , but stay not to discover it thorough , because he be assure by a indian , his guide , that the cannibal of Guanipa will assail they with many canoas , and that they shoot poison arrow ; so as if he haste not back , they shall all be lose . 378 in the mean time , fear the worst , i cause all the carpenter we have , to cut down a Galego boat , which we mean to cast off , and to fit she with bank to row on , and in all thing to prepare she the best they can , so as she may be bring to draw but five foot , for so much we have on the bar of Capuri at low water . And doubt of king return , i send John Dowglas again in my long barge , aswell to relieve he , as also to make a perfect search in the bottom of that bay : for it have be hold for infallible , that whatsoever ship or boat shall fall therein , can never disemboque again , by reason of the violent current which set into the say bay , as also for that the breeze and easterly wind blow direct into the same . of which opinion i have hear John Hampton of Plymmouth , one of the great experience of England , and diverse other beside that have trade to Trinidad . i send with John Dowglas a old casique of Trinidad for a pilot , who tell we that we can not return again by the bay or gulf , but that he know a by-branch which run within the land to the eastward , and that he think by it we may fall into Capuri , and so return in four day . John Dowglas search those river , and find four goodly entrance , whereof the least be as big as the Thames at Wolwich ; but in the bay thitherward it be shall , and but six foot water : so as we be now without hope of any ship or bark to pass over , and therefore resolve to go on with the boat , and the bottom of the Galego , in which we thrust 60 man . in the lion whelp boat and whery we carry 20. captain Calfield in his whery carry ten more , and in my barge other ten , which make up a hundred : we have no other mean but to carry victuali for a month in the same , and also to lodge therein as we can , and to boil and dress our meat . captain Gifford have with he master Edward porter , captain Eynos , and eight more in his whery , with all their victuali , weapon , and provision . captain Calfield have with he my 379 John Hampton captain of the minion under sir John Hawkins in his voyage to saint Juan de ullua . [ he . 643. ] cousin Butshead Gorges , and eight more . in the galley , of gentleman and officer my self have captain thin , my cousin John Greenvile , my nephew John Gilbert , captain Whiddon , captain Keymis , Edward handcocke , captain Clarke , lieutenant Hewes , Thomas Upton , captain fancy , Jerome Ferrar , Anthony Welles , William connocke , and above fifty more . we can not learn of Berreo any other way to enter but in branch , so far to windward , as it be impossible for we to recover : for we have as much sea to cross over in our whery , as between Dover and Calais , and in a great billow , the wind and current be both very strong , so as we be drive to go in those small boat the bay of direct before the wind into the bottom of the bay Guanipa . of Guanipa , anJ from thence to enter the mouth of some one of those river which John Dowglas have last discover , and have with we for pilot a indian of Barema , a river to the south of Orenoque , between that and Amazones , who canoas we have former take as he Barema . be go from the say Barema , lade with cassavi-bread , to sell at Margarita . this arwacan promise to bring i into the great river of Orenoque , but indeed of that which he enter he be utter ignorant , for he have not see it in twelve year before ; at which time he be very young , and of no judgement : and if God have not send we another help , we may have wander a whole year in that labyrinth of river , year we have find any way , either out or in , especial after we be pass ebb and flow , which be in four day , for i know a wonder ap the earth do not yield the like confluence of ‘ stream stream and branch , the one cross the other so many ' time , and all so fair and large , and so like one to another , as no man can tell which to take : and if we go by the sun or compass , hope thereby to go direct one way or other , yet that way we be also carry in a circle among multitude of island , and every island so border with high tree , as no man can see any further than the breadth of the river , or length of the breach . 380 but this it chance , that enter into a river , ( which because it have no name , we call the river of the red cross , our self be the first Christians that ever come therein ) the two and twenty of May , as we be row up the same , we espy a small canoa with three Indians , which ( by the swiftness of my barge , row with eight oar ) i overtake year they can cross the river , the rest of the people on the bank shadow under the thick wood , gaze on with a doubtful conceit what may befall those three which we have take . but when they perceive that we offer they no violence , neither enter their canoa with any of we , nor take out of the canoa any of they , they then begin to show themselves on the bank side , and offer to traffic with we for such thing as they have . and as we draw near , they all stay , and we come with our barge to the mouth of a little creek which come from their town into the great river . as we abide there a while , our indian pilot , call Ferdinando , will needs go ashore to their village to fetch some fruit , and to drink of their artificiali wine , and also to see the place , and know the lord of it against another time , and take with he a brother of he , which he have with he in the journey : when they come to the village of these people , the lord of the island offer to lay hand on they , purpose to have slay they both , yield for reason that this indian of we have bring a strange nation into their territory , to spoil and destroy they . but the pilot be quick , and of a dispose body , slip their finger , and run into the wood , and his brother be the better footman of the two , recover the creek mouth , where we stay in our barge , cry out that his brother be slay : with that we set hand on one of they that be next we , a very old man , and bring he into the barge , assure he that if we have not our pilot again , we will present cut off his head . this old man be resolve that he shall pay the loss of the other , cry out to those in the wood to save Ferdinando 381 the river of the red cross . [ Iii . 644. ] two nation of the Tivitivas , call ciawani , and waraweete . a description of the mighty river of Orenoque or Baraquan . what manner of people the Tivitivas be . the english voyage our pilot ; but they follow he notwithstanding , and hunt after he upon the foot with the dear-dog , and with so main a cry , that all the wood echo with the shout they make : but at the last this poor chase Indian recover the river side , and get upon a tree , and as we be coast , leap down and swim to the barge half dead with fear . but our good hap be , that we keep the other old indian which we handfasted to redeem our pilot withal ; for be naturali of those river , we assure our self he know the way better than any stranger can . and indeed , but for this chance , i think we have never find the way either to Guiana , or back to our ship : for Ferdinando after a few day know nothing at all , nor which way to turn , yea and many time the old man himself be in great doubt which river to take . those people which dwell in these break island and drown land , be general call Tivitivas ; there be of they two sort , the one call Ciawani , and the other waraweete . the great river of Orenoque or Baraquan have nine branch which fall out on the north side of his own main mouth : on the south side it have seven other fall into the sea , so it disemboqu by sixteen arm in all , between hand and break ground , but the hand be very great , many of they as big as the isle of wight , and big , and many less . from the first branch on the north to the last of the south , it be at least 100 league , so as the river mouth be 300 mile wide at his entrance into the sea , which i take to be far big than that of Amazones . all those that inhabit in the mouth of this river upon the several north branch , be these Tivitivas , of which there be two chief lord which have continual war one with the other . the hand which lie on the right hand , be call Pallamos , and the land on the left , Horotomaka , and the river by which John Dowglas return within the land from Amana to Capuri , they call Macuri . Theise Tivitivas be a very goodly people and very 382 valiant , and have the most manly speech and most deliberate that ever i hear , of what nation soever . in the summer they have house on the ground , as in other place : in the winter they dwell upon the tree , where they build very artificiali town and village , as it be write in the spanish story of the west Indies , that those people do in the low land near the gulf of Uraba : for between may and September the river of Orenoque rise thirty foot upright , and then be those island overflow twenty foot high above the level of the ground , save some few raise ground in the middle of they : and for this cause they be enforce to live in this manner . they never eat of any thing that be set or so wen : and as at home they use neither plant nor other manurance , so when they come abroad , they refuse to feed of aught , but of that which nature without labour bring forth . they use the top of palmito for bread , and kill dear , fish , and pork , for the rest of their sustenance . they have also many sort of fruit that grow in the wood , and great variety of bird and foul . and if to speak of they be not tedious , and vulgar , sure we see in those passage of very rare colour and form , not elsewhere to be find , for as much as i have either see or read . of these people those that dwell upon the branch of Orenoque , call Capuri and Macureo , be for the most part carpenter of canoas , for they make the most and fair canoas , and sei they into Guiana for gold , and into Trinidad for tobacco , in the excessive take whereof , they exceed all nation ; and notwithstanding the moistness of the air in which they live , the hardness of their diet , and the great labour they suffer to hunt , fish and foul for their live ; in all my life , either in the Indies or in Europe , do i never behold a more goodly or better favour people or a more manly . they be wont to make war upon all nation , and especial on the cannibal , so as none 383 than Arwacas on the south side of Orenoque . the port of the Ciatvani . a river call the great Amana . the english voyage dare without a good strength trade by those river : but of late they be at peace with their neighbour , all hold the Spaniard for a common enemy . when their commander die , they use great lamentation , and when they think the flesh of their body be putrify , and fall from the bone , than they take up the carcase again , and hang it in the caciques house that die , and deck his scull with feather of all colour , and hang all his gold plate , about the bone of his arm , thigh , and leg . those nation which be call Arwacas , which dwell on the south of Orenoque , ( of which place and nation our indian pilot be ) be disperse in many other place , and do use to beat the bone of their lord into powder , and their wife and friend drink it all in their several sort of drink . after we depart from the port of these Ciawani , we pass up the river with the flood , and anchor the ebb , and in this sort we go onward . the three day that we enter the river , our galley come on ground , and stick so fast , as we think that even there our discovery have end , and that we must have leave fourscore and ten of our man to have inhabit like rook upon tree with those nation : but the next morning , after we have cast out all her ballast , with tug and hail to and fro , we get her aflote , and go on . at four day end we fall into as goodly a river as ever i behold , which be call the great Amana , which run more direct without wind and turn then the other : but soon after the flood of the sea leave we ; and be enforce either by main strength to row against a violent current , or to return as wise as we go out , we have then no shift but to persuade the company that it be but two or three day work , and therefore desire they to take pain , every gentleman 8c other take their turn to row , and to spell one the other at the hour end . Every day we pass by goodly branch of 384 river , some fall from the west , other from the east into Amana , but those i leave to the description in the cart of discovery , where every one shall name with his rise and descent . when three day more be overgo , our company begin to despair , the [ three . 645. ] weather be extreme hot , the river border with very high tree , that keep away the air , and the current against we every day strong than other : but we evermore command our pilot to promise a end the next day , and use it so long , as we be drive to assure they from four reach of the river to three , and so to two , and so to the next reach : but so long we labour , that many day be spend , and we drive to draw our self to hard allowance , our bread even at the last , and no drink at all ; and our man and our self so weary and scorch , and doubtful withal , whether we shall ever perform it or no , the heat increase as we draw towards the line ; for we be now in five degree . they be in the further we go on ( our victuali decrease and degree . the air breed great faintness ) we grow weak and weak , when we have m●st need of strength and ability ; for hourly the river run more violent than other against we , and the barge , whery , and ship boat of captain Gifford and captain Calfield , have spend all their provision ; so as we be bring into despair and discomfort , have we not persuade all the company that it be but only one day work more to attain the land where we shall be relieve of all we want , and if we return , that we be sure to starve by the way , and that the world will also laugh we to scorn . on the bank of these river be diverse sort of fruit good to eat , flower and tree of such variety , as be sufficient to make ten volume of herbal : we relieve our self many time with the fruit of the country , and sometime with foul and fish . we see bird of all colour , some carnation , some crimson , orenge-tawny , purple , watchet , and of ten 385 2 b all other sort both simple and mix , and it be unto we a great good pass of the time to behold they , beside the relief we find by kill some store of they with our fowl piece ; without which , have little or no bread , and less drink , but only the thick and trouble water of the river , we have be in a very hard case . our old pilot of the Ciawani ( who , as i say before , we take to redeem Ferdinando ) tell we , that if we will enter a branch of a river on the right hand with our barge and whery , and leave the galley at anchor the while in the great river , he will bring we to a town of the Arwacas , where we shall find store of bread , hen , fish , and of the country wine ; and persuade we , that depart from the galley at noon , we may return year night . i be very glad to hear this speech , and present take my bark , with eight musketeer , captain giffords whery , with himself and four musketeer , and captain Calfield with his whery , and as many ; and so we enter the mouth of this river : and because we be persuade that it be so near , we take no victuali with we at all . when we have row three hour , we marvel we see no sign of any dwell , and ask the pilot where the town be : he tell we a little further . after three hour more , the sun be almost set , we begin to suspect that he lead we that way to betray we : for he confess that those Spaniard which flee from Trinidad , and also those that remain with Carapana in Emeria , be join together in some village upon that river . but when it grow towards night ; and we demand where the place be ; he tell we but four reach more . when we have row four and four ; we see no sign ; and our poor watermen , even heartbroken , and tire , be ready to give up the ghost : for we have now come from the galley near forty mile . at the last we determine to hang the pilot ; and 386 if we have well know the way back again by night , he have sure go ; but our own necessity plead sufficient for his safety : for it be as dark as pitch , and the river begin so to narrow it self , and the tree to hang over from side to side , as we be drive with arm sword to cut a passage through those branch that cover the water . we be very desirous to find this town , hope of a feast , because we make but a short breakfast aboard the galley in the morning and it be now eight a clock at night , and our stomach begin to gnaw apace : but whether it be best to return or go on , we begin to doubt , suspect treason in the pilot more and more : but the poor old indian ever assure we that it be but a little further , but this one turn and that turn : and at the last about one a clock after midnight we see a light ; and row towards it , we hear the dog of the village . when we land we find few people ; for the lord of that place be go with diverse canoas above four hundred mile off , upon a journey towards the head of Orenoque to trade for gold , and to buy woman of the cannibal , who afterward unfortunate pass by we as we ride at a anchor in the port of morequito in the dark of the night , and yet come so near we , as his canoas grate against our barge : he leave one of his company at the port of morequito , by who we understand that he have bring thirty young woman , diverse plate of gold , and have great store of fine piece of cotton cloth , and cotton bed . in his house we have good store of bread , fish , hen , and indian drink , and so rest that night , and in the morning after we have trade with such of his people as come down , we return [ three . 646. ] towards our gay , and bring with we some quantity of bread , fish , and hen . on both side of this river , we pass the most beauty - a most beautiful country that ever my eye behold : and whereas all countrey^ that we have see before be nothing but wood , prickle , 387 the river of Lagartos , or crocodile . two canoas take . three Spaniard escape . the english voyage bush , and thorn , here we behold plain of twenty mile in length , the grass short and green , and in diverse part grove of tree by themselves , as if they have be by all the art and labour in the world so make of purpose : and still as we row , the dear come down feed by the water side , as if they have be use to a keeper call . upon this river there be great store of fowl , and of many sort : we see in it diverse sort of strange fish , and of marvellous bigness : but for lagartos iter exceed , for there be thousand of those ugly serpent ; and the people call it for the abundance of they , the river of Lagartos , in their language . i have a negro a very proper young fellow , who leap out of the galley to swim in the mouth of this river , be in all our sight take and devour with one of those lagartos . in the mean while our company in the gay thought we have be all lose , ( for we promise to return before night ) and send the lion whelp ship boat with captain Whiddon to follow we up the river ; but the next day , after we have row up and down some fourscore mile , we return , and go on our way , up the great river ; and when we be even at the last cast for want of victual , captain Gifford be before the galley and the rest of the boat , seek out some place to land upon the bank to make fire , espy four canoas come down the river ; and with no small joy cause his man to try the uttermost of their strength , and after a while two of the four give over , and run themselves ashore , every man betake himself to the fastness of the wood , the two other lesser get away , while he land to lay hold on these ; and so turn into some by-creeke , we know not whither . those canoas that be take , be load with bread , and be bind for Margarita in the west Indies , which those Indians ( call Arwacas ) purpose to carry thither for exchange : but in the lesser there be three Spaniard , who have hear of the defeat of their goyernour in Trinidad , and that we purpose to enter Guiana , come away in those canoas : one of they be a 388 * 595-cavallero , as the captain of the Arwacas after tell we , another a soldier , and the three a refiner . in the mean time , nothing on the earth can have be more welcome to we , next unto gold , than the great store of very excellent bread which we find in these canoas ; for now our man cry , let we go on , we care not how far . after that captain Gifford have bring the two canoas to the galley , i take my barge , and go to the bank side with a dozen shot , where the canoas first run themselves ashore , and land there , send out captain Gifford , and captain thy on one hand , and captain Calfield on the other , to follow those that be flee into the wood : and as i be creep through the bush , i see a indian basket hide , which be the spanish refiner basket ; for i find in it his quicksilver , saltpeter , and diverse thing for the trial of metal , and also aing ta^en the dust of such ore as he have refine , but in those canoas which escape there be a good quantity of ore and gold . i then land more man , and offer five hundred pound to what soldier soever can take one of those three Spaniard that we think be land . but our labour be in vain in that behalf ; for they put themselves into one of the small canoas : and so while the great canoas be in take they escape . but seek after the Spaniard , we find the Arwacas hide in the wood , which be pilot for the Spaniard , and row their canoas ; of which i keep the chief for a pilot , and carry he with i to Guiana , by who i understand where and in what country the Spaniard have labour for gold , though i make not the same know to all : for when the spring begin to break , and the river to raise themselves so sudden , as by no mean we can abide the dig of any i , especial for that the rich be defend with rock of hard stone , which we r'lch call the white spar , and that it require both time , man , and instrument fit for such a work , i think it best not ew to hover thereabouts , lest if the same have be perceive by the company , there will have be by this 389 * 595 ' .. , , time many bark and ship set out , and perchance other nation will also have get of we for pilot ; so as both our self may have be prevent , and all our care take for good usage of the people be utter lose , by those that only respect present profit , and such violence or insolence offer , as the nation which be borderer will have change their desire of our love and defence into hatred and violence . and for any long stay to have bring a more quantity ( which i hear have be often object ) whosoever have see or prove the fury of that river after it begin to arise , and have be a month and odd day , as we be , from hear aught from our ship , leave they mean man 400 mile off , will perchance have turn somewhat soon than we do , if all the mountain have be gold , or rich stone . and to say the truth , all the branch and small river which fall into Orenoque be raise with such [ three . 647. ] speed , as if we wade they over the shoe in the morning outward , we be cover to the shoulder homeward the very same day : and to stay to dig out gold with our nail , have be opus laboris but not Ingenii : such a quantity as will have serve our turn we can not have have , but a discovery of the mine to our infinite disadvantage we have make , and that can have be the best profit of far search or stay : for those mine be not easy break , nor open in haste , and i can have return a good quantity of gold ready cast , if i have not shoot at another mark , then present profit . this arwacan pilot with the rest , fear that we will have eat they , or otherwise have put they to some the Spaniard cruel death ( for the Spaniard , to the end that none of the dtvehsh hes . peop [ e jn the passage towards Guiana or in Guiana it self may come to speech with we , persuade all the nation , that we be men-eater , and cannibal ) but when the poor man and woman have see we , and that we give they meat , and to every one something or other , which be rare and strange to they , they begin to conceive the deceit and purpose of the Spaniard , who indeed ( as 39° they confess ) take from they both their wife and daughter daily , and use they for the satisfy of their own lust , especial such as they take in this manner by strength . but i protest before the majesty of the live God , that i neither know nor believe , that any of our company one or other , by violence or otherwise , ever know any of their woman , and yet we see many hundred , and have many in our power , and of those very young , and excellent favour , which come among we without deceit , stark naked . Nothing get we more love among they then this usage : for i suffer not any man to take from any of the nation so much as a Pina , or a potato root , without give they contentment , nor any man so much as to offer to touch any of their wife or daughter : which course so contrary to the Spaniard ( who tyrannize over they in all thing ) draw they to admire her majesty , who commandment i tell they it be , and also wonderful to honour our nation . but i confess it be a very impatient work to keep the mean sort from spoil and steal , when we come to their house : which because in all i can not prevent , i cause my indian interpreter at every place when we depart , to know of the loss or wrong do , and if aught be steal or take by violence , either the same be restore , and the party punish in their sight , or else be pay for to their uttermost demand . they also much wonder at we , after they hear that we have slay the Spaniard at Trinidad , for they be before resolve , that no nation of Christians dare abide their presence , and they wonder moor when i have make they know of the great overthrow that her majesty army and fleet have give they of late year in their own country . after we have take in this supply of bread , with diverse basket of root which be excellent meat , i give one of the canoas to the Arwacas , which belong to the Spaniard that be escape , and when i have dismiss all 391 A.D. 1595 - a notable course of justice . but the captain ( who by the Spaniard be christen Martin ) i send back in the same Canoa the old ciawan , and Ferdinando my first pilot , and give they both such thing as they desire , with sufficient victuali to carry they back , and by they write a letter to the ship , which they promise to deliver , and perform it , and then i go on , with my new hire pilot Martin the arwacan : but they come on the next or second day after , we come aground again ground with w^h our galley , and be like to cast she away , with all etr ga y . our victuali and provision , and so lie on the sand one whole night and be far more in despair at this time to free she then before , because we have no tide of flood to help we , and therefore fear that all our hope will have end in mishap : but we fasten a anchor upon the land , and with main strength draw she off : and so the fifteen day we discover afar off the mountain of Guiana to our great joy , and towards the evening have a slent of a northerly wind that blow very strong , which bring we in sight of the great river Orenoque ; out of which this river descend wherein we be : we descry afar off three other canoas as far as we can discern they , after who we hasten with our barge and wherry , but two of they pass out of sight , and the third enter up the great river , on the right hand to the westward , and there stay out of sight , think that we mean to take the way eastward towards the province of Carapana , for that way the Spaniard keep , not dare to go upward to Guiana , the people in those part be all their enemy , and those in the canoas think we to have be those Spaniards that be flee from Trinidad , and have escape kill : and when we come so far down as the open of that branch into which they slip , be near they with our barge and wherry , we make after they , and ere they can land , come within call , and by our interpreter tell they what we be , wherewith they come back [ three . 648. ] will aboard we : and of such fish and Tortugas egg 392 * 595-as they have gather , they give we , and promise in the morning to bring the lord of that part with they , and to do we all other service they can . that night we come to a anchor at the part of the three goodly river ( the one be the river of Amana by which we come from the north , and run athwart towards the south , the other two be of Orenoque twa branch which cross from the west and run to the sea towards the east ) and land upon a fair sand , where ’ we find thousand of Tortugas egg , which be very wholesome meat , and great restore , so as our man be now well fill and high content both with the fare , and nearness of the land of Guiana which appear in sight . in the morning there come down accord to promise the lord of that border call Toparimaca , with some thirty or fourty follower , and bring we diverse sort of fruit , and of his wine , bread , fish , and flesh , who we also feast as we can , at least we drink good spanish wine ( whereof we have a small quantity in bottle ) which above all thing they love . i confer with this toparimaca of the next way to Guiana , who Toparimaca . conduct our galley and boat to his own port , and carry we from thence some mile and a half to his town , where some of our captain karouse of his wine till they be reasonable pleasant , for it be very strong with pepper , and the juice of diverse herb , and fruit digest and purge , they keep it in great earthen pot of ten or twelve galon very clean and sweet , and be themselves at their meeting and feast the great karouser and drunkard of the world : when we come to his town we find two casique , whereof one be a stranger that have be up the river in trade , and his boat , people , and wife encamp at the port where we ancker , and the other be of that country a follower of Toparimaca : they lie each of they in a cotton Hamaca , which we call brazil bed , and two woman attend they with six cup and a little 393 ladle to fill they , out of a earthen pitcher of wine , and so they drink each of they three of those cup at a time one to the other , and in this sort they drink drink at their feast and meeting . that casique that be a stranger have his wife stay at the port where we ancker , and in all my life i have seidome see a better favour woman : she be of good stature , with black eye , fat of body , of a excellent countenance , her hair almost as long as her self , tie up again in pretty knot , and it seem she stand not in that awe of her husband , as the rest , for she speak and discourse , and drink among the gentleman and captain , and be very pleasant , know her own comeliness , and take great pride therein . i have see a lady in England so like to she , as but for the difference of colour , i will have swear may have be the same . the seat of this town of Toparimaca be very pleasant , stand on a little hill , in a excellent prospect , with goodly garden a mile compass round about it , and two very fair and large pond of exedra town of Lent fish adjoin . this town be call Arowocai : the arowocay . people be of the nation call Nepoios , and be follower of Carapana . in that place i see very age people , that we may perceive all their sinew and vein without any flesh , and but even as a case cover only with the great skin . the lord of this place give i a old man ^er^ore^ or ot ’ who be great experience and travel , and we know the river most perfect both by day and night : and it shall be requisite for any man that pass it , to have such a pilot , for it be four , five , and six mile over in many place , and twenty mile in other place , with wonderful eddy , and strong current , many great island , and diverse shold , and many dangerous rock , and beside upon any increase of wind so great a bilowe , as we be sometime in great peril of drown in the galley , for the small boat dare not come from the shore , but when it be very fair . 394 the next day we haste thence , and have a easterly wind to help we , we spare our arm from row : for after we enter Orenoque , the river lie for the most part east and west , even from the sea unto Quito in Peru. this river be navigable with bark , little less than a thousand mile , and from the place where we enter , it may be sail up in small pinnace to many of the best part of Nuevo reyno de Granada , and of Popayan : and from no place may the city of these part of the Indies be so easy take and invade as from hence . all that day we sail up a branch of that river , have on the left hand a great island which they call Assapana which may contain some five and twenty mile in length , and six mile in breadth , the great body of the river run on the other side of this island . beyond that middle branch there be also another island in the river call Iwana , which be twice as big as the isle of wight , and beyond it , and between it and the main of Guiana , run a third branch of Orenoque call Arraroopana : all three be goodly branch , and all navigable for great ship . i judge the river in this place to be at least thirty mile broad , reckon the island which divide the branch in it , for afterward i seek also both the other branch . after we reach to the head of the island , call Assapana , a little to the westward on the right hand there open a river which come from the north , call Europa , and fall into the great river , and beyond it on the same side , we ancker for that night , by another island six mile long , and two mile broad , which they call Ocaywita : from hence in the morning we land two guianians , which we find in the town of Toparimaca , that come with we , who go to give notice of our come to the lord of that country call Putyma , a follower of Topiawari , chief lord of Aromaia , who succeed morequito , who ( as you have hear before ) Berreo put to death : but his town be far within the land , he come not unto we that day , so as we anchor 395 A.D. 1595-they enter the river Orenoque which run east and west . the isle of Assapana . the island of Iwana . [ Iii . 649. ] the isle of Ocaywita . again that night near the bank of another island , the isle of of bigness much like the other , which they call puta-putapayma . payma > over against which island , on the main land , be a very high mountain call oecope : we covet to anchor rather by these island in the river , then by the main , because of the Tortugas egg , which our people find on they in great abundance , and also because the ground serve better for we to cast our net for fish , the main bank be for the most part stony and high , and the rock of a blue metalline steele-ore . colour , like unto the best steele-ore , which i assure take it to be : of the same blue stone be also diverse great mountain , which border this river in many place . the next morning towards nine of the clock , we weigh anchor , and the breeze increase , we sail always west up the river , and after a while open the land on the right side , the country appear to be champain , and the bank show very perfect red . i therefore send two of the little barge with captain Gifford , and with he captain thou , captain Calfield , my cousin Greenvile , my nephew John Gilbert , captain Eynus , master Edward porter , and my cousin butshead Gorges , with some few soldier , to march over the bank of that red land , and to discover what manner of country it be on the other side , who at their return find it all a plain level , as far as they go or can discern , from the high tree they can get upon : and my old pilot , a man of great travel , brother to the casique Toparimica tell i , that those be call the plain of the plain of the Sayma , and that the same level cu-h reac^ed to Cumana , and Caracas in the west Indies , " mana , and the which be a hundred and twenty league to the north , Caracas . and that there inhabit four principali nation . the first be the Sayma , the next Assawai , the third and great the Wikiri , by who Pedro Hernandez de Serpa before mention be overthrow , as he pass with three hundred horse from Cumani towards oren-396 oque , in his enterprise of Guiana : the four be call Aroras , and be as black as negro , but have smooth hair , and these be very valiant , or rather desperate people , and have the most strong poison on their arrow , and most dangerous of all nation , of which poison i will speak somewhat be a digression not unnecessary . there be nothing whereof i be more curious , than to find out the true remedy of these poison arrow : for beside the mortality of the wound they make , the par tie shot endure the most insufferable torment in the world , and abide a most ugly and lamentable death , sometime die stark mad , sometime their bowel break out of their belly : which be present discolour as black as pitch , and so unsavoury , as no man can endure to cure , or to attend they . and it be more strange to know , that in all this time there be never Spaniard either by gift or torment that can attain to the true knowledge of the cure , although they have martyr and put to invent torture i know not how many of they . but every one of these indian know it not , no not one among thousand , but their soothsayer and priest , who do conceal it , and only teach it but from the father to the son . those medicine which be vulgar , and serve for the ordinary poison , be make of the juice of a root call Tupara : the same also quench marvellous the heat of burn fever , and heal inward wound , and break vein , that bleed within the body . but i be more behold to the guianians then any other : for Anthonio de Berreo tell i that he can never attain to the knowledge thereof , and yet they teach i the best way of heal as well thereof , as of all other poison . some of the Spaniard have be cure in ordinary wound , of the common poison arrow with the juice of garlic : but this be a generail rule for all man that shall hereafter travel the Indies where poison arrow be use , that they must abstain from 397 A.D. I595 - Aroras a black people use venomous arrow . the juice of garlic good against ordinary poison . speedy drink to be avoid of such as be wound with poison arrow . the province Aromaia . the pie of Murrecotima . the english voyage drink , for if they take any liquour into their body , as they shall be marvelous provoke thereunto by drought , i say , if they drink before the wound be dress , or soon upon it , there be no way with they but present death . and so i will return again to our journey which for this third day we finish , and cast anchor again near the continent or the left hand between two mountain , the one call Aroami , and the other aio : i make no stay here but till midnight , for i fear hourly lest any rain shall fall , and then it have be impossible to have go any further up , notwithstanding that there be every day a very strong breeze , and easterly wind . i defer the search of the country on guiana-side , till my return down the river . the next day we sail by a great island in the middle of the river call Manoripano , and as we walk a while on the island , while the galley get a head of we , there come for we from the main a small Canoa with seven or eight guianians , to invite we to anchor at their port , but i defer till my return ; it be that casique to who those nepoio go , which come with we from the town of Toparimaca : and so the five day we reach as high up as the province of Aromaia the country of morequito who Berreo execute , and anchor to the west of a island call Murrecotima , ten mile long and five broad : and that night the casique Aramiary , ( to who town we make our long and hungry voyage out of the river of Amana ) pass by we . the next day we arrive at the port of morequito , and ancker there , send away one of our pilot to seek the king of Aromaia , uncle to morequito slay by Berreo as aforesaid . the next day follow before noon he come to we on foot from his house , which be fourteen English mile ( himself be a hundred and ten year old ) and return on foot 398 the same day , and with he many of the borderer , with many woman and child , that come to wonder at our nation , and to bring we down victuali , which they do in great plenty , as venison , pork , hen , chicken , foul , fish , with diverse sort of excellent fruit and root , and great abundance of pina , the prince of fruit , that grow under the sun , especial those of Guiana . they bring we also store of bread , and of their wine , and a sort of paraquito , no big than wrennes , and of all other sort both small and great ; one of they give i a beast call by the Spaniard Armadilla , which they call Cassacam , which seem to be all bar over with small plate somewhat like to a rinoceros , with a white horn grow in his hinder part , as big as a great hunt horn , which they use to wind in stead of a trumpet . Monardus write that a little of the powder of that horn put into the ear , cure deafness . after this old king have rest a while in a little tent , that i cause to be set up , i begin by my interpreter to discourse with he of the death of morequito his predecessor , and afterward of the Spaniard , and ere i go any far i make he know the cause of my come thither , who servant i be , and that the queen pleasure be , i shall undertake the voyage for their defence , and to deliver they from the tyrannic of the Spaniard , dilate at large ( as i have do before to those of Trinidad ) her majesty greatness , her justice , her charity to all oppress nation , with as many of the rest of her beauty and virtue , as either i can express , or they conceive : all which be with great admiration attentive hear , and marvelously admire , i begin to sound the old man as touch Guiana , and the state thereof , what sort of common wealth it be , how govern , of what strength and policy , how far it extend , and what nation be friend or enemy adjoin , and final of the distance and way to enter the same : he tell i that 399 Orejones be the gentleman of Peru. Lop. de Gomar . Hist. gen . cap . 119. the english voyage himself and his people with all those down the river towards the sea , as far as Emeria , the province of Carapana , be of Guiana , but that they call themselves Orenoqueponi , and that all the nation between the river and those mountain in sight call wacarima , be of the same cast and appellation : and that on the other side of those mountain of Wacarima there be a large plain ( which after i discover in my return ) call the valley of Amariocapana , in all that valley the people be also of the ancient guianians . i ask what nation those be which inhabit on the far side of those mountain , beyond the valley of Amariocapana : he answer with a great sigh ( as a man which have inward feel of the loss of his country and liberty , especial for that his elder son be slay in a battle on that side of the mountain , who he most entire love ) that he remembered in his father life time when he be very old , and himself a young man , that there come down into that large valley of Guiana , a nation from so far off as the sun sleep , ( for such be his own word ) with so great a multitude as they can not be numbered nor resist , and that they wear large coat , and hat of crimson colour , which colour he express , by show a piece of red wood , wherewith my tent be support , and that they be call Orejones , and Epuremei , those that have slay and root out so many of the ancient people , as there be leaf in the wood upon all the tree , and have now make themselves lord of all , even to that mountain foot call Curaa , save only of two nation , the one call awarawaqueri , and the other Cassipagotos , and that in the last battle fight between the Epuremei , and the iwarawaqueri , his elder son be choose to carry to the aid of the iwarawaqueri , a great troop of the Orenoqueponi , and be there slay with all his people and friend , and that he have now remain but one son : and far tell i that those Epuremei have build a great town 400 call Macureguarai at the say mountain foot , at the begin of the great plain of Guiana , which have no end : and that their house have many room , one over the other , and that therein the great king of the Orejones and Epuremei keep three thousand man to defend the border against they , and withal daily to invade and slay they : but that of late year since the christian offer to invade his territory , and those frontier , they be all at peace , and trade one with another , save only the iwarawaqueri , and those other nation upon the head of the river of Caroli , call Cassipagotos , which we afterward discover , each one hold the Spaniard for a common enemy . after he have answer thus far , he desire leave to depart , say that he have far to go , that he be old , and weak , and be every day call for by death , which be also his own phrase : i desire he to rest with we that night , but i can not entreat he , but he tell i that at my return from the country above , he will again come to we , and in the mean time provide for we the best he can , of all that his country yield ; the same night he return to oroco-tona his own town , so as he go that day eight and twenty mile , the weather be very hot , the country be situate between four and five degree of the equinoctial . This Topiawari be hold for the proud , and wise of all the Orenoqueponi , and so he behave himself towards i in all his answer at my return , as i marveil to finde1 a man of that gravity and judgement , and of so good discourse , that have no help of learning nor breed . the next morning we also leave the port , and sail westward up to the river , to view the famous river call Caroli , as well because it be marvelous of it self , as also for that i understand it lead to the strong nation of all the frontier , that be enemy to the Epuremei , which be subject to Inga , emperor of ten 401 2 c A.D. * 595 - [ three . 651. ] the town of Macureguarai . Orotona between 4. and 5. degree of northerly latitude . Guiana , and Manoa , and that night our ancker at the isle of another island call Caiama , of some five or six mile ^ama - jn length } anj the next day arrive at the mouth of atth^mouth Caroli . when we be short of it as low or further of the river down as the port of morequito we hear the great roar Caroli . and fall of the river , but when we come to enter with our barge and whirry think to have go up some fburtie mile to the nation of the Cassipagotos , we be not able with a barge of eight oar to row one stone cast in a hour , and yet the river be as broad as the Thames at Wolwich , and we try both side , and the middle , and every part of the river , so as we encamp upon the bank adjoin , and send off our orenoque-pone ( which come with we from morequito ) to give knowledge to the nation upon the river of our be there , and that we desire to see the lord of Canuria , which dwell within the province upon that river , make they know that we be enemy to the Spaniard , ( for it be on this river side that morequito slay the friar , and those nine Spaniard which come from Manoa , the city of Inga , and take from they fourty thousand pezo of gold ) so as the next day there come down a Wanuretona . lord or casique call Wanuretona with many people with he , and bring all store of provision to entertain we , as the rest have do . and as i have before make my come know to Topiawari , so do i acquaint this casique therewith , and how i be send by her majesty for the purpose aforesaid , and gather also what i can of he touch the estate of Guiana , and i find that those also of Caroli be not only enemy to the Spaniard , but most of all to the Epuremei , which abound in gold , and by this Wanuretona , i have and Arana - knowledge that on the head of this river be three goto three mighty nation , which be seat on a great lake , from mighty nation whence this river descend , and be call Cassipagotos , lake^the EP^ragotos , and Arawagotos , and that all those either head of they against the Spaniard , or the Epuremei will join with river Caroli , we , and that if we enter the land over the mountain 402 of Curaa , we shall satisfy our self with gold and all other good thing : he tell we far of a nation call iwarawaqueri before speak off , that hold daily war with the Epuremei that inhabit Macureguarai the first civil town of Guiana , of the subject of Inga the emperor . upon this river one captain George , that i take with Berreo tell i there be a great silver i , and that a great silver it be near the bank of the say river . but by this time as well Orenoque , Caroli , as all the rest of the river be rise four or five foot in height , so as it be not possible by the strength of any man , or with any boat whatsoever to row into the river against the stream . i therefore send captain thy , captain green vile , my nephew John Gylbert , my cousin butshead Gorges , captain Clarke , and some thirty shot more to coast the river by land , and to go to a town some twenty mile over the valley call Amnatapoi , and they Amnatapol , a find guide there , to go far towards the mountain iowne-foote to another great town call Capurepana , belong to a casique call Haharacoa ( that be a nephew to old Topiawari king of Arromaia our chief friend ) because this town and province of Capurepana adjoin to Macureguarai , which be a frontier town of the [ three . 652. ] empire : and the mean while my self with captain Gifford , captain Calfield , Edward Hancocke , and some half a dozen shot march over land to view the strange overfal of the river of Caroli which roar so far off , and also to see the plain adjoin , and the rest of the province of Canuri : i send also captain Whiddon , William connocke , and some eight shot with they , to see if they can find any minerail stone alongst the river side . when we be come to the top of the first the strange hill of the plain adjoin to the river , we behold werfal‘ °f that wonderful breach of water , which run down Canl1 " Caroli : and may from that mountain see the river how it run in three part , above twenty mile off , and there appear some ten or twelve overfal in sight , 403 every one as high over the other as a church-tower , which fall with that fury , that the rebound of water make it seem , as if it have be all cover over with a great shower of rain : and in some place we take it at the first for a smoke that have rise over some great town . for my own part i be well persuade from thence to have return , be a very ill footman , but the rest be all so desirous to go near the say strange thunder of water , as they draw i on by little and little , till we come into the next valley where we may better discern a mostbeauti - the same . i never see a more beautiful country , nor full country . more lively prospect , hill so raise here and there over the valley , the river wind into diverse branch , the plain adjoin without bush or stubble , all fair green grass , the ground of hard sand easy to march on , either for horse or foot , the dear cross in every path , the bird towards the evening sing on every tree with a thousand several tune , crane and herons of white , crimson , and carnation perch in the river side , the air fresh with a gentle easterly wind , and every stone that we stoop to take up , promise either gold or silver by his complexion . your lordship shall see of many sort , and i hope some of they can be better under the sun , and yet we have no mean but with our dagger and finger to tear they out here and there , the abundance of rock be most hard of that minerali spar afore-^sparre say , which be like a flint , and be altogether as hard or it hard , and beside the vein lie a fathom or two deep in the rock . but we want all thing requisite save only our desire and good will to have perform more if it have please God . to be short , when both our company return , each of they bring also several sort of stone that appear very fair , but be such as they find loose on the ground , and be for the most part but colour , and have not any gold fix in they , yet such as have no judgement or experience keep all that glister , and will not be persuade but it be rich because of the lustre , and bring of those , and of mar-404 1595-quesite with all , from Trinidad , and have deliver of those stone to be try in many place , and have thereby breed a opinion that all the rest be of the same : yet some of these stone i show afterward to a Spaniard of the Caracas , who tell i that it be el Madre del oro , that be the mother of gold , and that the mine be far in the ground . but it shall be find a weak policy in i , either to betray my self , or my country with imagination , neither be i so far in love with that lodging , watch , care , peril , disease , ill savour , bad fare , and many other mischiefs that accompany these voyage , as to woo my self again into any of they , be i not assure that the sun cover not so much riches in any part of the earth . captain Whiddon , and our chirurgeon Nicholas millechap bring i a kind of stone like saphire , what they may prove i know not . i show they to some of the Orenoqueponi , and they promise to bring i to a mountain , that have of they very large piece grow diamond wise : whether it be crystal of the mountain , bristol-diamond , or saphire i do not yet know , but i hope the best , sure i be that the place be as likely as those from whence all the rich stone be bring , and in the same height or very near . on the left hand of this river Caroli be seat those nation which be call Iwarawakeri before remember , which be enemy to the Epuremei : and on the head of it adjoin to the great lake Cassipa , be situate those other nation which also resist Inga , and the Epuremei , call Cassepagotos , Eparegotos , and Arrawagotos . i far understand that this lake of Cassipa be so large , Cassipa a as it be above one day journey for one of their canoas gnat lake . to cross , which may be some fourty mile , and that thereinto fall diverse river , and that great store of grain of gold be find in the summer time when the lake fall by the bank , in those branch . there be also another goodly river beyond Caroli which the nver of be call arui , which also run through the lake Cassipa , arui - 405 Ewaipanomaa strange headless nation . [ he . 653. ] the english voyage and fall into Orenoque far west , make all that land between Caroli and arui a island , which be likewise a most beautiful country . next unto arui there be two river Atoica and Caora , and on that branch which be call Caora , be a nation of people , who head appear not above their shoulder ; which though it may be think a mere fable , yet for my own part i be resolve it be true , because every child in the province of Arromaia and Canuri affirm the same : they be call Ewaipanoma : they be report to have their eye in their shoulder , and their mouth in the middle of their breast , and that a long train of hair grow backward between their shoulder . the son of Topiawari , which i bring with i into England tell i that they be the most mighty man of all the land , and use bow , arrow , and club thrice as big as any of Guiana , or of the Orenoqueponi , and that one of the Iwarawakeri take a prisoner of they the year before our arrival there , and bring he into the border of Aromaia his father country . and far when i seem to doubt of it , he tell i that it be no wonder among they , but that they be as great a nation , and as common as any other in all the province , and have of late year slay many hundred of his father people , and of other nation their neighbour , but it be not my chance to hear of they till i be come away , and if i have but speak one word of it while i be there , i may have bring one of they with i to put the matter out of doubt . such a nation be write of by Mandevile , who report be hold for fable many year , and yet since the east Indies be discover , we find his relation true of such thing as heretofore be hold incredible : whether it be true or no , the matter be not great , neither can there be any profit in the imagination ; for my own part i see they not , but i be resolve that so many people do not all combine , or forethink to make the report . when i come to Cumana in the west Indies afterward by chance i speak with a Spaniard dwell not far from 406 1595-thence , a man of great travel , and after he know that i have be in Guiana , and so far direct west as Caroli , the first question he ask i be , whether i have see any of the Ewaipanoma , which be those without head : who be esteem a most honest man of his word , and in all thing else , tell i that he have see many of they : i may not name he , because it may be for his disadvantage , but he be well know to monsieur mucherons son of London , and to Peter Mucheron merchant of the flemish ship that be there in trade , who also hear what he avow to be true of those people . the four river to the west of Caroli be Casnero the river of which fall into Orenoque on this side of Amapaia , casnen ' and that river be great than Danubius , or any of Europe : it rise on the south of Guiana from the mountain which divide Guiana from Amazones , and i think it to be navigable many hundred mile : but we have no time , mean , nor season of the year , to search those river for the cause aforesaid , the winter the winter be come upon we , although the winter and summer °fgu'lana-as touch cold and heat differ not , neither do the tree ever sensible lose their leaf , but have always fruit either ripe or green , and most of they both blossom , leaf , ripe fruit , and green at one time : but their winter only consist of terrible rain , and overflow of the river , with many great storm and gust , thunder and lightning , of which we have our fill , ere we return . on the north side , the first river that fall into Orenoque be Cari , beyond it on the same side be the river of Limo , between these two be a great nation of cannibal , and their chief town bear the name of the river , and be call Acamacari : at this town be a continual market of woman for three or four hatchet a piece , they be buy by the Arwacas , and by they sell into the west Indies . to the west of Limo be the river Pao , beyond it Caturi , beyond that Voari and Capuri which fall out of the great river of Meta , by 4°7 which Berreo descend from Nuevo reyno de Granada . to the westward of Capuri be the province of Amapaia , where Berreo winter , and have so many of his people poison with the tawny water of the marsh of the anebas . above Amapaia towards Nuevo reyno fall in Meta , Pato , Meta , Pato , and Cassanar . to the west of those to-cassanar . ward the province of the ashaguas and Catetios be the river of Beta , Dawney , and Ubarro , and towards the frontier of Peru be the province of Thomebamba , and Caxamalca . adjoin to Quito in the north side of Peru be the river of Guiacar and Goauar : and on the other side of the say mountain the river of Papamene . Papamene which descend into Marannon or Amazones pass through the province Mutylones where don Pedro de Osua who be slay by the traitor Agiri before rehearse , build his brigandine , when he seek Guiana by the way of Amazones . the isle of between dawney and Beta lie a famous island in Baraquan . Orenoque now call Baraquan ( for above Meta it be not know by the name of Orenoque ) which be call Athule , beyond which , ship of burden can pass by reason of a most forcible overfall , and current of water : but in the eddy all small vessel may be draw even to Peru it self : but to speak of moor of these river without the description be but tedious , and therefore Orenoque a i with leave the rest to the description . this river of Orenoque be navigable for ship little less than 1000 Peru , Nuevo mile , and for lesser vessel near 2000 by it ( as afore-reyno , and say ) Peru , Nuevo reyno , and Popaian , may be invade : Popaian may it also lead to the great empire of Inga , and to the province of Amapaia , and Anebas which abound in gold : l ' ’J he branch of Cosnero , manta , Caora descend from the middle land and valley , which lie between the easter province of Peru and Guiana ; and it fall into the sea between Marannon and Trinidad in two degree and a half : all which your honour shall better perceive in the general description of Guiana , Peru , Nuevo reyno , the kingdom of Popayan , and Roidas , with the 408 province of Venezuela , to the bay of Uraba , behind Cartagena westward ; and to Amazones southward . while we lay at anchor on the coast of Canuri , and have Canuri . take knowledge of all the nation upon the head and branch of this river , and have find out so many several people , which be enemy to the Epuremei , and the new conqueror : i think it time lose to linger any long in that place , especial for that the fury of Orenoque begin daily to threaten we with danger in our return : for no half day pass , but the river begin to rage and overflow very fearful , and the rain come down in terrible shower , and gust in great abundance : and withal , our man begin to cry out for want of shift , for no man have place to bestow any other apparel then that which he wear on his back , and that be thorough wash on his body for the most part ten time in one day : and we have now be well near a month , every day pass to the westward far and far from our ship . we therefore turn towards the east , and spend the rest they return . of the time in discover the river towards the sea , which we have not view , and which be most materiali . the next day follow we leave the mouth of Caroli , and arrive again at the port of morequito where we be before : for pass down the stream we go without labour , and against the wind , little less than a hundred mile a day . assoon as i come to anchor , i send away one for old Topiawari , with who i much desire to have further conference , and also to deal with he for some one of his country , to bring with we into England , as well to learn the language , as to confer withal by the way , the time be now spend of any long stay there . within three hour after my messenger come to he , he arrive also , and with he such a rabble of all sort of people , and every one load with somewhat , as if it have be a great market or fair in England : and our hungry company cluster thick and threefold among their basket , every one lay hand on 409 1595-the last conference of sir Walter Ralegh with Topiawari . who son he bring into England . counsel to be follow in other conquest . Macureguarai the first town of Guiana , and of rich and apparel people . the english voyage what he like . after he have rest a while in my tent , i shut out all but our self , and my interpreter , and tell he that i know that both the Epuremei and the Spaniard be enemy to he , his country and nation : that the one have conquer Guiana already , and the other seek to regain the same from they both : and therefore i desire he to instruct i what he can , both of the passage into the golden part of Guiana , and to the civil town and apparel people of Inga . he give i a answer to this effect : first that he can not perceive that i mean to go onward towards the city of Manoa , for neither the time of the year serve , neither can he perceive any sufficient number for such a enterprise : and if i do , i be sure with all my company to be bury there , for the emperor be of that strength , as that many time so many man more be too few : beside he give i this good counsel and advise i to hold it in mind ( as for himself he know , he can not live till my return ) that i shall not offer by any mean hereafter to invade the strong part of Guiana without the help of all those nation which be also their enemy : for that it be impossible without those , either to be conduct , to be victual , or to have aught carry with we , our people not be able to endure the march in so great heat , and travel , unless the borderer give they help , to carry with they both their meat and furniture : for he remember that in the plain of Macureguarai three hundred Spaniard be overthrow , who be tire out , and have none of the borderer to their friend : but meet their enemy as they pass the frontier , be environ on all side , and the people set the long dry grass on fire , smother they , so as they have no breath to fight , nor can discern their enemy for the great smoke . he tell i far that 4 day journey from his town be Macureguarai , and that those be the next and near of the subject of Inga , and of the 410 Epuremei , and the first town of apparel and rich people , and that all those plate of gold which be scatter among the borderer and carry to other nation far and near , come from the say Macureguarai and be there make , but that those of the land within be far fine , and be fashion after the image of man , beast , bird , and fish . i ask he whether he think that those company that i have there with i , be sufficient to take that town or no ? he tell i that he think they be . i then ask he , whether he will assist i with guide , and some company of his people to joy ne with we ? he answer that he will go himself with all the borderer , if the river do remain fordable , upon this condition that i will leave with he till my return again fifty soldier , which he undertake to victuali : i answer that i have not above fifty good man in all there , the rest be labourer and rower , and that i have not pro - . vision to leave with they of powder , shot , apparel , or [ three . 655. ] aught else , and that without those thing necessary for their defence , they shall be in danger of the Spaniard in my absence , who i know will use the same measure towards i , that i offer they at Trinidad : and although upon the motion captain Calfield , captain green vile , my nephew John Gilbert and diverse other be desirous to stay , yet i be resolve that they must needs have perish , for Berreo expect daily a supply out of Spain , and look also hourly for his son to come down from Nuevo reyno de Granada , with many horse and foot , and have also in Valencia in the Caracas , two hundred horse ready to march , and i can not have spare above forty , and have not any store at all of powder , lead , or match to have leave with they , nor any other provision , either spade , pickeaxe , or ought else to have fortify withal . when i have give he reason that i can not at this time leave he such a company , he then desire i to forbear he and his country for that time , for he 411 assure i that i shall be no soon three day from the coast , but those Epuremei will invade he , and destroy all the remain of his people and friend , if he shall any way either guide we or assist we against they . he further allege , that the Spaniard seek his death , and as they have already murder his nephew morequito lord of that province , so they have he seventeen day in a chain before he be king of the country , and lead he like a dog from place to place , until he have pay a hundred plate of gold , and diverse chain of spleen-stone for his ransom : and now since he become owner of that province , that they have many time lay wait to take he , and that they will be now more vehement , when they shall understand of his conference with the english , and because , say he , they will the better displant i , if they can lay hand on i , they have get a nephew of i call Eparacano , who they have christen don Juan , and his son don Pedro , who they have also apparel and arm , by who they seek to make a party against i in my own country : he also have take to wife one Loviana of a strong family , which be borderer and neighbour , and my self now be old and in the hand of death be not able to travel nor to shift , as when i be of young year : he therefore pray we to defer it till the next year , when he will undertake to draw in all the borderer to serve we , and then also it will be more seasonable to travel , for at this time of the year , we shall not be able to pass any river , the water be and will be so grow ere our return . he far tell i , that i can not desire so much to invade Macureguari , and the rest of Guiana , but that the borderer will be more vehement than i , for he yield for a chief cause that in the war with the Epuremei , they be spoil of their woman , and that their wife and daughter be take from they , so as for their own part they desire nothing of the gold 412 or treasure , for their labour , but only to recover woman from the Epuremei : for he far complain very sad ( as it have be a matter of great consequence ) that whereas they be wont to have ten or twelve wife , they be now enforce to content themselves with three or four , and that the lord of the Epuremei have fifty or a hundred : and in truth they war more for woman then either for gold or dominion : for the lord of country desire many child of their own body , to increase their race and kindred , for in those consist their great trust and strength . diverse of his follower afterward desire i to make haste again , that they may sack the Epuremei , and i ask they of what ? they answer , of their woman for we , and their gold for you : for the hope of those many of woman they moor desire the war , then either for gold , or for the recovery of their ancient territory . for what between the subject of Inga , and the Spaniard , those frontier be grow thin of people , and also great number be flee to other nation far off for fear of the Spaniard . after i receive this answer of the old man , we fall into consideration , whether it have be of better advice to have enter Macureguarai , and to have begin a war upon Inga at this time , yea or no , if the time of the year , and all thing else have sort . for my own part ( as we be not able to march it for the river , neither have any such strength as be requisite , and dare not abide the come of the winter , or to tarry any long from our ship ) i think it be evil counsel to have attempt it at that time , although the desire of gold will answer many objection : but it will have be in my opinion a utter overthrow to the enterprise , if the same shall be hereafter by her majesty attempt : for than ( whereas now they have hear we be enemy to the Spaniard and be send by her majesty to relieve they ) they will as good cheap have join with the Spaniard at our 413 15951 , , , return , as to have yield unto we , when they have prove that we come both for one errant , and that both seek but to sack and spoil they , but as yet [ three . 656. ] our desire of gold , or our purpose of invasion be not know to they of the empire : and it be likely that if her majesty undertake the enterprise , they will rather submit themselves to her obedience then to the Spaniard , of who cruelty both themselves and the borderer have already taste : and therefore till i have know her majesty pleasure , i will rather have lose the sack of one or two town ( although they may have be very profitable ) then to have deface or endanger the future hope of so many million , and the great good , and rich trade which England may be possess of thereby . i be assure now that they will all die even to the last man against the Spaniard in hope of our succour and return : whereas otherwise if i have either lay hand on the borderer , or ransom the lord , as Berreo do , or invade the subject of Inga , i know all have be lose for hereafter . after that i have resolve Topiawari lord of Aromaia , that i can not at this time leave with he the company he desire , and that i be content to forbear the enterprise against the Epuremei till the next year , he free give i his only son to take with i into England , and hope , that though he himself have but a short time to live , yet that by our mean his son shall be establish after his death : and i leave with he one Francis Francis sparrow , a servant of captain Gifford , ( who be sparrow . desirous to tarry , and can describe a country with his pen ) and a boy of i call Hugh Goodwin , to learn the language . i after ask the manner how the Epuremei wrought those plate of gold , and how they can melt it out of the stone ; he tell i that the most of the gold which they make in plate and image , the lake off be not sever from the stone , but that on the lake of Manoa . Manoa , and in a multitude of other river they gather it in grain of perfect gold and in piece as big as small 414 stone , and that they put it to a part of copper , otherwise they can not work it , and that they use a great earthen pot with hole round about it , and when they have mingle the gold and copper together , they fasten cane to the hole , and so with the breath of man they increase the fire till the metal run , and then they cast it into mould of stone and clay , and so make those plate and image . i have send your honour of two sort such as i can by chance recover , more to show the manner of they , then for the value : for i do not in any sort make my desire of gold know , because i have neither time , nor power to have a great quantity . i give among they many more piece ot gold , than i receive , of the new money of 20 shilling with her majesty picture to wear , with promise that they will become her servant thenceforth . i have also send your honour of the ore , whereof i know some be as rich as the earth yield any , of s^-ore . most rich which i know there be sufficient , if nothing else be to be hope for . but beside that we be not able to tarry and search the hill , so we have neither pioner , bar , ledge , nor wedge of iron to break the ground , without which there be no work in mine : but we see all the hill with stone of the colour of gold and silver , and we try they to be no marquesite , and therefore such as the Spaniard call el madre del oro , or , the mother of gold , which be a undoubted assurance of the generali abundance : and my self see the outside of many mine of the spar , which i know to be the same that all covet in this world , and of those , more than i will speak of . have learn what i can in Canuri and Aromaia , and receive a faithful promise of the principall of those province to become servant to her majesty , and to resist the Spaniard , if they make any attempt in our absence , and that they will draw in the nation about the lake of Cassipa , and those iwarawaqueri , i the lake of then part from old Topiawari , and receive his son c ™ 1 ? 0 - 415 for a pledge between we , and leave with he two of we as aforesaid . to Francis sparrow i give instruction to travel to Marcureguarai , with such merchandize as i leave with they , thereby to learn the place , and if it be possible , to go on to the great city of Manoa : which be do , we weigh anchor , and coast the Guiana on the river on Guiana side , because we come upon the north Southside . side , by the lane of the saima and wikiri . there come with we from Aromaia a cassique call Putijma , that command the province of Warapana , ( which Putijma slay the nine Spaniard upon Caroli before speak of ) who desire we to rest in the porte of his country , promise to bring we unto a mountain adjoin to his town that have stone of the colour of gold , which he perform . and after we have rest there one night , i go my self in the morning with most of the gentleman of my company , over land towards the say mountain , march by a river Mana . side call Mana , leave on the right hand a town call Tuteritona , stand in the province of Tarracoa , of the which Wariaaremagoto be principali . beyond it lie another town towards the south , in the valley of Amariocapana , which bear the name of the say valley , who plain stretch themselves some sixty mile in length , east and west , as fair ground , and as beautiful [ three . 657. ] field , as any man have ever see , with diverse copse scatter here and there by the river side , and all as full of dear as any forest or park in England , and in every lake and river the like abundance of fish and foul , of which Irraparragota be lord . from the river of Mana , we cross another river in Diana . the say beautiful valley call Oiana , and rest our self by a clear lake , which lie in the middle of the say Oiana , and one of our guide kindle we fire with two stick , we stay a while to dry our shirt , which with the heat hang very wet and heavy on our shoulder . afterwards we seek the ford to pass over towards the mountain call Iconuri , where 416 Putijma foretell we of the mine . in this lake we see one of the great fish , as big as a wine pipe , which they call Manati , be most excellent and wholesome meat . but after i perceive , that to pass the say river will require half a day march more , i be not able my self to endure it , and therefore i send captain Keymis with six shot to go on , and give he order not to return to the port of Putijma , which be call chiparepare , but to take leisure , and to march down the say valley , as far as a river call Cumaca , where i promise to meet he again , Putijma himself promise also to be his guide : and as they march , they leave the town of Emparepana , and Capurepana , on the right hand , and march from Putijmas house down the say valley of Amariocapana , and we return the same day to the river side , see by the way many rock , like unto gold over , and on the left hand , a round mountain which consist of minerali stone . from hence we row down the stream , coast the province of Parino : as for the branch of river which i overpass in this discourse , those shall be better express in the description with the mountain of Ajo , Ara , and the rest , which be situate in the province of Parino and Carricurrina . when we be come as far down as the land call Ariacoa , ( where Orenoque divide it self into three great branch , each of they be most goodly river ) i send away captain Henry thin , and captain greenevile with the galley , the near way , and take with i captain Gifford , captain calfield , Edward porter , and captain Eynos with my own barge , and the two wherry , and go down that branch of Orenoque , which be call Cararoopana , which lead towards Emeria the province of Carapana , and towards the east sea , as well to find out captain Keymis , who i have send over land , as also to acquaint my self with Carapana , who be one of the great of all the lord of the Orenoqueponi : and when i come to the ten 417 2d A.D. * 595 - great fish call Manati most excellent meat . river of Cumaca ( to which Putijma promise to conduct captain Keymis ) i leave captain Eynos and master porter in the say river to expect his come , and the Emeria . rest of we row down the stream towards Emeria . in this branch call Cararoopana be also many goodly island , some of six mile long , some of ten , and some of twenty . when it grow towards sunset , we enter a branch of a river that fall into Orenoque winicapora . call winicapora : where i be en form of the mountain of crystal , to which in truth for the length of the way , and the evil season of the year , i be not able to march , nor abide any long upon the journey : we see it afar off and it appear like a white church-a mighty cata - tower of a exceed height . there fall over it a rack or overfall mjghty river which touch no part of the side of the ojviaer . mountain , but rush over the top of it , and fall to the ground with so terrible a noise and clamour , as if a thousand great bell be knock one against another . i think there be not in the world so strange a overfall , nor so wonderful to behold : Berreo tell i that there diamond and be diamond and other precious stone on it , and that other precious shine very far off : but what it have i know ' not , neither dare he or any of his man ascend to the top of the say mountain , those people adjoin be his enemy ( as they be ) and the way to it so impassable . upon this river of Winicapora we rest a while , and from thence march into the country to a town call after the name of the river , whereof the captain be one Timitwara , who also offer to conduct i Wacarima . to the top of the say mountain call Wacarima : but when we come in first to the house of the say Timitwara , be upon one of their say feast day , we find they all as drink as beggar , and the pot walk from one to another without rest : we that be weary , and hight with march , be glad of the plenty though a small quantity satisfy we , their drink be very strong and heady , and so rest our self 418 a while ; after we have feed , we draw our self back to our boat , upon the river and there come to we all the lord of the country , with all such kind of victuali as the place yield , and with their delicate wine of pina , and with abundance of hen , and other provision , and of those stone which we call spleen-stone . we understand by the chieftain of Winicapora , that their lord Carapana be depart from Emeria which be now in sight , and that he be flee to Cairamo , adjoin to the mountain of Guiana , over [ three . 658. ] the valley call Amariocapana , be persuade by those ten Spaniard which lie at his house , that we will destroy he , and his country . but after these cassique of Winicapora and sapora-tona his follower perceive our purpose , and see that we come as enemy to the Spaniard only , and have not so much as harm any of those nation , no though we find they to be of the Spaniard own servant , they assure we that Carapana will be as ready to serve we , as any of the lord of the province , which we have pass ; and that he dare doe no other till this day but entertain the Spaniard , his country lie so direct in their way , and next of all other to any entrance that shall be make in Guiana on that side . and they far assure we , that it be not for fear of our come that he be remove , but to be acquit of the Spaniard or any other that shall come hereafter . for the province of Cairoma be situate at the mountain foot , which divide the plain of Guiana from the country of the Orenoqueponi : by mean whereof if any shall come in . our absence into his town , he will slip over the mountain into the plain of Guiana among the Epuremei , where the Spaniard dare not follow he without great force . but in my opinion , or rather i assure my self , that Carapana ( be a notable wise and subtle fellow , a man 419 of one hundred year of age , and therefore of great experience ) be remove , to look on , and if he find that we return strong he will be we , if not , he will excuse his departure to the Spaniard , and say it be for fear of our come . we therefore think it bootless to row so far down the stream , or to seek any far of this old fox : and therefore from the river of Waricapana ( which lie at the entrance of Emeria ) we return again , and leave to the eastward those four river which fall from the mountain of Emeria into Orenoque , which be waracayari , Coirama , akaniri , and Iparoma : below those four be also these branch and mouth of Orenoque , which fall into the east sea , whereof the first be araturi , the next Amacura , the three Barima , the four Wana , the five Morooca , the sixth paroma , the last Wijmi : beyond they there fall out of the land between Orenoque and Amazones 14 river which i forbear to name , inhabit by the Arwacas and cannibal . it be now time to return towards the north , and we find it a wearisome way back from the border of Emeria , to recover up again to the head of the river Carerupana , by which we descend , and where we part from the galley , which i direct to take the next way to the port of Toparimaca , by which we enter first . all the night it be stormy and dark , and full of thunder and great shower , so as we be drive to keep close by the bank in our small boat , be all hearty afraid both of the billow and terrible curent of the river . by the next morning we recover the mouth of the river of Cumaca , where we leave captain Eynos and Edward porter to attend the come of captain Keymis over land : but when we enter the same , they have hear no news of his arrival , which breed in we a great doubt what may become of he : i row up a league or two far into the river , shoot off piece all the way , that he may know of our be there . 420 1595-and the next morning we hear they answer we also with a piece : we take they aboard we , and take our leave of Putima their guide , who of all other most lament our departure , and offer to send his son with we into England , if we can have stay till he have send back to his town : but our heart be cold to behold the great rage and increase of Orenoque , and therefore depart , and turn towards the west , till we have recover the part of the three branch aforesaid , that we may put down the stream after the galley . the next day we land on the island of Assapano ( which divide the river from that branch by which we send down to Emeria ) and there feast our self with that beast which be call Armadilla present unto we before at Winicapora , and the day follow we recover the galley at anchor at the port of Topari - the port of maca , and the same evening depart with very foul Toparimaca . weather and terrible thunder , and shower , for the winter be come on very far : the best be , we go no less than 100 mile a day , down the river ; but by the way we enter , it be impossible to return , for that the river of Amana , be in the bottom of the bay of Guanipa , can be sail back by any mean , both the breeze and current of the sea be so forcible : and therefore we follow a branch of Orenoque call Capuri , which enter into the sea eastward of our ship , to the end we may bear with they before the wind , and it be not without need , for we have by that way as much to cross of the main sea after we come to the river mouth , as between Gravelyn and Dover , in such boat as your Hon. have hear . to speak of what pass homeward be tedious , either to describe or name any of the river , island , or village of the Tivitivas which dwell on tree : we will leave all those to the generail map : and to be short , [ three . 659. ] when we be arrive at the sea side , then grow our great doubt , and the bitter of all our journey before - 421 pass , for i protest before God , that we be in a most desperate estate : for the same night which we ankor in the mouth of the river of Capun , where it fall into the sea , there arise a mighty storm , and the river mouth be at least a league broad , so as we run before night close under the land with our small boat , and bring the galley as near as we can , but she have as much a do to live as can be , and there want little of her sink , and all those in she ; for my own part i confess , i be very doubtful which way to take , either to go over in the pester galley , there be but six foot water over the sand , for two league together , and that also in the channel , and she draw five : or to adventure in so great a billow , and in so doubtful weather , to cross the sea in my barge . the long we tarry the worse it be , and therefore i take captain Gifford , captain Calfield , and my cousin greenevile into my barge ; and after it clear up , about midnight we put our self to god keep , and thrust out into the sea , leave the galley at anchor , who dare not adventure but by daylight : and so be all very sober , and melancholy , one faint cheat another to show courage , it please God that the next day about nine of the clock , we descry the island of Trinidad , and steer for the near part of it , we keep the shore till we come to Curiapan , where we find our ship at anchor , than which there be never to we a more joyful sight . now that it have please God to send we safe to our ship , it be time to leave Guiana to the sun , who they worship , and steer away towards the north : i will therefore in a few word finish the discovery a rehearsal thereof . of the several nation which we find upon y description this discovery i will once again make repetition , and timsandiivers ^°ye be affect - at our first entrance into Amana , find in this which be one of the outlet of Orenoque , we leave on the discovery . right hand of we in the bottom of the bay , lie direct against Trinidad , a nation of inhuman cannibal , which 422 inhabit the river of Guanipa and Berbeese ; in the same bay there be also a three river which be call Areo , which rise on Paria side towards Cumana , and that river be inhabit with the wikiri , who chief town upon the say river be Sayma ; in this bay there be no more river , but these three before rehearse , and the four branch of Amana , all which in the winter thrust so great abundance of water into the sea , as the same be take up fresh , two or three league from the land . in the passage towards Guiana ( that be , in all those land which the eight branch of Orenoque fashion into hand ) there be but one sort of people call Tivitivas , but of two cast as they term they , the one call Ciawani , the other waraweeti , and those war one with another . on the hithermost part of Orenoque , as at Toparimaca , and winicapora , those be of a nation call Nepoios , and be of the follower of Carapana , lord of Emeria . between Winicapora and the port of morequito which stand in Aromaia , and all those in the valley of Amariocapana be call Orenoqueponi , and do obey morequito , and be now follower of Topiawari . upon the river of Caroli , be the canuri , which be govern by a woman ( who be inheritrix of that province ) who come far off to see our nation , and ask i diverse question of her majesty , be much delight with the discourse of her majesty greatness , and wonder at such report as we true make of her highness many virtue : and upon the head of Caroli , and on the lake of Cassipa , be the three strong nation of the Cassipagotos . right south into the land be the capure-pani , and emparepani , and beyond those adjoin to Macureguarai ( the first city of Inga ) be the iwarawakeri : all these be profess enemy to the Spaniard , and to the rich Epuremei also . to the west of Caroli be diverse nation of cannibal , and of those Ewaipanoma without head . direct west be the amapaias and Anebas , which be also marvelous rich in gold . the rest towards Peru we will omit . on the north of 423 the english voyage Orenoque , between it and the west Indies be the wikiri , Saymi , and the rest before speak of , all mortali enemy to the Spaniard . on the south side of the main mouth of Orenoque , be the Arwacas ; and beyond they the cannibal and to the south of they the Amazones . to make mention of the several beast , bird , fish , fruit , flower , gum , sweet wood , and of their several religion and custom , will for the first require as many volume as those of Gesnerus , and for the rest another bundle of Decades . the religion of the Epuremei be the same which the Ingas , emperor of Peru use , which may be read in Cieza , and other spanish story , how they believe the immortality of the soul , worship the sun , and bury with they alive their best belove wife and treasure , as they likewise do in Pegu in the east Indies , and other place . the Orenoqueponi bury not their wife with they , but their jewel , hope to enjoy they again . the Arwacas dry the bone of their lord , and their wife and friend drink they in powder . in the grave of the peruvians the Spaniard find their great abundance of treasure : the like also be to be find among these people in every province . they have all many wife , and the lord fivefold to the common sort : their wife never eat with their husband , nor among the man , but serve their husband at meal , and afterwards feed by themselves . those that be past their young year , make all their bread and drink , and work their cotton bed , and do all else of service and labour , for the man do nothing but hunt , fish , play , and drink , when they be out of the war . i will enter no further into discourse of their manner , law and custom : and because i have not my self see the city of Inga , i can avow on my credit what i have hear , although it be very likely , that the emperor Inga have build and erect as magnificent palace in Guiana , as his ancestor do in Peru , which be for their 424 riches and rareness most marvellous and exceed all in Europe , and i think of the world , China except , which also the Spaniard ( which i have ) assure i to be true , as also the nation of the borderer , who be but savage to those of the inland , do cause much treasure to be bury with they : for i be inform of one of the cassique of the valley of Amariocapana which have bury with he a little before our arrival , a chair of gold most curious wrought , which be make either in macureguaray adjoin , or in Manoa : but if we shall have grieve they in their religion at the first , before they have be teach better , and have dig up their grave , we have lose they all : and therefore i hold my first resolution , that her majesty shall either accept or refuse the enterprise , ere any thing shall be do that might in any sort hinder the same . and if Peru have so many heap of gold , whereof those Ingas be prince , and that they delight so much therein ; no doubt but this which now live and reign in Manoa , have the same honour , and i be assure have more abundance of gold , within his territory , than all Peru and the west Indies . for the rest , which my self have see , i will promise these thing that follow , which i know to be true . those that be desirous to discover and to see many nation , may be satisfy within this river , which bring forth so many arm and branch lead to several country and province , above 2000 mile east and west , and 800 mile south and north , and of these , the most either rich in gold , or in other merchandize . the common soldier shall here fight for gold , and pay himself in steed of penny , with plate of half a foot broad , whereas he break his bone in other war for provant and penury . those commander and chieftain that shoot at honour and abundance , shall find there more rich and beautiful city , more temple adorn with golden image , more sepulchre fill with treasure , then either Cortes find in Mexico , 425 great riches . exceed commendation of the river of Orenoque . the holsome-nesse of the country . gold . Brasil wood . excellent die . the english voyage or Pizarro in Peru : and the shine glory of this conquest will eclipse all those so far extend beam of the spanish nation . there be no country which yield more pleasure to the inhabitant , either for those common delight of hunt , hawk , fish , fowl , or the rest , than Guiana do . it have so many plain , clear river , abundance of pheasant , partridge , quail , rail , crane , herons , and all other fowl : deer of all sort , pork , hare , lion , tiger , leopard , and diverse other sort of beast , either for chase , or food . it have a kind of beast call Cama , or Anta , as big as a english beef , and in great plenty . to speak of the several sort of every kind , i fear will be troublesome to the reader , and therefore i will omit they , and conclude that both for health , good air , pleasure , and riches i be resolve it can be equal by any region either in the east or west . Moreover the country be so healthful , as of a hundred person and more ( which lie without shift most sluttish , and be every day almost melt with heat in row and march , and sudden wet again with great shower , and do eat of all sort of corrupt fruit , and make meal of fresh fish without season , of Tortugas , of Lagartos or crocodile , and of all sort good and bad , without either order or measure , and beside lodge in the open air every night ) we lose not any one , nor have one ill dispose to my knowledge , nor find any Calentura , or other of those pestilent disease which dwell in all hot region , and so near the equinoctial line . where there be store of gold , it be in effect needless to remember other commodity for trade : but it have towards the south part of the river , great quantity of brasil-wood , and diverse berry that die a most perfect crimson and carnation : and for paint , all France , Italy , or the east Indies yield none such : for the more the skin be wash , the fair the colour appear , and 426 the short , easy , and commodious navigation to Guiana . the discovery of Guiana a.d. ... * 595 - with which , even those brown and tawny woman spot themselves , and colour their cheek . all place yield abundance of cotton , of silk , of balsamum , and of those cotton , silk , kind most excellent , and never know in Europe , of all sort of gum , of indian pepper : and what else an the country may afford within the land we know not , neither have we time to abide the trial , and search . the soil beside be so excellent and so full of river , as it will carry sugar , ginger , and all those other commodity , which the west Indies have . the navigation be short , for it may be sail with a ordinary wind in six week , and in the like time back again , and by the way neither lee shore , enemy coast , rock , nor sand , all which in the voyage to the west Indies , and all other place we be subject unto , as the channel of Bahama , come from the west Indies , can well be pass in the winter , and when it be at the best , it be a perilous and a fearful place . the rest of the Indies for calm , and disease very troublesome , and the sea about the Bermuda a hellish sea for thunder , lightning , and storm . this very yeere* there be seventeen sail of Spanish 1595. ship lose in the channel of Bahama , and the great fillip like to have sink at the Bermuda be put back to saint Juan de Puerto rico . and so it fall out in that navigation every year for the most part , which in this voyage be not to be fear : for the time of year to leave England be best in July , and the summer in Guiana be in October , November , December , Januarie , February , and march , and then the ship may depart thence in April , and so return again into England in June , so as they shall never be subject to winter-weather , either come , go , or stay there : which for my part , i take to be one of the great comfort and encouragements that can be think on , have ( as i have do ) taste in this voyage by the west Indies so many calm , so much heat , such outrageous gust , foul weather , and contrary wind . 427 to conclude , Guiana be a country that have yet her maidenhead , never sack , turn , nor wrought , the face of the earth have not be tear , nor the virtue and salt of the soil spend by manurance , the grave have not be open for gold , the mine not break with sledge , nor their image pull down out of their temple . it have never be enter by any army of strength , and never conquer or possess by any christian prince . it be beside so defensible , that if two fort be build in one of the province which i have see , the flood set in so near the bank , where the channel also lie , that no ship can pass up but within a pike length of the artillery , first of the one , and afterward of the other : which two fort will be a sufficient guard both to the empire of Inga , and to a hundred other several kingdom , lie within the say river , even to the city of Quito in Peru. there be therefore great difference between the easiness of the conquest of Guiana , and the defence of it be conquer , and the west or east Indies : Guiana have but one entrance by the sea ( if it have that ) for any vessel of burden : so as whosoever shall first possess it , it shall be find unaccessible for any enemy , except he come in wherry , barge , or canoas , or else in flat bottomed boat , and if he do offer to enter it in that manner , the wood be so thick two hundred mile together upon the river of such entrance , as a mouse can sit in a boat unhit from the bank . by land it be more impossible to approach , for it have the strong situation of any region under the sun , and be so environ with impassable mountain on every side , as it be impossible to victuali any company in the passage : which have be well prove by the spanish nation , who since the conquest of Peru have never leave five year free from attempt this empire , or discover some way into it , and yet of three and twenty several gentleman , knight , and noble man , there be never any that know which way to lead a army by land , or to con - 428 ... I595* dust ship by sea , any thing near the say country . Orellana , of who the river of Amazones take name , be the first , and don Antonio de Berreo ( who we displant ) the last : and i doubt much , whether he himself or any of he yet know the best way into the say empire . tt can therefore hardly be regain , if any strength be former set down , but in one or two place , and but two or three crumster or galley build , and furnish upon the river within : the west Indies have many port , water place , and landing , and near than three hundred mile to Guiana , no man can harbour a ship , except he know one only place , which be not learned in haste , and which i will undertake there be not any one of my company that know , whosoever hearken most after it . beside by keep one good fort , or build one town of strength , the whole empire be guard , and whatsoever company shall be afterwards plant within the land , although in twenty several province , those shall be able all to reunite themselves upon any occasion either by the way of one river , or be able to march by land without either wood , bog , or mountain : whereas in the west Indies there be few town or province that can succour or relieve one the other , either by land or sea : by land the country be either desert , mountainous , or strong enemy : by sea , if any man invade to the eastward , those to the west can in many month turn against the breeze and eastern wind , beside the Spaniard be therein so disperse , as they be no where strong , but in Nueva Espanna only : the sharp mountain , the thorn , and poison [ three . 662. ] prickle , the sandy and deep way in the valley , the smother heat and air , and want of water in other place be their only and best defence , which ( because those nation that invade they be not victual or provide to stay , neither have any place to friend adjoin ) do serve they in steed of good arm and great multitude . 429 the west Indies be first offer her majesty grandfather by Columbus a stranger , in who there may be doubt of deceit , and beside it be then think incredible that there be such and so many land and region never write of before . this empire be make know to her majesty by her own vassal , and by he that owe to her more duty than a ordinary subject , so that it shall ill sort with the many grace and benefit which i have receive to abuse her highness , either with fable or imagination . the country be already discover , many nation win to her majesty love and obedience , and those Spaniard which have late and long labour about the conquest , beat out , discourage and disgrace , which among these nation be think invincible . her majesty may in this enterprise employ all those soldier and gentleman that be young brethren , and all captain and chieftain that want employment , and the charge will be only the first set out in victual and arm they : for after the first or second year i doubt not but to see in London a contractation house of more receipt for Guiana , than there be now in Seville for the west Indies . and i be resolve that if there be but a small army a foot in Guiana , march towards Manoa the chief city of Inga , he will yield to her majesty by composition so many hundred thousand pound yearly , as shall both defend all enemy abroad , and defray all expense at home , and that he will beside pay a garrison of three or four thousand soldier very royal to defend he against other nation : for he can but know , how his predecessor , yea how his own great uncle Guascar and Atabalipa son to Guainacapa emperor of Peru , be ( while they contend for the empire ) beat out by the Spaniard , and that both of late year and ever since the say conquest , the Spaniard have seek the passage and entrey of his country : and of their cruelty use to the 43° * 595-borderer he can be ignorant . in which respect no doubt but he will be bring to tribute with great gladness , if not , he have neither shot nor iron weapon in all his empire , and therefore may easy be conquer . and i far remember that Berreo confess to i and other ( which i protest before the majesty of God to be true ) that there be find among prophecy in Peru ( at such time as the empire be reduce to the spanish obedience ) in their chief temple , among diverse other which foreshow the loss of the say empire , that from Inglatierra those Ingas shall be again in time to come restore , and deliver from the servitude of the say conqueror . and i hope , as we with these few hand have displant the first garrison , and drive they out of the say country , so her majesty will give order for the rest , and either defend it , and hold it as tributary , or conquer and keep it as empress of the same . for whatsoever prince shall possess it , shall be great , and if the king , of Spain enjoy it , he will become unresistable . her majesty hereby shall confirm and strengthen the opinion of all nation , as touch her great and princely action . and where the south border of Guiana reach to the dominion and empire of the Amazon , those woman shall hereby hear the name of a virgin , which be not only able to defend she own territory and her neighbour , but also to invade and conquer so great empire and so far remove . to speak more at this time , i fear will be but troublesome : i trust in God , this be true , will suffice , and that he which be king of all king and lord of lord , will put it into her heart which be lady of lady to possess it , if not , i will judge those man worthy to be king thereof , that by her grace and leave will undertake it of themselves . Letters take at sea by captain George Popham . j594 - Alonso his letter from the grand Canaria to his brother be commander of saint Lucar , concern el Dorado . there have be certain letter receive here of late , of a land new discover call Nuevo Dorado , from the son of certain inhabitant of this city , who be in the discovery : they write of wonderful riches to be find in the say Dorado , and that gold there be in great abundance : the course to fall with it be fifty league to the windward of Margarita . [ Alonsos letter ten 433 2 e alonsos letter from thence to certain merchant of Sant Lucar concern el Dorado . Sirs , we have no news worth the writing , save of a discovery late make by the Spaniard in a new land call Nuevo Dorado , which be two day sail to the windward of Margarita : there be gold in such abundance , as the like have not be hear of . we have it for certain in letter write from thence by some that be in the discovery , unto their parent here in this city . i purpose ( God will ) to bestow ten or twelve day in search of the say Dorado , as i pass in my voyage towards Carthagena , hope there to make some good sale of our commodity . i have send you therewith part of the information of the say discovery , that be send to his majesty . part of the copy that be send to his majesty , of the discovery of Nuevo Dorado . in the river of Pato otherwise call Orenoque , in the principali part thereof call Warismero , the 23 of April 1593 Domingo de vera master of the camp , and generali for Antonio de Berreo governor and captain generail for our lord the king , betwixt the river of Pato and Papamene alias Orenoque , and mar-rannon , and of the hand of Trinidad , in presence of i Rodrigo de Caranza register for the sea , command [ three . 664. ] all the soldier to be draw together and put in order of battle , the captain and soldier , and master of the camp stand in the midst of they , say unto they : sir , soldier , and captain , you understand long since that our general Antonio de Berreo , with the travel of eleven year , and expense of more than a hundred thousand pezo of gold , discover the royal province of Guiana and Dorado : of the which he take possession to govern the same , but through want of his people health , and necessary munition , he issue out at the hand Margarita , and from thence people Trinidad . 434 but now they have send i to learn out and discover the way most easy to enter , and to people the say province , and where the camp and army may best enter the same . by reason whereof i intend so to do in the name of his majesty , and the say governor Antonio de Berreo , and in token thereof i require you Francis Carillo , that you aid i to advance this cross that lie here on the ground , which they set on end towards the east , and the say master of the camp , the captain and soldier kneel down , and do due reverence unto the say cross , and thereupon the master of the camp take a bowl of water and drink it off , and take more and throw abroad on the ground : he also draw out his sword and cut the grass off the ground , and the bough off the tree say , i take this possession in the name of the king don Philip our master , and of his governor Antonio de Berreo : and because some make question of this possession , to they i answer , that in these our action be present the cassique , or principali don Antonio , otherwise call morequito , who land this be , who yield consent to the say possession , be glad thereof , and give his obedience to our lord the king , and in his name to the say governor Antonio de Berreo . and the say master of the camp kneel down be in his liberty , and all the captain and soldier say , that the possession be well take , and that they will defend it with their life , upon whosoever will say the contrary . and the say master bf the camp have his sword draw in his hand say unto i : register , that be here present , give i a instrument or testimoniali to confirm i in this possession , which i have take of this land , for the governor Antonio de Berreo , and if it be needful i will take it a new . and i require you all that be present to witness the same , and do further declare that i will go on , take the possession of all these land wheresoever i shall enter . Signed thus . Domingo de vera , and underneath , before i Rodrigo de Caranza , register of the army . 435 a nd in prosecution of the say possession , and the discovery of the way and province , the 27 of April of the say year , the master of the camp enter by little and little with all the camp and man of war , more than two league into the inland , and come to a town of a principali , and confer with he do let he understand by mean of Antonio Bisante the interpretor , that his majesty and Antonio de Berreo have send he to take the say possession . and the say friar Francis Carillo by the interpretor , deliver he certain thing of our holy catholique faith , to all which he answer , that they understand he well and will become Christians , and that with a very good will they shall advance the cross , in what part or place of the town it please they , for he be for the governor Antonio de Berreo , who be his master . thereupon the say master of the camp take a great cross , and set it on end toward the east , and request the whole camp to witness it , and Domingo de vera firm it thus . it be well and firm do . and underneath . before i Rodrigo Caranza , register of the army . the first of May they prosecute the say possession and discovery to the town on Carapana . from thence the say master of the camp pass to the town of Toroco who principali be call Topiawary be five league far within the land then the first nation , and well inhabit . and to this principali by mean of the interpretor they give to understand that his majesty and the say corregidor command they to take the possession of that land , and that they shall yield their obedience to his majesty , and to his corregidor , and to the master of the camp in his name , and that in token thereof he will place a cross in the middle of his town . whereunto the say cassique answer they shall advance it with a very good will , and that he remain in the obedience of our lord the king , and of the say governor Antonio de Berreo who vassal he will be . 436 the four of May we come to a province above five league thence , of all side inhabit with much people , the principali of this pedple come and meet we in peaceable manner : and he be call revato , he bring we to a very large house where he entertain we well , and give we much gold , and the interpreter ask he from whence [ three . 665. ] that gold be , he answer , from a province not pass a day journey off , where there be so many Indians as will shadow the sun , and so much gold as all yonder plain will not contain it . in which country ( when they enter into the Borracheras or their drunken feast ) they take of the say gold in dust and anoint themselves all over therewith to make the brave show ; and to the end the gold may cover they , they anoint their body with stamp herb of a gluey substance : and they have war with those Indians . they promise we that if we will go unto they , they will aid we ; but they be such infinite number , as no doubt they will kill we . And be ask how they get you same gold , they tell we they go to a certain down or plain , and pull or dig up the grass by the root : which do , they take of the earth , put it in great bucket , which they carry to wash at the river , and that which come in powder they keep for their Borracheras or drunken feast : and that which be in piece they wrought into eagle . the eight of may we go from thence , and march about five league : at the foot of a hill we find a principali call Arataco with three thousand Indians , man and woman all in peace with much victuali , as hen and venison in great abundance , and many sort of wine . he entreat we to go to his house , and to rest that night in his town , be of five hundred house . the interpreter ask whence he have those hen : he say they be bring from a mountain not pass a quarter of a league thence , where be many Indians , yea so many as grass on the ground , and that these man have the point of their shoulder 437 high than the crown of their head , and have so many hen as be wonderful ; and if we will have any , we shall send they Jew harp , for they will give for every one two hen . we take a indian , and give he five hundred harp ; the hen be so many that he bring we , as be not to be number . we say we will go thither ; they tell we they be now in their Borracheras or drunken feast , and will kill we . we ask the indian that bring the hen , if it be true ; he say it be most true . we ask he how they make their Borracheras or drunken feast ; he say , they have many eagle of gold hang on their breast , and pearl in their ear , and that they dance be all cover with gold . the indian say unto we , if we will see they , we shall give he some hatchet , and he will bring we of those eagle . the master of the camp give he one hatchet ( he will give he no more because they shall not understand we go to seek gold ) he bring we a eagle that weigh 27. pound of good gold . the master of the camp take it , and show it to the soldier , and then throw it from he , make show not to regard it . about midnight come a indian and say unto he , give i a pickeaxe , and i will tell thou what the Indians with the high shoulder mean to do . the interpreter tell the master of the camp , who command one to be give he : he then tell we , those Indians be come to kill we for our merchandise . hereupon the master of the camp cause his company to be set in order , and begin to march . the eleven day of may we go about seven league from thence to a province , where we find a great company of Indians apparel : they tell we that if we come to fight , they will fill up those plain with Indians to fight with we ; but if we come in peace , we shall enter and be well entertain of they , because they have a great desire to see Christians : and there they tell we of all the 438 i594 ’ rich that be . i do not here set it down , because there be no place for it , but it shall appear by the information that go to his majesty : for if it shall here be set down , four leaf of paper will not contain it . a table of the name of the river , nation , second voyage river . Nations . Townes . [ Iii . 688. ] 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 arowari great . Iwaripoco very great . Maipari great . Caipurogh great . Arcooa great . Waipoco great . Wanari . Capurwacka great . Cawo great . Arwaos , Pararweas , charibe . Mapurwanas , laos . Arricari . Arricurri . Marowanas , charibe . Coonoracki , Wacacoia , Wariseaco . charibe . charibe . laos . Icomana . io Wia great . Maworia , charib , Wiaco , Ch. 490 Parammona , great . •whereof ten be for that place and Guiana , and have some other ship ready at Cadiz , if the same have not be by my lord her majesty general and your lordship set on fire . in one word ; the time serve , the like occasion seidome happen in many age , the former repeat consideration do all joint together importune we , now , or never to make our self rich , our posterity happy , our prince every way strong than our enemy , and to establish our country in a state flourish and peaceable . o let not then such a indignity rest on we , as to deprave so notable a enterprise with false rumour , and vain supposition , to sleep in so serious a matter , and renounce the honour , strength , wealth , and sovereignty of so famous a conquest , to leave all unto the Spaniard . town , and casique or captain that in this be discover . captain . 1 these be enemy to the laos , their money be of white and green stone . they speak the Tivitivas language ; so likewise do the nation of the Arricari , who have great store of those money then any other . 2 here it be as it seem , that Vincent Pinzon the Spaniard have his emerald . in one of these two river certain Frenchmen that suffered shipwreck some 2. or 3. year since , do live . 3 . 4. 5. Theise with the other two seem to be branch of the great river of Amazones . when we first fall with land , we be , by the indian report , but 1. day journey from Wareo . Mashwipo . the great river , that be on that coast . 6 the first mountain that appear within land , do lie on the east side of this river . from 491 11 caiane g . Wiaco . Ch. Canawi . g . Gowateri a great island . Shebaios . Orinikero . 12 Macuria . Piraos . Ch. 13 Cawroora . arawaccos Charib . 14 Manmanuri . Ipaios . Ch. 15 cureey . Shebaios . 16 Curassiwini . Shebaios . Musswara . great . 17 Cunanama . laos . Arwaccas . Waritappi . great 18 uracco . Arwaccas . Moruga . Arwaccas . 19 Mawari . winicinas . Arwaccas . Iwanama . 20 Mawarpari . Arwaccas . Awaricana . 21 amonna very great . charibe . laremappo . Capellepo . g . very great . 22 Marawini . g . Paracuttos . 23 Owcowi . 24 wiawiami . 25 Aramatappo . 26 Wiapo . 27 Macuruma . 28 Carapi . 29 Uraca . 30 Chaimawimini great . Carepini . Charib . 31 Ecrowto . upotomma . 32 Pawro . maripomma . 33 Shurinama g . Arwaccas . Carepini . Chari . 34 Shurama g . Carepini . Cupari . 35 Northumbria or cu - Char. panama very g . Arwaccas . 36 Wioma . [ Iii . 689. ] 37 cushwini . Neekeari . Tawrooromene . 38 Inana . g . Carepini . owaripoore . 39 Curitini . g . Mawronama . Arwaccas . Parawianni . 40 Winitwari g . 492 maiapoore . Cariwacka . Parawatteo . Ocapanio . Carinamari . curipotoore . Marwabo . Eramacoa . Aranacoa . Mahahonero . caponaiarie . Neperwari . the mouth thereof , the inhabitant do pass with their canoas in 20. day to the salt lake , where Manoa stand . the water have many cataract like Caroli , but that they be of great distance one from another : where it fall into the sea , hill do enclose it on both side . 10 the freshet shoot out into the sea , with great force : the sea do here sometime camp high , and break , as if it be full of rock : but in proof it be nothing else but the pride and force of the tide . in this bay , and round about , so far as the mountain do extend there be great store of Brasill wood , some of it bear far dark colour than other some . here be also many sort of other good wood . 14 these speak the language of the Indians of Dominica . they be but few , but very cruel to their enemy . for they bound , and eat they alive piecemeal . this torment be not comparable to the deadly pain that come of hurt , or wound , make by those arrow that be envenome with the juice of you herb Wapototo . Theise Indians because they eat they who they kill , use no poison . the sea coast be nowhere populous , for they have much waste themselves , in mutual war . but now in all part so far as Orenoque , they live in league and peace . 21. near the head of this river , Capeleppo fall out of the plain , and run into the sea with Curitini . some of the guianians live in this river . 39 this river , as also most of the rest , be not navigable above six day journey by reason of rock . it be ten day journey to the head , where the guianians do dwell : honey , yarn or cotton , silk , balsamum , and brasil-493 manacobeece . eppera . parawiannos . Lupulee . 42 Wapari . Shebaios . Arwaccas . Madewini . 43 Maicawini . Panapi . Arwaccas . Itewee . 44 Mahawaica . Arwaccas . Maburesa . g . 45 lemerare . g . Wacawaios . Maburesa . g . * so call 46 * Devoritia or desk - arwaccas . after the name kebe very g . laos . of the right shebaios . honourable the Arwaccas . EarleofEssex . Matorooni . charibe . Coowini . Maripai . Chipanama . Wocowaios . Arawanna . Parawianni . Itorebece . Iwarewakeri . Caiaremappo . 47 Pawrooma . g . laos . Waroopana . Aripacoro . panipi . Maripa . Ecawini . Chipariparo . Manurawini . Towtwi . sarinbugh . Wariwagh . 48 Moruga . g . laos . cooparoore . g . Piara . Chaimeragoro . Arwaccas . Awiapari . Topoo . 49 Waini . g . charibe . Tocoopoima . g . So barima . g . charibe . Pekwa . g . Caitooma . Arooca . Arwaccas . Arwakima . 51 Amacur . g . 52 Aratoori . g . Cawrooma . g . Raleana , or Orenoque . Maipar [ hand in the ita caponea mouth of Owarecapater . Warucanasso . [ Raleana . 494 Warawaroco . Benmurwagh . Caporaco . great Cap. bed be here to be have in plenty , and so all the coast alongst eastward . some image of gold , spleenestone , and other may be get on this coast , but they do somewhat extraordinary esteem of they , because every where they be current money . they get their moon , and other piece of gold by exchange , take for each one of their great canoas , one piece or image of gold , with three head , and after that rate for their lesser canoas , they receive piece of gold of less value . one hatchet be the ordinary price for a Canoa . they have every where diverse sort of drug , gum , and root , which i doubt not by far trial , will be find medicinable . name of poison herb . Macapowa . Shuracoima . ourari . Carassi . Apareepo . Parapara . Manarecowa . larwarema . Parana . Anawra . Aparwa . Arracurri . herb good against poison . Turara . Cutarapama . Wapo . Macatto . the 29. day of June we arrive in Portland ride , have spend five month in go , stay , and return . the three voyage set forth by sir Walter Ralegh to Guiana , with a pinnace call the Watte , in the year 1596. write by m. Thomas Mash be a gentleman of the company . Pon Thursday the 14. of October 1596. we set sail from limehouse upon the river of Thames , and through much contrariety of wind and other accident , we make it the 27. of December , before we can get out of Waimouth . the 25. of Januarie in the morning we come to the north side of the island of grand Canaria , where we hope to have get a boat to serve we upon the coast of Guiana , but the wind be so great , that we can not launch our shalope : so we pass along by the road and the town , and at length see a boat lie on shore , which be too big for we , we rip up , and wooded our self with she . that day we descry a sail , which at length we find to be a flyboat of Dartmouth , of 200. ton , bind to the island of Mayo for salt . we fall in consort with she , and that night stand for the southermost part of the island there to water , where we stay all the next day , and water at the southsouthwest part thereof . that night we weigh and stand away together southsoutheast , and south and by east , purpose by their persuasion to go for the river Doro. the 28. of Januarie we make the furthermost part of Barbary ; and this morning we jor the u^outk meet with m. Benjamin wood with his fleet of 3 sail sea . xi i a bind for the straight of Magellan and China , to wit , the bear , the whelp , and the Benjamin : who tell we that there be no good to be do in the river Doro. Cape Blanco . whereupon we stand along with they for cape Blanco , unto which we come upon Sunday night next follow . and upon Monday morning the first of February , we see two ship in a sandy bay : so we stir in with they , which be Frenchman bind for the west Indies , and put all into the bay , where we refresh our self with fish , in which there be infinite store , and stay there until Thursday the 5. at which time we stand up with the cape again , where ride the Frenchman and his pinnace , who put forth right afore we , and another Frenchman and his caravel well man : so all our 5. English come to a anchor by they , where after kind greeting with many shot out of every ship both english and french , all our captains be invite to a feast aboard the french admiral : where after great cheer and kind entertainment , it be conclude on all hand to take the isle of Fogo , if God will give we leave . the same day we all weigh and stand along for the the island jsje of ga^ unto which we come the 8. of February , of and anchor altogether at a bay in the west part thereof : in which island we have good store of goat and fresh fish . there be no man dwell upon the island that we can see . we can find no fresh water upon it , but one stand puddle of bad water : it have four great mountain upon the 4. corner of it . here the Frenchman ( as it seem being overcome with drink , have be aboard our generali at a feast ) be on shore , one of the gentleman of their company be slay , and their chief captain sore wound : by reason whereof , and of the set together of a pinnace which they be about , the french admiral and the caravel stay behind . so we in the Watte , and the other 6. ship weigh the 10. of [ three . 693. ] February , and stand away for the isle of Maio . this night the other two french ship that come from Sal with we ( as it seem of purpose , because their consort be not with they ) lose we . the next morning we see Maio . so we and the flyboat of Dartmouth compass the northermost part of the island , and master Benjamin wood in the china-fleete , the southermost , and come all to a anchor together at the southwest part thereof : where ride six sail of psalle of Fleming lade salt ; who have bring their horse and cart , and wheelbarrow , and plank for their m0j0r sa ’ barrow to run upon . here be abundance of salt in this island make by God hand without man labour . Theise tell we that there be thirty sail more , which fall to leeward of Fogo , who , as i hear since , beat it up with much ado , and come thither also for salt . this trade may be very beneficial to England , consider the dearness of salt . of goat on this island there be such store , as be incredible , but to those that have see they : and it be a wonder how they live one by the other , the ground be stony and barren . it be think that there be dwell in it some twenty mountainier , which get one of the Fleming man straggle , and God know what they do with he : for they see he no more . this island be somewhat low and round , have no great mountain upon it . here end our determination concern the invade of Fogo . and here we leave the flyboat of Dartmouth lade salt , and the china-fleete to refresh themselves with goat , who as i have hear since have at the village ( from whence the mountainier be flee into the further part of the island and rock ) great store of dry goat which they carry along with they : which be like to be a great help unto they in their long voyage . so upon Saturday the 12 of February at night we set sail and stand for the coast of Wiana , which we be bind for . upon Sunday the twenty of February we come into the main current that set from the cape of buena esperanza along the coast of Brasil , and so towards the west Indies , for the most part set away northwest . the Tuesday night follow , whereas before our course be westsouth west , we stand away west and by south : by reason whereof , and of the current that set we to the northward , we be the next day by noon twenty minute further to the northward then the day before . so that than we lay away Southwest , because we be loath to fall to the northward of our place intend : which if we shall be put to leeward of , there be small hope leave to recover it . by Thursday we be within one degree i of the equinoctial line : therefore this day we hail away west and by south , and west among . this night we sound , but have no ground at 90 fathom . the next day in the morning the colour of the water begin to change , and to be more white , so we make another sound and have ground at thirty fathom , but see no land , and in the afternoon we hail away westnorthwest , northwest , and northnorthwest . in the night we sound diverse time , and have twelve , ten , and nine fathom water . all Saturday we have a thick red water , and have seven and eight fathom both day and night , and upon Sunday morning by day be the seven and twenty of February , we make the land which appear low , and trend near as we fall with it , south and by east , north and by west about two degree towards the north . right on head of we be a cape or head land , so that have we be shoot a little further into the bay , the wind be more northerly , we shall hardly have double it off . for with much ado make many board , and stop every tide , it be the Tuesday follow before we clear our self of the bay , and recover the cape . now the land trend northwest and by north , and southeast and by south . and still we be fain to anchor every tide sometime in four fathom , and sometime in three , as far as we can the river of Wiapoucou almost in 4 degree north . Thomas Masham ad .. * 597 - see land . so about night we see cape Cecill : and cape Cecil in after some two hour come to a anchor . between these 3 degree and two cape the land lie low and even . a half - upon Wednesday morning , have the wind large at Eastnortheast , we lay it away upon a board into the bay of Wiapoucou and come to a anchor in the river mouth in two fathom : over the bar there be little water , as 6 and 7 foot , and less in many place . and this river of Wiapoucou stand almost in 4 degree to the northward of the line . the next morning we weigh , and stand in with our pinnace by night , we get some eight league up the river . this day sometime we have but 5 foot water and draw 7 foot , but be soft oaze we go clear : and a little before we come to anchor , we be on ground upon a rock , but with some trouble and labour we get off and have no hurt . upon Friday the 4 of march towards night we come to the fall . the next day m. Leonard Berrie our captain , the master , my self and some 5 more , go through the wood , and spend all the day in search the head of the fall , but can not find it : for though we pass by many , yet be there more still one above [ three . 694. ] the other . so that find no Indians in this river to buy victual of , neither any kind of thing that may entice we to come to so short allowance , as we must have do , if we have spend any long time here , find it over hard to pass the fall , we fall down the river again , and by Friday the 11 of march we clear our self of the river and bay . this river from the mouth to the fall be some 16 league , in many place a mile over , but for the most part half a mile . there be many island in it : as be also in most of the river upon the coast . this night we anchor against Cawo in two fathom ; whereinto we Cam. think to have put with our pinnace : but find the water so shall , and the sea so grow , that neither with our ship nor shallope we dare go in . on Saturday by noon we come to anchor under one the 7 hand , of the 7 island : upon which go on shore we find neither man nor beast , but great store of yellow plumb which be good to eat . upon Sunday after dinner our master William Dowie and 6 moor go off with our boat to a town Aramatto a call Aramatto ; where they find many inhabitant , great tosvne . anj bring victual and some tobacco with they , and one indian name caprima , who lie aboard all night , the next day be Monday the 14 of march go with TheCaribestf our captain into Wias , and there trade with the wiastractable caribe for such thing as they have . and afterward ' they of Aramatto come off with their canoas to we , and we go on shore to they : and from thence our captain send a canoa with seven man , which have every one of they a knife to go back to the river of Cawo , and to tell ritimo captain of that place , that because we can not come to he , we will Chiana a stay at Chiana for he , whither we entreat he to river and bay . come to we . so upon Thursday the 17 we stand in for Chiana , and come to a anchor without in the bay in 3 fathom that night : and have the caribe come continual to we with their canoas , which bring we great store of victual and some tobacco , show themselves very kind and love , and come all from their town , and dwell on shore by we until ritimo come : at who come they return all up to their town again , which be upon the Sunday follow . all this day we feast he and his train , and the next day we traffic with they for such thing as they bring , which be principal tobacco . after that they have make know their mind of the desire that they have to have the english come and kill the Spaniard , and to dwell in Orenoque and in the country , they depart with their 3 canoas the next day . and we with the help of the caribe of Chiana , have by their mean from the shore water , because the river mouth be salt , depart out of 6 the bay the Thursday follow , and pass by Macerea , couroura , and Manamanora , by reason of shoald , rock , and great wind , be a lee shore ; and for want of a good shalope , we come to a anchor the next day be good Friday in five fathom near the triangle Islands call the carere . and upon the Carenes . Saturday stand to the westward , we stop against the town of Maware , which be a little to the Maware . Westward of the town Comanamo : from whence and from the other town in that bay , which be some 6 or 7 , we have canoas come off to we as before with such thing as they have themselves in use , with parrot , monkey , and cotton-wool , and flax . from whence we depart upon Monday follow the 28 of march 1597. And pass by the river of euracco and Amano , which open but a small river , and be shall off , we come to marawinne the next day : and find a marawinne channel of three , four , and five fathom , we stand a rtver ' into the river : and the same day come to a anchor some 2 league in against the mouth of cooshepwinne , which river go into Amana . into which , ( understand that there be arwaccawe dwell ) this night we send our boat and come to a town call Marrac one league in : and find the people some - Marrac , a thing pleasant , have drink much that day , be as towne-it seem a festival day with they , yet be they very fearful and ready to run away at the first sight of we , have seidome see any christian before . but assoon as Henry our indian interpreter have tell they what we be , and our intent , they come to we and use we kind , and bring we victual and other thing . and the next day their captain Mawewiron come out into marawinne , with diverse canoas , and trade with we , and we go in again to they on shore , who make very much of we , and carry we from house to house , and make we eat and drink in every house which we come in . and the next day follow be the last of march , have the captain of Marrack with we , we weigh and stand into the river , and about two of the clock in the afternoon come to a anchor some eight league within the river , a little short of a Quiparia a town call Quiparia , the people whereof be caribe : tCmibffae W^° ’ w^en see we come towards their town with ' our boat , begin all to run into the wood , until the captain of Marrac which be with we in the boat , leap overboard and swim on shore unto they , and tell they that we be Englishman , and come in friendship to trade with they . upon who report they come before night six or [ three . 695. ] seven canoas aboard we , yet very fearful , because there be never either ship or Christian see in that river before . the first of April , we weigh Macirria a again , and stand in to the next town call Macirria : town . where come to anchor , there come a canoa from Amano to we , with great store of victual , which canoa we buy : and because we meet with some shold , we be loath to go any far with our pinnace : so there we more she , and the next day at three of the clock in the afternoon , eleven of we ( master Monax have the government of the action , by the captain appointment ) with Mawerirou , Henry , and William of Cawo , in the canoa which we buy , go into the river far to search it so far as we can , and that night get some five league from our ship . and between two village , awodwaier and Mapeributto , we take up our lodging in the wood . the three of April , betimes in the morning , we take our course still unto the river , and in the afternoon come to one house where we find many Indians , where we hire another canoa and four Indians , into the which i go , and one more of our man , and this night get twelve league far , and as before , lodge among the wild beast . on Monday the four of April , we come to the fall of this river about two in the afternoon : and have 8 shot up some of the rock , we go on shore upon a island , and there confer of our far proceed . And inquire of the Indians that we hire for our pilot of the last house , whether the fall be passable or not : their first answer be , that they have nothing to eat : but we be loath to loose so much labour , and the sight of that upper rich country , which we desire , tell they that they shall have victual of we ( though God know we have none for our self ) who see we so importunate , say far , that the rock will kill the canoas : which they say because indeed they have no victual : which by some be take for sufficient to proceed no far , and so we leave off , and only stay some two hour upon the island , and with the swiftness of the current , fall that night down io league again . though i for my own part offer in that small canoa that i be in , be so leak , that my self do nothing but lave out the water , to lead they the way , and if they see any danger to i , they may choose whether they will come into it or not themselves . for see the country above be rich as we be inform , that their bow be handle with gold , ( be man of a extraordinary stature for talnes ) we shall have take the more pain , and have fare the hard , until we have get up in the country which we see with our eye : for though we have not victual in any sort to carry we up , yet the wood do yield fruit and the palmito tree afford meat , whereby we may have make shift to live , until we have come to the inhabitant , by who we may both be refresh with victual , and also have reap that , which may have do we good as long as we have live . but to return to the rest of our voyage : the day after we go from the fall we come to our ship , which be the five of April 1597. on Wednesday we fall with our pinnace to Quiparia again : where 9 A.D. * 597 - a rich country . Bowes handle with gold . we bring she on ground right before the town , and pitch to trim trim she with the pitch of the country : and until ship . we hac | do , keep a corpse du guard , night and day on shore , which be upon Saturday follow the nine of April . all the while we be there we have a house of the caribe , and be kind use of they , and have victual , and every thing we need of they . and so take our leave on Tuesday be then the river of twelve of April , we come to the mouth of cusse-cusse-winne . wonderful [ nnej where the Arwaccas of Marrac and of the river have provide and bring to we such infinite store of potato , and guiney-wheate , that the steward say we have no stowage for they ; and so they be turn back , and we by that mean come to short allowance home ward bind , then ( if there have be any good care ) we need to have do . on Friday the fifteeneth of April , we put forth marawime . of marawinne , which be some four league over , and within one league and a half for the most part broad ; full of island , and diverse small river run into it : and it be between forty and fifty league , from the mouth to the fall , and lie for the most part south Southwest up , alter some 3 point , be almost straight . And stand along to the westward , this night we try with our main coarse and bonnet . on Saturday night we Sewramo . come to a anchor , in three fathom against Sewramo . on Sunday morning we think to have go into cuppa-namo : but send off our boat and find uncertain sound , sometime 3 fathom and present 9 foot , Coritine we stand along to Coritine , and come into it upon the river . Monday be the 18 of April : and the next night we come to anchor against Warrawalle in 10 fathom . on Wednesday the Indians of the town have hunt a doe , she take soil and come near our ship , and put off with our boat we take she , be like unto our deer in England , not altogether so fat , but very good flesh and [ three . 696. ] great body . in this river we meet a bark call the John of London captain leigh be in she . And be both fall down within some five league of the mouth of the river , upon intelligence that one Marracon , ( who we bring along with we ) give we , namely that the river Desekebe , in which he dwell ( and wherein there be some three hundred Spaniard , which for the most part now be destroy and dead ) do lead so far into the country , that it come within a day journey of the lake call perima , whereupon Manoa be suppose the great lake to stand ; and that this river of Coritine do meet with ? er‘ma-desekebe up in the land : by mean whereof we make account to go up into the country , and to have discover a passage unto that rich city . So have conclude both ship , we stand up into the river again , and come to Warawalle the 24 of April there our ship ride until we go up to Mawranamo to speak with Marracon , to know the truth of these thing : who when we have find , he verify all that before he have speak : master Monax be the man that of Leonard of Cawe take all the intelligence : who be bring up with Antony Berreo can speak some spanish and marracons language also . and beside we our self by sign , and draw the two river on the ground , and the meeting of they aloft , do perceive as much . now come down with our boat the six and twenty of April we go up with our ship to Mawranama , where we mor they , and take some twenty out of both , upon Thursday the eight and twenty in the afternoon with two shallop and two canoas , in one of which Henry the indian be and some twenty Indians moor , we go up the river ; and by night get some three league far we lodge in the wood , and the next morning we with our boat and the two canoas went into a small river call they bring their ship up to the Mawranamo . tapuere , to a town call Macharibi , think to have have Casavi and other victual , which they be altogether unprovide of , by reason that they make no more ready than serve themselves from hand to mouth , live in this town for the most part by fish . by mean of go both into this river , though we row very hard it be noon before we overtake the big shallop wherein both the captain be . this night we come to a town call Vaperon , where we stay all Saturday and the night follow , for Casavi : whereof they bake good store for we being but a few leave in the town . for not a month before we come thither , the waccawa that dwell above the fall come down to the town , and slay some ten of they , and many of the rest flee away , so that we find most of the house empty . upon Sunday morning be may day , we go from this place , and by night get some twelve league beyond , and be past all town we lodge as before in the wood , and the next day come to the fall of the river ; up some of which fall we shoot with our boat , and go upon a rock there come some nine canoas up the river to we , and will have go up with we to kill the waccawayans , because they have kill some of they , as before be say . whereupon the captain and master Monax take advice : and because now they have learn , as they say , that five day journey far there be a fall not passable , and that by this mean they shall make the wacchawayans their enemy , which will turn to our great hurt , when sir Walter Ralegh shall come thither , have occasion to use this river , where we be inform be good store of gold , they resolve to return , though i yield diverse reason to the contrary . so upon Tuseday night , we come back to Vaperon , where we lodge . and upon Wednesday the four of May , we come to our ship : where it be report that the Spaniard be go ne out of Desekebe , which be not so : but as it seem in policy by they give out to make our man that we leave in our ship more careless , that they may the easy have surprise they in our absence . the next night we have news bring we to Mawranamo , where we yet ride , that there be ten canoas of Spaniard in the mouth of Coritine ; and fear lest they 12 have intend to come to we in the night , we fit all our gun and musket , and keep good watch to prevent they of their purpose ; who , as it be afterward tell we , go along the coast to buy bread and other victual for they in Orenoque , Marowgo , and Desekebe . upon Friday the six of May we weigh and make down the river , and upon Sunday the eight we get clear of it . this river be much like unto Marawynne in breadth , and about fifty league from the mouth to the first fall , full of island as the other : in which three river , Mano , tapuere , and tabvebbi , otherwise Tapuellibi : with six town , Warrawalle , Mawranamo , maapuere , maccha-ribi , Yohoron , and Vaperon . and so clere our self of this coast , we take our course to the island of the west Indies . now i think it not amiss to speak something of this country . and first touch the climate ; though it stand within the Tropic , and something near to the equinoctial , so that the sun be twice a year over their head and never far from they , yet be it temperate enough in those part . for beside that we lose not a man [ he - 697. ] upon the coast , one that be sick before he come there , be nothing sick for be there , but come home safe , thank be to God . and for my own part , i be never better in body in all my life , and in like sort fare it with the rest of the company : for indeed it be not so extreme hot as many imagine . the people in all the low part of the country go naked , both man and woman , be of several language , very tractable , and ingenious , and very love and kind to Englishmen general ; as by experience we find , and upon our own knowledge do report . in the upper country they go apparel , be , as it seem , of a more civil disposition , have great store of gold , as we be certain inform by the great store low Indians , of who we have some gold , which they m bring and buy in the high country of Wiana , be able to buy no more , because they want the thing the english voyage which now we have leave among they . they keep no order of marriage ; but have as many wife as they can buy , or win by force of their enemy , which principal be the cause of all their war . for bread there be infinite store of casavi , which be as good bread as a man need to eat , and better than we can carry any thither . we spend not a bit of our own all the while we be upon the coast . it be make of a root so call ; which they take and scrape , and crush all the juice out , be poison ; and when it be dry it be as fine flower as our white meal make : which dry as it be , without any moisture , they strew upon a round stone , have a still fire under it , and so it congeal to a cake ; and when it come new off , it eat like to our new white bread . beside there be great store of guiny-wheat ( whereof they make pass good drink ) which after it be once sow , if you cut off the ear , on the same stalk grow another . for victual , we either do not , or at least need not to have spend any of our own : for there be great store of as good fish in the river , as any be in the world . great store of fowl , of diverse sort . tortoise-flesh plentiful , and tortoise egg innumerable . deer , swine , cony , hare , cock and hen , with potato more than we can spend . beside , all kind of fruit , at all time of the year : and the rare fruit of the world , the pine , the plantan , with infinite other variable and pleasant , grow to their hand , without plant or dress . for commodity , though we have but small time to search , because we spend so much time in search the river : yet we have bring example of some , which the country yield in great plenty : as a kind of long hemp like unto steel hemp , fine cotton wool , which the tree yield great store of ; and wherewith the woman make a fine thread , which will make excellent good fustian or stocking . great store of pitch , diverse sort of sweet gum , and west indian pepper , balsamum , parrot and monkey . beside diverse other commodity , which in good time may be find out to the benefit of our 1597-countrey , and profit of the adventurer , who as yet have venture much , have gain little . now leave the river of Cori tine , pass by saint Vincent , Santa Lucia , and Matalina , we come to Dominica upon the Friday follow , be the thirteenth of May , have lose the bark that come out with we the wednes - tty thy ty-day before . upon Sunday morning , the fifteen of tn may , we come to Guadalupe , where we water at ” ° the Souther part of the island , and have do by night , we set sail , and stand away to the northward , but be becalm all night , and until ten of the clock on Monday night : at which time have a fair gale at east , and after at southeast , we pass along in the sight of monserate , Antigua , and Barbuda . upon the nine of June , be Thursday , we make the island of Flores and Corvo : and the eight and twenty of June we make the lisart , and that night come all safe to Plymmouth , bless be God . between the isle of Barbuda in the west Indies and England we have three mighty storm , many calm , and some contrary wind . and upon the fourteen of June 1597 , there be diverse whale play about our pinnace , one of they cross our stem , and go under , rub she back against our keel : but by none of all these we sustain any loss . thank be to he that govern all thing . write by master Thomas Masham . testimony of the Amazon broad and as much beat , as the way between Salamanca and Validolid : and this be when the great entrance or discovery be make by the great river of the Amazon or Marannon by Pedro de Orsua , and afterwards by other that succeed he : and they suppose that Dorado which they seek , be far up in the country , do not inhabit there , and afterward return without discover Dorado ( which they never find ) and without that great province which they leave . a short description of the river of Marannon or Amazones , and the country thereabouts , as also of the sea of freshwater , take out of a ancient discourse of all the port , creek , and haven of the west Indies , write by Martin Fernandez de Enciza , and dedicate to Charles the emperor , anno 1518. Arannon lie in seven degree and a half northward of the equinoctial , it be a great river , and have more than fifteen league in breadth eight league within the land . it have many island , and in this river within the land forty league there be near to the say river a mountain , whereupon grow tree of incense , the tree be of a good height , and the bough thereof be like to plumtree , and the incense do hang at they , as the ice do at the tile of a house in the winter season when it do freeze . in this river be take four Indians in a small boat , call in the indian language a Canoa , that come down by the river , and there be take from they two stone of emerald , the one of they be as great as a man hand . they say that so many day journey go upward by the river , they find a rock of that stone . likewise there be take from they two loaf make of flower , which be like to cake of soap , and it seem that 19 A.D. 1518. they be knead with the liquour of balsamum . all this coast from the cape of S. Austine unto Marannon be a clear coast and deep , but near to the river be certain shold towards the east part . and by the west part the river be deep , and it have a good entry . from this river Marannon , unto the river which be call the sea of fresh water , be 25 league : this river have 40 league of breadth at the mouth , and carry such abundance of water that it enter more than 20 league into the sea , and mingle not it self with the salt water : this breadth go 25 league within the land , and after it be divide into part , the one go towards the southeast , and the other towards the southwest . that which go towards the southeast be very deep and of much water , and have a chanel half a league of breadth , that a carrack may go up through it : and the tide be so swift , that the ship have need of good cable . the river of this port be very good , and there have be some that have enter 50 league within it , and have see no mountains . the Indians of this country have their lip make full of small hole in 4 part , and through those hole be put small ring , and likewise at their ear : and if any man ask of they where they have their gold , they answer , that go up by the river so many day journey , they find certain mountain that have much of it , and from those mountain they bring it when they will have it , but they make no great account of it , for they neither buy nor sell , and among they be nothing but change . in this country they eat bread of root , and Maiz , and they eat certain root which they call aies and batatas , but the batatas be better than the other root , and be raw they have a smell of chestnut : they be to be eat roast . Theise Indians do make wine of the fruit of datetree , which fruit be yellow in colour , and be as great as a little dove egg , and be in season be good to be eat , and of it proceed good wine , and be preserve for a long time . Theise kind of people do make their house with upper room , and they sleep in they , as also all their habitation be in the upper room , and that which be below , they leave open : and also they use certain mantel of cotton wool , and these they tie at the end with rope , and the one end of the rope they make fast to one part of the house , and the other end to the other part of the house : and in these they lie , which be their bed , and these kind of bed be use in ' all India , and there be not in any part of India any chamber that the people do use to lodge in aloft from the ground , nor they make any high room , but only in this part of India : and in all other place they make their house without any loft or chamber , and they cover their house with the leaf of datetree , and of grass . and from this fresh water sea unto Paria , the coast lie west northwest , and be so full of shold that the ship can come near to the land . there be from this river to Paria 250 league . in this fresh water sea , the tide do ebb and flow as much as they do in Britain , and it stand in 6 degree and a half . Paria stand on the other side of the equinoctial towards the north , in seven degree : in Paria the sea flow but little , and from Paria towards the west , the sea do not flow . from the entry of the gulf of Paria unto the cape that lie towards the west , be 35 league , and from thence the coast turn towards the north-east other 35 league , and from thence the coast turn towards the west . before this gulf stand the island of Trinidad , and towards the west do appear the gulf of Paria like to half a round circle , after the fashion of a diameter , and at the end of this circle be the entery inn of Paria , and at this entery there be between the land and the island 8 league , and on the other side there be but little space between the hand and the land , but it be deep , and have a good entry : this hand of Trinidad have in length 25 league , and as many in breadth , and 21 A.D. I5l8 . [ Iii . 700. ] stand in eight degree , and be inhabit of many people , and as yet not under subjection . here the Indians do use to shoot with bow and arrow which be of a fathom in length , make of reed , which grow in that country , and at the end of they be artificial join a piece of wood very strong , unto the which piece of wood at the end of it , they put a bone of a fish , in place of a arrow head : these kind of bone be hard than diamond , and every one of they be three or four finger long , and they be take out of a fish that have three of these bone , one upon the back , another under every wing : but that which grow upon the back be the strong and the great . in this island the people say that there grow gold : and in this island and in Paria grow reed so great , that they make staff of they and carry of they into Spain . likewise there be popinjays very great and gentle , and some of they have their forehead yellow , and this sort do quick learn to speak , and speak much . there be likewise in the gulf of Paria pearl , although not many , but very good and great . the second voyage ofM . William haukin to Brasil . a king of Brasil bring into England . [ Iii . 701. ] the english voyage with the negro , and take of they elephant tooth , and other commodity which that place yield : and so arrive on the coast of Brasil , he use there such discretion , and behave himself so wise with those savage people , that he grow into great familiarity and friendship with they . insomuch that in his second voyage , one of the savage king of the country of Brasil , be content to take ship with he , and to be transport hither into England : whereunto m. haukin agree , leave behind in the country as a pledge for his safety and return again , one Martin cockeram of Plymouth . This Brasilian king be arrive , be bring up to London and present to king Henry the 8 , lie as then at Whitehall : at the sight of who the king and all the nobility do not a little marvel , and not without cause : for in his cheek be hole make accord to their savage manner , and therein small bone be plant , stand a inch out from the say hole , which in his own country be repute for a great bravery . he have also another hole in his nether lip , wherein be set a precious stone about the bigness of a pease : all his apparel , behaviour , and gesture , be very strange to the beholder . Having remain here the space almost of a whole year , and the king with his sight full satisfy , m. Hawkins accord to his promise and appointment , purpose to convey he again into his country : but it fall out in the way , that by change of air and alteration of diet , the say savage king die at sea , which be fear will turn to the loss of the life of Martin cockeram his pledge . nevertheless , the savage be full persuade of the honest deal of our man with their prince , restore again the say pledge , without any harm to he , or any man of the company : which pledge of they they bring home again into England , with their ship freight , and furnish with the commodity of the country . RENIGER , BOREY and Pudsey a.d. 1540-42 . which Martin cockeram , by the witness of sir John Hawkins , be a officer in the town of Plymouth , be live within these few year . in this bay we anchor , and the people of the description country have their house close by the water side , of the people show themselves unto we , and send a present to our andpountrty generali . when they come unto we , they great wonder at the thing that we bring , but our generali ( accord to his naturali and accustom humanity ) courteous entreat they , and liberal bestow on they necessarything to cover their nakedness , whereupon they suppose we to be god , and will not be persuade to the contrary : the present which they send to our generali , be feather , and call of network . their house be dig round about with earth , and have from the uttermost brim of the circle , cliff of wood set upon they , join close together at the top like a spire steeple , which by reason of that closeness be very warm . their bed be the ground with rush strew on it , and lie about the house , have the fire in the midst . the man go naked , the woman take bulrush , and kemb they after the manner of hemp , and thereof make their loose garment , which be knit about their middle , hang down about their hip , have also about their shoulder a skin of deer , with the hair upon it . Theise woman be very obedient and serviceable to their husband . after they be depart from we , they come and visit we the second time , and bring with they feather and bag of tobacco for present : and when they come to the top of the hill ( at the bottom whereof we have pitch our tent ) they stay they - 119 the english voyage self : where one appoint for speaker weary himself with make a long oration , which do , they leave their bow upon the hill , and come down with their present . in the mean time the woman remain on the hill , torment themselves lamentable , tear their flesh from their cheek , whereby we perceive that they be about a sacrifice . in the mean time our generali with his company go to prayer , and to read of the scripture , at which exercise they be attentive , and seem great to be affect with it : but when they be come unto we , they restore again unto we those thing which before we bestow upon they . the news of our be there be spread through the country , the people that inhabit round about come down , and among they the king himself , a man of a goodly stature , and comely personage , with many other tall and warlike man : before who come be send two ambassador to our generali , to signify that their king be come , in do of which message , their speech be continue about half a hour . This end , they by sign request our generali to send some thing by their hand to their king , as a token that his come may be in peace : wherein our generali have satisfy they , they return with glad tiding to their king , who march to we with a princely majesty , the people cry continual after their manner , and as they draw near unto we , so do they strive to behave themselves in their action with comeliness . in the forefront be a man of a goodly personage , who bear the sceptre or mace before the king , whereupon hang two crown , a less and a big , with three chain of a marvellous length : the crown be make of knit work wrought artificial with feather of diverse colour : the chain be make of a bony substance , and few be the person among they that be admit to wear they : and of that number also the person be 120 stint , as some ten , some 12. etc next unto he which bear the sceptre , be the king himself , with his guard about his person , clad with conie skin , and other skin : after they follow the naked common sort of people , every one have his face paint , some with white , some with black , and other colour , and have in their hand one thing or another for a present , not so much as their child , but they also bring their present . in the mean time our generali gather his man together , and march within his fence place , make against their approach a very warlike show . they be troop together in their order , and a generail salutation be make , there be present a generali silence . than he that bear the sceptre before the king , be inform by another , who they assign to that office , with a manly and lofty voice proclaim that which the other speak to he in secret , continue half [ three . 738. ] a hour : which end , and a generali amen as it be give , the king with the whole number of man and woman ( the child except ) come down without any weapon , who descend to the foot of the hill , set themselves in order . in come towards our bulwark and tent , the scepter-bearer begin a song , observe his measure in a dance , and that with a stately countenance , who the king with his guard , and every degree of person follow , do in like manner sing and dance , save only the woman , which dance and keep silence . the general permit they to enter within our bulwark , where they continue their song and dance a reasonable time . when they have satisfy themselves , they make sign to our general to sit down , to who the king , and diverse other make several oration , or rather supplication , that he will take their province and kingdom into his hand , and become their king , make sign that they will resign unto he their right and title of the whole land , and become his subject . in which , to persuade we the better , the king and the rest , with one 121 the king consent , and with great reverence , joyful sing a reside hu song , do set the crown upon his head , enrich his kingdom* to neck with all their chain , and offer unto he many sir Francis other thing , honour he by the name of Hioh , drake . add thereunto as it seem , a sign of triumph : which thing our generali thought not meet to reject , because he know not what honour and profit it may be to our country . wherefore in the name , and to the use of her majesty he take the sceptre , crown , and dignity of the say country into his hand , wish that the riches and treasure thereof may so convenient be transport to the enrich of her kingdom at home , as it abound in you same . the common sort of people leave the king and his guard with our generali , scatter themselves together with their sacrifice among our people , take a diligent view of every person : and - such as please their fancy , ( which be the young ) they enclose they about offer their sacrifice unto they with lamentable weep , scratch , and tear the flesh from their face with their nail , whereof issue abundance of blood . but we use sign to they of dislike this , and stay their hand from force , and direct they upward to the live God , the like they who only they ought to worship . they show unto do in Hoche - we their wound , and crave help of they at our hand , whereupon we give they lotion , plaster , and ointments , agree to the state of their grief , beseech God to cure their disease . Every three day they bring their sacrifice unto we , until they understand our meaning , that we have no pleasure in they : yet they can not be long absent from we , but daily frequent our company to the hour of our departure , which departure seem so grievous unto they , that their joy be turn into sorrow . they entreat we , that be absent we will remember they , and by stealth provide a sacrifice , which we mislike . our necessary business be end , our generali with his company travail up into the country to their 122 village , where we find herd of deer by 1000 in great herd a company , be most large , and fat of body . of deer . we find the whole country to be a warren of a abundance of strange kind of cony , their body in bigness as be stran& continue ™ 5-the Barbary cony , their head as the head of we , the foot of a want , and the tail of a rat be of great length : under her chin be on either side a bag , into the which she gather her meat , when she have fill her belly abroad . the people eat their body , and make great account of their skin , for their king coat be make of they . Oure generali call this country Nova Albion , and Nova Albion . that for two cause : the one in respect of the white bank and cliff , which lie towards the sea : and the other , because it may have some affinity with our country in name , which sometime be so call . there be no part of earth here to be take up , gold and wherein there be not some probable show of gold or r ° earth of Nova S11V5 - , , „ Albion . at our departure hence our generali set up a monument of our be there , as also of her majesty right and title to the same , namely a plate , nail upon a fair great post , whereupon be engrave her majesty name , the day and year of our arrival there , with the free give up of the province and people into her majesty hand , together with her highness picture and arm , in a piece of six penny of current english money under the plate , whereunder be also write the name of our generali . it seem that the Spaniard hitherto have never be their deparin this part of the country , neither do ever discover ture-the land by many degree , to the southward of this place .. October . after we have set sail from hence , we continue certain without sight of land till the 13. day of October island in % , follow , which day in the morning we fall with certain island 8. degree to the northward of the line , qanoas > i^e from which island come a great number of canoas , those of Java . 123 have in some of they 4. in some 6. and in some also 14. man , bring with they coco , and other fruit . [ Iii . 739. ] their canoas be hollow within , and cut with great art and cunning , be very smooth within and without , and bear a glass as if it be a horn dainty burnish , have a prow , and a stern of one sort , yield inward circlewise , be of a great height , and full of certain white shell for a bravery , and on each side of they lie out two piece of timber about a yard and a half long , more or less , accord to the smallness , or bigness of the boat . this people have the nether part of their ear cut into a round circle , hang down very low upon their cheek , whereon they hang thing of a reasonable weight . the nail of their hand be a inch long , their tooth be as black as pitch , and they renew they often , by eat of a herb with a kind of powder , which they always carry about they in a cane for the same purpose . Islands . leave this island the night after we fall with it , the 18. of October , we light upon diverse other , some whereof make a great show of inhabitant . we continue our course by the island of Tagulada , Zelon , and Zewarra , be friend to the Portugal , the first whereof have grow in it great store of cinnamom . November . the 14. of November we fall with the island of Maluco , which day at night ( have direct our course to run with Tydore ) in coast along the island of mutyr , belong to the king of ternate , his deputy or vice-king see we at sea , come with his Canoa to we without all fear , and come aboard , and after some conference with our generali , will he in any wise to the isle of run in with ternate , and not with Tydore , assure ternate . hjm tjiat the king will be glad of his come , and will be ready to do what he will require , for which purpose he himself will that night be with the king , and tell he the news , with who if he once deal , he 124 shall find that as he be a king , so his word shall stand : add further , that if he go to Tydore before he come to ternate , the king will have nothing to do with we , because he hold the Portugal as his enemy : whereupon our general resolve to run with ternate , where the next morning early we come to anchor , at which time our generali send a messenger to the king with a velvet cloak for a present , and token of his come to be in peace , and that he require nothing but traffic and exchange of merchandise , whereof he have good store , in such thing as he want . in the mean time the vice-king have be with the king accord to his promise , signify unto he what good thing he may receive from we by traffic : whereby the king be move with great like towards we , and send to our generali with speciali message , that he shall have what thing he need , and will require with peace and friendship , and moreover that he will yield himself , and the right of his island to be at the pleasure and commandment of so famous a prince as we serve . in token whereof he send to our generali a signet , and within short time after come in his own person , with boat , and canoas to our ship , to bring she into a better and safe road than she be in at present . in the mean time , our general messenger be come to the court , be meet by certain noble personage with great solemnity , and bring to the king , at who hand he be most friendly and gracious entertain . the king purpose to come to our ship , send before 4. great and large canoas , in every one whereof be certain of his great state that be about he , attire in white lawn of cloth of Calicut , have over their head from the one end of the Canoa to the other , a cover of thin perfume mat , bear up with a frame make of reed for the same use , under which every one do sit in his order accord to his 125 A.D. » 579 - the king of ternate offer himself and his kingdom to the service of the queen of England . the great and strange canoas of the king of ternate . the king of ternate come to visit sir Francis . Drake . [ Iii . 740. ] saga a kind of meal . the english voyage dignity , to keep he from the heat of the sun , diverse of who be of good age and gravity , do make a ancient and fatherly show . there be also diverse young and comely man attire in white , as be the other : the rest be soldier , which stand in comely order round about on both side , without who sit the rower in certain gallery , which be three on a side all along the canoas , do lie off from the side thereof three or four yard , one be orderly build low than another , in every of which gallery be the number of 4. score rower . Theise canoas be furnish with warlike munition , every man for the most part have his sword and target , with his dagger , beside other weapon , as lance , caliver , dart , bow and arrow : also every Canoa have a small cast base mount at the least one full yard upon a stock set upright . thus come near our ship , in order they row about we , one after another , and pass by , do their homage with great solemnity , the great personage begin with great gravity and fatherly countenance , signify that the king have send they to conduct our ship into a better road . soon after the king himself repair , accompany with 6. grave and ancient person , who do their obeisance with marvellous humility . the king be a man of tall stature , and seem to be much delight with the sound of our music , to who as also to his nobility , our generali give present , wherewith they be pass well content . at length the king crave leave of our generali to depart , promise the next day to come aboard , and in the mean time to send we such victual , as be necessary for our provision : so that the same night we receive of they meal , which they call Sagu , make of the top of certain tree , taste in the mouth like sour curd , but melt like sugar , whereof they make certain cake , which may be keep the space of ten 126 1579-yeere , and yet then good to be eat . we have of they store of rice , hen , unperfect and liquid sugar , sugar cane , and a fruit which they call figo , with store of clove . the king have promise to come aboard , break his promise , but send his brother to make his excuse , and to entreat our generali to come on shore , offer himself pawn aboard for his safe return . whereunto our generali consent not , upon mislike conceive of the breach of his promise , the whole company also utter refuse it . but to satisfy he , our general send certain of his gentleman to the court , to accompany the king’s brother , reserve the vice-king for their safe return . they be receive of another brother of the king , and other state , and be conduct with great honour to the castle . the place a ** that they be bring unto , be a large and fair ternatehouse , where be at the least 1000 person assemble . the king be yet absent , there sit in their place 60. grave personage , all which be say to be of the king counsel . there be beside 4. grave person , apparel all in red , down to the ground , and attire on their head like the Turk , and these be say to be roman , and Ligiers there to keep continual traf - romana and fike with the people of ternate . there be also 2. Turks Ligiers in this place , and one Italian . the king majesty at last come in guard with 12. lance cover over of the king . with a rich canopy , with emboss gold . our man accompany with one of their captain call Moro , rise to meet he , he gracious do welcome , and entertain they . he be attire after the manner of the country , but more sumptuous than the rest . from his waste down to the ground , be all cloth of gold , and the same very rich : he leg be bare , but on his foot be a pair of shoe , make of Cordovan skin . in the attire of his head be fine wreathe hoop ring of gold , and about his neck he have a chai ne of perfect gold , the link whereof 127 be great , and one fold double . on his finger he have six very fair jewel , and sit in his chair of estate , at his right hand stand a page with a fan in his hand , breathe and gather the air to the king . the fan be in length two foot , and in breadth one foot , set with 8. sapphire , rich embroider , and knit to a staff 3. foot in length , by the which the page do hold , and move it . our gentleman have deliver their message , and receive order accord , be license to depart , be safe conduct back again by one of the king counsel . Temate the this island be the chief of all the island of Maluco , and the king hereof be king of 70. Islands auco-ts shilling . bgsidg the king with his people be moor in religion , observe certain new moon , with fast : during which fast , they neither eat nor drink in the day , but in the night . after that our gentleman be return , and that we have here by the favour of the king receive all necessary thing that the place can yield we : our general consider the great distance , and how far he be yet off from his country , think it not best here to linger the time any long , but weigh his anchor , set a utle island out of the island , and sail to a certain little island ard^f^ ' to southward of celebe , where we grave our celebe . ship , and continue there in that and other business 26. day . this island be thorough grow with wood of a large and high growth , very straight and without bough , save only in the head or top , who leaf be not much differ from our broom in England . among these tree night by night , through the whole tiery worm , land , do show themselves a infinite swarm of fiery worm fly in the air , who body be no big than our common english fly , make such a show and light , as if every twig or tree have be a burn candle . in this place breed also wonderful store of bat . Bats , as big as large hen : of crayfish also here Cravlshes . want no plenty , and they of exceed bigness , one 128 1580. whereof be sufficient for 4. hungry stomach at a dinner , be also very good , and restore meat , whereof we have experience : and they dig themselves hole in the earth like cony . when we have end our business here , we weigh , and set sail to run for the Malucos : but have at that time a bad wind , and be among the island , with much difficulty we recover to the northward of the island of celebe , where by reason of contrary wind not able to continue our course to run westwards , we be enforce to alter the same to the southward again , find that course also to be very hard and dangerous for we , by reason of infinite shoald which lie off , and among the island : whereof we have too much trial to the hazard and danger of our ship and life . for of all other day upon the 9 of Januarie , in the Januarie in year 1579. we run sudden upon a rock , where ’579-we stick fast from 8. of the clock at night , till 4. ' 741 of the clock in the afternoon the next day , be indeed out of all hope to escape the danger : but our their danger generali as he have always hitherto show himself 0 reck ’ courageous , and of a good confidence in the mercy and protection of God : so now he continue in the same , and lest he shall seem to perish wilful , both he , and we do our best endeavour to save our self , which it please God so to bless , that in the end we clear our self most happy of the danger . we light our ship upon the rock of 3. ton of clove . clove , 8. piece of ordinance , and certain meal and bean : and then the wind ( as it be in a moment the klfe of11 by the speciali grace of God ) change from the star - the board to the larboard of the ship , we hoist our sail , " and the happy gale drive our ship off the rock into the sea again , to the no little comfort of all our heart , for which we give God such praise and thank , as so great a benefit require . p , . the 8. of February follow , we fall with the fruitful island of Barateve , have in the mean time suffer island . xi 129 1 nutmeg and long pepper grow in Barateve . commendation of the island of Barateve . Java major . the english voyage many danger by wind and shoald . the people of this island be comely in body and stature , and of a civil behaviour , just in deal , and courteous to stranger , whereof we have the experience sundry way , they be most glad of our presence , and very ready to relieve our want in those thing which their country do yield . the man go naked , save their head and privity , every man have something or other hang at their ear . their woman be cover from the middle down to the foot , wear a great number of bracelet upon their arm , for some have 8. upon each arm , be make some of bone , some of horn , and some of brass , the light whereof by our estimation weigh two ounce apiece . with this people linen-cloth be good merchandise , and of good request , whereof they make roll for their head , and girdle to wear about they . their island be both rich and fruitful : rich in gold , silver , copper , and sulphur , wherein they seem skilful ! and expert , not only to try the same , but in work it also artificial into any form and fashion that please they . their fruit be diverse and plentiful , as nutmeg , ginger , long pepper , lemon , cucumber , coco , figu , sagum , with diverse other sort : and among all the rest , we have one fruit , in bigness , form , and husk , like a bay berry , hard of substance , and pleasant of taste , which be sodden , become soft , and be a most good and wholesome victuali , whereof we take reasonable store , as we do also of the other fruit and spice : so that to confess a truth , since the time that we first set out of our own country of England , we happen upon no place ( ternate only except ) wherein we find more comfort and better mean of refresh . at our departure from Barateve , we set our course for Java major , where arrive , we find great coiirtesie , and honourable entertainment . this island be govern by 5. king , who they call Rajah : as Rajah Donaw , and 130 1580. Rajah Mang bange , and Rajah Cabuccapollo , which live as have one spirit , and one mind . of these five we have four a shipboard at once , and two or three often . they be wonderful delight in red and green colour clothes , as red and green : their upper part cl°^1 of their body be naked , save their head , where - eseeme • upon they wear a turkish roll , as do the maluccians : from the middle downward they wear a pintado of silk , trail upon the ground , in colour as they best like . the maluccians hate that their woman shall be manner see of stranger : but these offer they of high peo^e courtesy , yea the king themselves . the people be of goodly stature , and warlike , well provide of sword and target , with dagger , all be of their own work , and most artificial do , both in temper their mettle , as also in the form , whereof we buy reasonable store . they have a house in every village for their common assembly : every day they meet twice , man , woman , and child , bring with they such victual as they think good , some fruit , some rice boil , some hen roast , some sagum , have a table make 3. foot from the ground , whereon they set their meat , that every person sit at the table may eat , one rejoice in the company of another . they boil their rice in a earthen pot , make in form of a sugar loaf , be full of hole , as our pot which we water our garden withal , and it be open at the great end , wherein they put their rice dry , without any moisture . in the mean time they have ready another great earthen pot , set fast in a furnace , boil full of water , whereinto they put their pot with rice , by such measure , that they swell become soft at the first , and by their swell stop the hole of the pot , admit no more water to enter , but the more they be boil , the hard and more firm substance they become , so that in the end they be a firm and good bread , of the which with oil , butter , 131 a strange fashion of boy ling rice . the cape of buena esperanza not so dangerous as the Portugal have give out . Sierra Leona . oyster-tree . the english voyage sugar , and other spice , they make diverse sort of meat very pleasant of taste , and nourish to nature . the french pock be here very common to all , and they help themselves , sit naked from ten to two in the sun , whereby the venomous humour be draw out . not long before our departure , they tell we , that not far off there be such great ship as we , wish we to beware : upon this our captain will stay no long . from Java Major we sail for the cape of good hope , which be the first land we fall withal : neither do we touch with it , or any other land , until we come to Sierra Leona , upon the coast of Guinea : notwithstanding we run hard aboard the cape , find the report of the Portugal to be most false , who affirm , that it be the most dangerous cape of the world , never without intolerable storm and present danger to traveller , which come near the same . this cape be a most stately thing , and the fair cape we see in the whole circumference of the earth , and we pass by it the 18. of June . from thence we continue our course to Sierra Leona , on the coast of Guinea , where we arrive the 22. of July , and find necessary provision , great store of elephant , oyster upon tree of one kind , spawn and increase infinite , the oyster suffer no bud to grow . we depart thence the 24. day . we arrive in England the three of November 1580. be the three year of our departure . the relation of a voyage make by a pilot call 1579. Nuno da Silva for the viceroy of new Spain , the 20. of may , in the year of our lord 1579. in the city of Mexico , from whence it be send to the viceroy of the portugall-indy : wherein be set down the course and action pass in the voyage of sir Francis Drake that take the aforesaid Nuno da Silva at S. Iago one of the island of Cabo Verde , and carry he along with he through the strait of Magellan , to the haven of Guatulco in new Spain , where he let he go again . Uno da Silva bear in Porto , a citizen and inhabitant of Guaia , say , that he depart out of his house in the begin of November in the year of our lord 1577. take his course to Cabo Verde , or the green cape , where he anchor with his ship close by the haven of the island of Sant Iago , one of the island of Cabo Verde aforesay , be the nineteenth of 133 [ three . 743. ] January in the year of our lord 1578. And lie there , there come six ship , which seem to be Englishman , whereof the admiral board his ship , and by force with his man take he out of his ship , bring he in the boat aboard the admiral ship , leave some of his best man aboard his ship : and although the fortress of the island shoot four or five time at they , yet they hurt not the Englishman : who have do , set sail from thence to the island of Brava , take with they the ship of the say Nuno da Silva : be there , they fill certain vessel with fresh water : from thence hold their course inward to sea , have first with a boat set the man of Nuno da Silvas ship on land , only keep Nuno da Silva in his ship , as also his ship with the wine that be therein . and Nuno da Silva say , the cause why they keep he on board be , because they know he to be a pilot for the coast of Brasilia , that he may bring they to such place in those country as have fresh water . be put off " from the island of Brava , they hold their course to the land of Brasilia , which they descry upon the first of April , under the height of thirty degree : and without land or take in fresh water , Rio de plata , they hold on their course to Rio de la plata , that be , the river of silver , lie under five and thirty degree , little more or less : where they go on land , and provide themselves off fresh water . from thence they hold on their course till they come under nine and thirty degree , where they anchor : and be there they leave two of their six ship behind they , and sail but four in company ( that of Nuno da Silva be one ) till they come to the bay call bay de las Baya de las Islas , that be , the bay of the hand , lie under nine and forty degree , where it be say , that Magellan lie and winter there with his ship , when he first discover the strait , which now hold his name . into this bay the twenty of June they enter , and there anchor so close to the land , that they may 134 send to it with a harquebus shoot : and there they see the land to be inhabit with Indians , that be apparel with skin , with their leg from the knee downward , and their arm from the elbow downward naked , all the rest of their body be clothe , with bow and arrow in their hand , be subtle , great , and well form people , and strong and high of stature : where six of the Englishman go on land to fetch fresh water , and before they leap on land , four of the indian come unto their boat , to who the Englishman give bread and wine : and when the Indians have well eat and drink , they depart thence : and go somewhat far from they , one of the indian cry to they , and say : Magallanes , esta he minha terra , that be , Magallanes , this be my country : and because the Englishman follow they , it seem the indian flee upward into the land , and be somewhat far off , they turn back again , and with their arrow slay two of the english shipper , one be a Englishman , the other a Netherlander : the rest come back again and save themselves in the boat , wherewith they present put off from the shore . here they stay till the seventeenth of August , upon the which day they set sail , run along by the coast about a league and a half from the land , ( for there it be all fair and good ground , at twenty , and five and twenty fathom deep ) and be about four or five day before they come to the mouth or entry of the strait : but because the wind be contrary , they stay till the 24 of August before they enter . the entry or mouth of the strait be about a league the descrif-broad , on both side be bare and flat land : on the turn of the north side they see Indians make great fire , but on the south side they see no people stir . the four * ‘ and twenty day aforesaid , they begin to enter into the strait , with a eastnortheast wind . This straight may be about a hundred and ten league long , and in breadth a league . about the entry of the strait , and J35 half way into it , it run right forth without any wind or turn : and from thence about eight or ten league towards the end , it have some boutes and wind , among the which there be one so great a hook or headland , that it seem to run into the other land : and there it be less than a league broad from one land to the other : and from thence forward it run straight out again : and although you find some crooking , yet they be nothing to speak of . the issue of the straight lie westward , and about eight or ten league before you come to the end , than the straight begin to be broad , and it be all high land to the end thereof , after you be eight league within the strait , for the first eight league after you enter be low flat land , as i say before : and in the entry of the strait you find the stream to run from the south sea to the north sea . and after they begin to sail in with the eastnortheast wind , be enter they pass along without any let or hindrance either of wind or weather : and because the high land on both side lay cover with snow , and that all the strait be fair and clear , they hold their course a [ three . 744. ] harquebus-shot in length from off the north side , have nine and ten fathom depth , with good ground , as i say before , where ( if need require ) a man may anchor : the hill on both side be full of tree , some of the hill and tree reach down to the sea - side in some place have plain and even land : and there they see not any great river , but some small river that issue out of the rifle and breach of the land : and in the country where the great cape or crooking be , on the south side they see certain indian fisherman in their canoas or skiffs , be such as they see first on the north side , but more people they see not on the south side . be out of the strait on the other side , upon the sixth of September of the aforesaid year , they hold their course northwest for the space of three day , and the three day they have a north-east wind , that by force drive they westsouthwest , which course they hold for 136 the space of ten or twelve day with few sail up : and because the wind begin to be very great , they take in all their sail , and lay drive till the last of September . the 24 day of the same month have lose the sight of this be the one of their ship which be about a hundred ton , then again they hoist sail because the wind come winter better , hold their course Northeast for the space of seven day , and at the end of the say seven day , they have the sight of certain island , which they make towards for to anchor by they , but the weather will not permit they : and be there , the wind fall northwest : whereupon they sail Westsouthwest . the next day they lose the sight of another ship of their company , for it be very foul weather , so that in the end the admiral ship be leave alone , for the ship of Nuno da Silva be leave in the bay where they winter before they enter into the strait : and with this foul weather they run till they be under seven and they be fifty degree , where they enter into a haven of a drivenunt0 island , and anchor about the length of the shot of a great piece from the land , at twenty fathom deep , latitude . where they stay three or four day , and the wind come southward , they weigh anchor , hold their course northward for the space of two day , and then they espy a small unhabit island , where be arrive , they strike sail , and hoist out their boat , and there they take many bird and seal . the next day they set sail again , hold their course Northnortheast , and north , to another island lie five the isle of or six league from the firm land , on the north side Mocha in 38. of the strait , where they anchor about a quarter 3°‘ mm ' of a league from the land , in twelve fathom water . this island be small and low land , and full of Indians , the island be altogether possess and inhabit by they , where they hoist out their boat , wherein the admiral and twelve Englishman enter , go to fetch fresh water , and to seek for victual : and be land upon the island , the Indians in exchange of other thing , 137 bring two spanish sheep , and a little Maiz or root whereof they make bread , and because it be late , they return again unto their ship , without do any other thing for that day . the next day the say captain with the aforesaid twelve man be harquebusier , row to land again , and set two of their company on shore with their vessel to fetch fresh water , and by the place where they shall fill their water there lay certain Indians secret hide , that fall upon the two Englishman and take they : which they in the boat perceive , go out to help they , but they be so assail with stone and arrow , that all or sir Frandt the most part of they be hurt , the captain himself be wound with a arrow on the face , and with a w u ' other arrow in the head , whereby they be constrain to turn back again , without once hurt any of the Indians , and yet they come so near the boat , that they take four of their oar from they . this do , they set sail again , run along the coast with a south wind , sail so for the space of six day , pass by the haven call Sant Iago , and put into another haven , and there they take a indian that lie fish in a Canoa , give he linen and butcher chap knife , with other trifle , and not long after there come another indian aboard their ship call Felippe , and he speak Spanish , he give the english captain notice of a certain ship that lie in the haven of Sant Iago , which they have leave six league behind they : with that intelligence the indian be their guide , the next day they set sail and go to the aforesaid haven of saint Iago , and enter therein , they take the say ship , wherein they find a thousand seven hundred and 70 botija or spanish pot full of wine , and other thing : which have do , they leap on land , where they take certain sack with meal , with whatsoever they can find ; they take likewise the ornament and the relic out of the church , wherewith they depart from thence , take the aforesaid ship , with two 138 man ( that they find in she ) with they , and so depart from that haven , which lie under 32 degree and a half , run along by the coast till they come under one and thirty , and thirty degree : which be the place where they have appoint to meet , and there to stay for each other , if by tempest or foul weather they chance to be separate , and so loose each other company . And come under thirty degree , they find a very good haven , whereinto they enter , and anchor at six fathom deep , the shot of a great piece from the land , which be right over against a river , where they take in six pipe of fresh water : and to defend they that fetch the water , they set twelve man upon the land , and be busy in fill of their water , they espy a company of man come towards they , whereof half of they be Spaniard , be about two hundred and fifty horseman , and as many footman , but they have no soon espy they , but they present enter into the boat , and escape away , loose but one man . the same night they set sail again with both their ship , run along the coast about ten league far , where they take in some fresh water , but because they perceive certain horseman , they depart without lade any more water . from thence they follow on their course along the coast for the space of 30. league , where they enter into a desert or unhabit haven : yet they go not on land , for every day they see people upon the shore , and there they make out a small pinnace , the piece whereof they bring ready frame out of England , and have prepare it , they launch it into the water , wherein the captain with fifteen man enter with the chief boatesman call John the greek , ( be master of the ship which they have take in the haven of saint Iago , ) wherewith they go to see if they can find the two ship that they have lose by stormy 139 A.D. 1578. the haven of saint Iago in 32 degree and a half . [ Iii . 745. ] weather , as i say before : and likewise think to go on land to fill certain vessel with fresh water , they dare not venture , for they see people on all side of the shore : so that in the end they return again without hear of the other ship : be there , they take all the ordinance out of their ship , and new dress and rig she : which do , they put a small piece of ordinance into the pinnace , wherewith they set sail again , follow on their course . Having sail thirteen day , they come to a island lie about the shot of a base from the land , where they anchor , and there they find four indian fisherman in two canoas who tell they that on the firm land they may have fresh water , but they understand that there be not much , and that it be somewhat within the land , will not spend any time about it , but set sail again , leave the fisherman with their canoas , follow on their course along by the shore . the next day be somewhat further , they espy certain indian fisherman that be upon the land in their house , which the english captain perceive , present enter into his pinnace , and row on land , where he take three of the say fisherman , take with he half of the fish that lie pack upon the shore ready to be lade , with the which Indians and booty , they come on board again . the next day follow , they see a bark lade with fish , that belong to the Spaniard , with four Indians in it . this bark with the Indians and the fish they take , and bind the spanish ship to their stern , and so draw it after they , leave the say Indians within it , who by night unbind the bark , and secret make away with bark and fish , and be not more see . the next day the captain go into the pinnace , and because fie saw certain house upon the shore , he make thither , and be on land , he find two man in they , one whereof he take , leave the other 140 behind , and there he find three thousand pezo of silver , ( every pezo be the value of a rial of eight , ) and seven indian sheep , and hen , and take all ■ whatsoever they find : wherewith they depart from thence , follow on their course . and two day after they come to the haven call Arica , where they find Arica . two ship , the one lade with good and spanish ware , out of the which they take only two hundred botija , or spanish pot with wine , and out of the other seven and thirty bar of silver , which be piece of ten or twelve pound each bar , and think to leap on shore ( with two bark that they find in the say haven , with about seven and thirty harquebuss and bow ) they perceive on the land certain horseman come towards they , whereupon they leave off their pretence , and take with they a negro that they find in the bark , with who they return aboard . the next day in the morning they burn the ship , that be lade with the spanish ware , and take the other with they , pass forward with it on their course , the captain sail along the shore with his pinnace , and the ship keep about a league from he to seaward , to seek for a ship whereof they have intelligence : and have in that manner sail about five and forty league , they find the ship that lie at anchor in a haven , who about two hour before have be advertise of a english pirate or sea-rover , and have discharge eight hundred bar of silver out of she , and hide it on the land , which silver belong to the king of Spain , of the which silver the english - [ three . 746. ] man have receive some intelligence , but they dare not go on land , because there be many Indians and Spaniards that stand to guard it , and they find nothing in the ship but three pipe of water : the ship they take with they , and be about a league in the sea , they hoist up all her sail and let she drive , do the like with the ship that they have take in Arica , as 141 also the other of Sant Iago , which likewise they let drive , follow on their course with their own ship , and the pinnace . be seven or eight league from the haven of Calao de Lyma , they espy three ship , and board one of they , they take three man out of she , and so hold on their course towards Calao de Lyma , where they enter , be about two or three hour within night , sail in between all the ship that lie there , be seventeen in number : and be among the ship , they ask for the ship that have lade the silver , but when answer be make they , that the silver be lay on land , they cut the cable of the ship , and the mast of two of the great ship , and so leave they . at the same time there arrive a ship from Panama lade with ware and merchandise of Spain , that anchor close by the english ship , which be , while the english captain seek in the other ship for the silver . assoon as the ship of Panama have anchor , there come a boat from the shore to search it : but because it be in the night , they let it alone till morning , and come to the english ship , they ask what ship it be : whereupon one of the spanish prisoner ( by the english captain commandment ) answer and say it be the ship of Michael Angelo , that come from Chili : which they of the boat hear send a man on board , who climb up , light upon one of the great piece , wherewith he be afraid , and present step back again into the boat ( because the ship that lie there , and that sail in those country , use to carry no great shot ) and therewith they be abash , and make from it : which the ship of Panama hear , that be new come in , she judge it to be a rover , and therewith cut her cable , she put to sea , which the Englishman perceive , ship certain man in their pinnace , and follow she : and be hard by she , they bid she strike , which they of the ship refuse to do , and with a harquebus shoot 142 kill one of the Englishman , wherewith they turn again into their ship , and present set sail , follow after the ship , which not long after they overtake : which they of the ship perceive hoist out their boat , and leap into it , row to the land , leave the ship with all the good , which the Englishman present take , and with she sail on their course . the next day they see a boat with sail make towards they , whereby they present mistrust it to be a spy , and not long after they perceive two great ship come towards they , which make the english think they come to fight with they , whereupon they let the ship of Panama drive , therein leave John the greek , with the two man that they have take the same day that they enter into the Calao de Lyma , as i say before , and present hoist all their sail , and sail forward , not once set eye again upon the aforesaid ship , for they make towards the ship of Panama , which the Englishman let drive . from thence they sail again along the coast , follow on their course : and have sail certain day , they meet a frigate that go towards Lyma , lade with ware and merchandise of the country , from whence the Englishman take a lamp and a fountain of silver , and ask the pilot be a Spaniard , if they meet not with a ship , that they understand shall be lade with silver , but the one pilot say he meet she not , and the other say he see she about three day before . this frigate come not to the ship , but to the pinnace , wherein the captain sail , for the pinnace run close by the shore , and the ship keep a league and a half from the land : whereupon they let the frigate go , follow on their course . two day after , they come to the haven call Payta , Payta . where they find a ship lade with spanish ware , which the pinnace board , and take without any resistance : for assoon as the Spaniard perceive the Englishman , they present make to land with their boat , and two of they leap into the sea , none stay in the ship , but 143 the master , pilot , and some negro , out of the which ship the Englishman take the pilot , and all the bread , hen and a hog , and so sail forward with the ship : but be about two harquebus shoot to seaward , they let it go again , not take any thing out of it , and ask after the ship , which they seek for , they tell they that about two day before she depart from that place , wherewith they follow on their course , and before night they meet with a ship of Panama , which they present board , but take nothing from she but only a negro , and so leave it , hold on their course . the next day be the first of February , they meet another ship that sail to Panama , lade with fish and other victual , and forty bar of silver , and some gold , but i know not how much , which they take , and send the passenger ( with two friar that be in she ) in a boat [ three . 747. ] to land . the next day they hang a man of the ship , because he will not confess two plate of gold that he have take , which after they find about he : which do , they let the ship drive , follow on their course . the first of march towards noon , they espy the ship lade with silver , be about four league to seaward from they : and because the english ship be somewhat heavy before , whereby it sail not as they will have it , they take a company of Botijas or a / retie de - spanish pot for oil , and fill they with water , hang vice to make they by rope at the stern of the ship to make her sail on wiftl^ better : and the ship that sail towards Panama swjty - maje towards the english ship to know what she be , think it to be one of the ship that use to sail along the coast , and to traffic in the country : and be hard by she , the english captain bid they strike , but the other refuse to do it , with a great piece he shoot her mast overboard , and have wound the master with a arrow , the ship present yield , which they take , and sail with her further into the sea , all that night and the next day and night , make all the way they can . 144 the three day be out of sight of the land , they begin to search the ship , and to lade the good out of she into their ship , which be a thousand three hundred bar or piece of silver , and fourteen chest with ryal of eight , and with gold : but what quantity it be i know not , only the passenger say that there be great store , and that three hundred bar of the silver belong to the king , the rest belong to certain merchant . that do , they let the ship with the man sail on their course , put the three pilot in she that they bring with they , so that as then they have none but their own man aboard , be the sixth of march , and from thence they hold their course towards the land of Nicaragua . the thirteenth of march , either the day before or after , in the morning they descry land , not be very high , be a small island two league from the firm land , and there they find a small bay , wherein they anchor at five fathom deep close by the land , and there they stay till the twenty day . upon the which day there pass a frigate close by the island , which with their pinnace they follow , and take she , bring she to the english ship , which frigate be lade with Salsaperilla , and Botijas or pot with butter and honey , and with other thing . the english captain go on board , and cast the Salsaperilla on the land , leave all the rest of the ware in the frigate , and then he put all his piece into the frigate , that so he may lay his ship on shore , to new calk and trim she , which continue till the three and twenty or four and twenty of march . which do , and have make provision of wood and fresh water , they hold on their course along by the coast , sail westward , take the say frigate and her man with they , and have sail two day , they take their man out of she , and set they in the pinnace , among the which be four sailor , that mean to sail to Panama , and from thence to China , whereof one they take , with the letter and patent that he have about he , among xi 145 king 1579 - Nicaragua the island of can . the first sight of Nueva Espanna . they calk and trim their ship at the lie of can over against Nicaragua . sea-charts of the south sea take . they arrive at Guatuko . a prill 13. Stilo novo . Nuno da Silva set on land . [ he - 748. ] the english voyage the which be the letter of the king of Spain , send to the governor of the philippinas , as also the sea-card wherewith they shall make their voyage , and direct themselves in their course . and so sail until the sixth of April , about evening they discover a ship that hold two league to seaward from the land : and before the next day in the morning they be hard by she , and sudden fall upon her while her man sleep , and present make the man enter into their ship , among the which be one don Francisco Xarate . which do , they follow on their course with the say ship , out of the which they take certain pack and other ware , but i know not what it be . they likewise take a negro out of it , and three day after they both let the ship and man go whether they will , set therein the two sailor that shall go for China , which they have take in the frigate , keep only one sailer to show they where they shall find fresh water , to the which end they take the empty vessel with they to fill with water , and so keep on their course to the haven of Guatulco , where they put in , be upon Monday the thirteenth of April , and have anchor , they stay there till the six and twenty of April : and about three or four hour within the night , they set sail , hold their course westward , and a hour or two before they let Nuno da Silva go , put he into another ship , that lie in the haven of Guatulco . from thence forward the Englishman pass on their voyage , to the island of Malucos , and from thence they pass by the cape de buena esperanza , and so to England , as it be well know , so that thjs be only the description of the voyage that they make , while the say pilot Nuno da Silva be with they .  in the mean while there come about descrip of the country people down to the sea side : and fanofuriaine when they be within 100 pase of our man , they set * ’ J55 themselves in array very orderly cast their company into the form of a ring , every man have his bow and arrow : who ( when they have pight a staff on the ground , with certain glass , bead , and other trifle ) return back . then the country people come and take they and afterward approach near to our man , show themselves very pleasant , insomuch that m. winter dance with they . they be exceed delight with the sound of the trumpet , and vialy . they be of a mean stature , well lim , and of a duskish , tawny , or brown colour . some of they have their face spot with diverse colour , as red , white , and black . their apparel be a certain skin ( wherein they wrap themselves ) not reach so low as to cover their privy member , all the rest of their body be naked , save that they be certain roll upon their head , who end hang over their shoulder . every one bear his bow , be a ell in length , and arrow make of reed , have head , frame very strange and cunning of a flint stone . they be much give to mirth and jollity , and be very sly , and ready to steal any thing that come within their reach : for one of they snatch our general cap from his head ( as he stoop ) be of scarlet with a golden band : yet he will suffer no man to hurt any of they . they eat raw flesh , for we find seal bone , the raw flesh whereof they have gnaw with their tooth like dog . in this bay we water , and victual with seal : for there be such plenty that we slay above 200 in the space of one hour upon a little island . the 3 of June we depart from thence , and be at sea we be put back again to cape hope , where we discharge our canter and let she float in the sea . afterwards we run to the 50 degree of the south pole , where we meet with the wind southerly , and so turn back again to the northward . and as we run along the shore , we meet with our prize the 19 of June , which we lose the 13 of May . the day follow we find 156 a harbour , into the which we enter with all our fleet the same day . this port be 49 degree and a half in latitude , and i suppose it to be the same which Magellan name port S. Julian : for we find a gibbet on a the port of hill , whereupon they be execute that do conspire ant Julian . against Magellan , and certain bone also of their dead body . the 22 of this month our generali go to shore upon the main with 7 or 8 of his man , meet with 3 of the patagon , have bow and arrow , who come near to our man make they sign to depart . where - two 0^jur , upon a gentleman be there present , and have a bow p^g^ and arrow , make a shot to the end to show they the force of our bow , with the which shoot his string break : whereupon the patagon presume to encounter they , direct their arrow first at our m. gunner , who have a caliver ready bend to shot at they but it will not take fire : and as he level his piece one of they shoot he through the breast , and out at the back , wherewith he fall down stark dead . also the gentleman that shoot the arrow be so wound that he die the 2 day after and with the other be bury in a little island lie in the say port . our man leave the slay man on shore till night , and then fetch he in a boat . in the mean time the patagon have strip he of all his clothes , and view his body lay his clothes under his head , and so leave he untouched , save that they have stick the english arrow in his left eye . Theise man be of no such stature as the Spaniard report , be but of the height of english man : for i have see man in England tall than i can see any of they . but peradventure the Spaniard do not think that any english man will have come thither so soon to have disprove they in this and diverse [ three . 752. ] other of their notorious lie : wherefore they presume more bold to abuse the world .but before i pass any far i will here describe unto you situation and quality of Chili . this ' country stretch in length from north to south above two hundred league , contain in breadth but five and twenty league at the most . from the great ridge of mountain lie to the east of Chili run very many river into the sea , which river be the cause of diverse valley the fruitful in all the world , where bread , wine , and other victual river rich of mighty abound : and the say river also be very rich of gold . but to declare in few word the excellency of this province , i say that it may well be call a earthly paradise , save that it lack one only commodity , and that be peace . it be first discover on this manner : the Spaniard have conquer the kingdom of Peru , ( as i will hereafter show unto you ) find in the say kingdom great store of gold ; and ask the indian from whence it come , they answer , from Chili . upon which news don Diego de Almagro be one of the principali captain that conquer Peru make a voyage with three hundred horseman towards Chili , be constrain in his way to go over part of the snowy mountain , which way his indian guide conduct he , to the end that himself and all his company may die for cold . howbeit the Spaniard , though they lose some of their horse , Copiapo then come to the first town of Chili call Copiapo be next town of situate upon the first plain at the entrance of the say Peru province . but have news that the Indians be rise against the Spaniard of Peru and have enclose they , he return back without go any far . now this captain don Diego de Almagro be slay in the war of Peru , another call don Pedro de Baldivia march into Chili with four hundred horse , easy conquer that half of the country which be subject to the king of Peru. for know that Peru , be the chief country of their emperor , be over-274 i572-87-come by the Spaniard , they also immediate yield their land unto they . but the other half as it be Bl esta^Q the rich and the fruitful part , so God have people arauco-it with the most valiant and furious people in all America . the province which they inhabit call el Estado de PJ1 - 797 - ] arauco be but a small province about 20 league in ° length , and be govern by ten principali man of the country , out of which ten they choose the valiant man for the generali in the war . the king of Peru in time past can never conquer this part of Chili , nor yet any other king of the Indians . the weapon use by these people of Arauco be long pike , halberd , bow and arrow : they also make they jack of seal-skin , and head-piece : in time past the head of their halberd and pike be of brass , but now they have get store of iron . they pitch their battle in manner like the Christians : for put their pikeman in rank , they place bowman among they , and marshal their troop with discretion and great valour . now the Spaniard come unto this province send word unto they by other Indians , say that they be the child of God , and come to teach they the word of God , and that therefore they ought to yield themselves unto they : if not , they will shoot fire among they and burn they . Theise people not fear the great word of the Spaniard , but desire to see that which they have hear report , meet they in the field , and fight a most cruel battle : but by reason of the Spaniard great ordinance and caliver , they be in the end put to flight . now these Indians think very that the Spaniard be the child of God , because of their great ordinance which make such a noise , and breathe out such flame of fire , yield themselves unto they . So the Spaniard have divide this province make the Indians to serve their turn for get of gold out of the mine , which they enjoy in such abundance , that he which have least have 20000 pezo , but captain Baldivia himself have 300000 pezo 275 villa neuva de la Serena , la Concepcion , Sant lag ) , la imperial , Baldivia , la villa rica , the first six town that wereinhdbit in Chili . a stratagem of the Indians of Chili against the Spaniard . the death of Baldivia . the english voyage by the year . the fame of these riches in the end be spread as far as Spain ; from whence soon after resort many Spaniards to the land of Chili , who captain Baldivia cause to inhabit six town : to wit , villa nueva de la Serena call in the indian tongue coquimbo ; the second sant Iago which the Indians call Mapocha ; the three la Concepcion call by the indian penco ; the four la Imperial ; the five Baldivia ; and the sixth la villa Rica . also he build a fort in the middle of all the land , wherein he put ordinance and soldier ; howbeit all this their good success continue not long : for the indian in short time perceive that the Spaniard be but mortali man as well as they , determine to rebel against they : wherefore the first thing that they do , they carry grass into the say fort for the Spaniard horse , and wood also for they to burn , among which grass the Indians convey bow and arrow with great club . this do , fifty of the indian enter the fort , betake themselves to their bow , arrow , and club , and stand in the gate of the say fort : from whence make a sign unto other of their nation for help , they win the fort , and slay all the Spaniard . the news of this overthrow come to the town of Concepcion where captain Baldivia be , he present set forth with two hundred horseman to seek the Indians , take no more man with he , because he be in haste . and in a plain he meet the indian , who come of purpose also to seek he , and compass he about , slay most part of his company , the rest escape by the swiftness of their horse : but Baldivia have his horse slay under he be take alive . who the Indians wish to be of a good courage , and to fear nothing ; for the cause ( say they ) why we have take you , be to give you gold enough . and have make a great banquet for he , the last service of all be a cup full of melt gold , which the Indians force he to drink , say , now glut thy self with gold , and so they kill he . This Baldivia be a most valiant man , who have be a 276 old soldier in the war of Italy , and at the sack of Rome . upon this discomfiture the Spaniard choose for their captain one Pedro de Villa grande : who assemble Pedro de all the Spaniard in Chili , and take with he ten s " ande-peece of ordinance , march against those Indians ; but with so bid success , that he lose not only the field and many of his man , but also those ten piece of ordinance which he bring . the Indians have thus get the victory , go straightway against the town of Concepcion , from whence the Spaniard flee for fear , and leave the town desolate . and in this manner be the Spaniard chase by the Indians out of the country of Arauco . but news hereof be bring to the mark of Cannete viceroy of Peru , he send his sdnne don d°n Garda de Garcia de Mendoza against those Indians , with a great power of horseman , and footman , and store of artillery . the nobleman have subdue Chili again , and slay in diverse battle above 40000 Indians , and bring they the second time under the Spaniard subjection , new erect the say fort that stand in the midst of the land , inhabit the town of Concepcion again , and build other town for the Spaniard : and so leave the land in peace , he return for Peru. but year he be clean depart out of the land the indian rebel again , but can not do so much mischief as they do before , because the Spaniard take better heed unto they . from that time until this present there have be no peace at all : for notwithstanding many captain and soldier have do their uttermost , yet can they not bring that people whole in subjection . and although the Spaniard have in this province eleven town and two bishopric , yet have they little enough to maintain themselves , by reason of the war ; for they spend all the gold that the land yield in the maintenance of their soldier : which will not be so , if they have peace , for than they may work in all their mine . [ Iii . 798. ] Eleventowns , andtwobishop-ricks in Chili . 277 description thus have speak somewhat of the situation of ^ofchil^ ™ Chili , and of the troublesome conquest thereof , i will Baldivia . return to my former discourse where i leave . Baldivia therefore be of 150 house have twice be burn and spoil by the Indians ; so that now it be wax poor , but before the indian sack it , it be very rich : and it stand up a river four league from the tie province sea . pass from hence you come to the plain country insethe'* Arauco be situate over against the island la Mocha , island la on wbich island the Indians that inhabit belong to the Mocha situate main land . in 38 deg . and have pass this plain of Arauco , the next town a hayi . of the Spaniard that you come unto be la Concepcion which have be the great and the rich town in all Chui : but by reason that the Indians have burn the same four time , it be now grow very poor , and have small store of people : it contain about some two hundred house . and because it adjoin upon the plain of Arauco , where these valiant Indians be , therefore this town be environ about with a strong wall , and have a fort build hard by it : and here be 500 soldier continual in garrison . between this place Valparizo anJ Valparizo , the Indians call the coast by the name WortofS^Ia 0 Mapocha . Sant Iago it self stand 25 league up into the country , be the principali town of all Chili , deg . 40 min. and the seat of the governor : it consist of about 800 house . the port of Valparizo whither the good come from Lima by ship , have about twenty house stand by it . the next town near the sea side coquimbo beyond this be coquimbo , which stand two league standethtm^ . up jnto janj ; anj contain about 200 house . next C%'iapo . mtn ' unt0 coquimbo stand a port-town call Copiapo inhabit altogether by Indians which serve the Spaniard : and here a gentleman which be governor of the town have a ingenio for sugar : at this place end the whole province of Chili . here also the mountain join hard upon the sea be the cause why all the land between Copiapo and Peru , contain 160 league , lie desolate . 278 the first town on the coast of Peru call Atacama be a description inhabit by Indians which be slave unto the Spaniard . °fperu-but before i pass any far i will here also declare unto you the first discovery of Peru with other matter thereto belong , and then will i return to the seacoast again : and to the end you may understand i the better , i will begin with Panama . after that the Spaniard have inhabit the north side of this main land , pass over the mountain they discover the south sea : where because they find indian people with gold and pearl , they build a town eighteen league to the west of number de dios hard upon the seaside , and call it Panama . from hence they discover along the coast of Nueva Espanna : and for that Nueva Espanna be at the same time inhabit by Spaniards , there begin a trade from thence to Panama : but from Panama by sea to the coast of Peru they can not trade in a long time , because of the southerly wind blow on this coast almost all the year long , which be a hindrance to ship sail that way : and by land the passage be impossible , in regard of mountain and river : yea it be fifteen year before they pass the island of pearl , which be but twenty league from Panama . there be at this time in Panama two man , the one call Francisco Pizarro bear in the city of Truxillo in Spain , a valiant man , but withal poor : the other call Diego de Almagro be very rich . Theise man get a company unto they , and provide two caravel to discover the coast of Peru : and . have obtain licence of the governor of that place , Francisco Pizarro set forth with the two foresay caravel and 100 man , and Diego de Almagro stay in Panama to send he victual and other necessary . now Francisco Pizarro sail along the coast meet with much contrary wind and rain , which put he to great trouble ; and he begin also after a while to lack victual , for he be sail of that in eight month which they now pass in fifteen day , and not know the right course he run into every river and bay that he see along the coast : which 279 be the chief cause that he stay so long on his voyage : also thirty of his company die by reason of the unhealthfulness of the coast . at last he come to a Isla deal Gallo . Island call by he Isla deal Gallo , be situate from the main land six league . from hence he send one of his ship to Panama for a new supply of victual and of man : which ship be depart , 40 of his man that remain behind make a mutiny , and pass up into the country , mean to return by land to Panama , but in the way they all perish , for they be never hear of until this day . so that Francisco Pizarro be leave upon the say island only with thirteen man : who although [ three . 799. ] he have his ship there in which he may have return , yet will he rather die than go back ; and his 13 man also be of his opinion , notwithstanding that they have no other victual , but such as they have from the main land in the night season . thus he continue nine month , before any succour be bring he from Panama : but in the end his ship return with 40 man only and victual : whereupon he prosecute his voyage till he come to the first plain country of Peru call Tumbez , where he find a fort make by the king of Peru against the Indians of the mountain . wherefore Pizarro and his man be very glad in that they have find a people of so good understanding and discretion , be rich also in gold and silver and well apparel . at this port of Tumbez he take 30000 pezo of gold in truck of merchandise : and have too few man to proceed any further he carry two Indians with he to learn the language and return back for Panama . upon this discovery Francisco Pizarro think it expedient to travel into Spain to crave of the king the conquest of this land . whither be come , the king grant his request . and with the money which he carry over with he he hire a great number of man with a fleet of ship , and bring also along with he four of his brethren very valiant and hardy man . And be come to Panama he straightway go on his voyage 280 for Peru , be accompany with his partner Diego de Almagro . they sail first to the island call Isla deal Gallo ; where Francisco pizarroand his brethren go on land , and leave Diego de Almagro in the ship . and the whole number which afterward land on the main land be 60 horseman and 120 footman , with two great fieldpiece . but before we proceed any far , we think it not tir river of amiss to describe unto you the situation of Peru , and the naturali disposition of the inhabitant : this country be call Peru by the Spaniard , of a river so name by the Indians , where they first come to the sight of gold . from which river stand under the line , till you come to Copiapo the first town on the coast of Chili , stretch the land of Peru , for the space of eight hundred league : upon six hundred whereof from Atacama to Tumbez do never drop of rain fall , since the flood of Noah : and yet it be the fruitful land for all kind of victual and other necessary for the sustentation of man life that be to be find in all the world beside . the reason why it the cause why rain not in this land be because it be a plain coun - ^mth not trey and very narrow and low , situate between the ' equinoctial and the tropic of Capricorn , there run on the west frontier not above twenty league from the sea call mar deal Sur eastward thereof , a mighty ridge of high mountain cover with snow , the height of which mountain so draw the moisture of the cloud unto it self , that no rain fall upon the valley of Peru. from these mountain issue great store of river into the south sea , with the water whereof draw by certain sluice and channel they moisten their vineyard and cornfield , and by this mean the land be so exceed fruitful . between these mountain and the mountain of Chili that stretch unto the streit of Magellan , lie a plain of 60 league over , be so cold that it yield no wheat , but good store of other victual . this country of Peru be full of people well apparel and of civil behaviour . it have many mine 281 gold , silver , of gold and moor of silver , as also great store of copper , aft-peur^nd and tinne-mine , with abundance of salt peter , and of brimstone . brimstone to make gunpowder . there be likewise cattle the sheep of of all sort , among which there be a beast in shape some-Peru call what resemble a camel , but no big than a steer of a Llamas . year old ; they serve to carry burden , their flesh be good to eat , and their wool apt for many purpose . this beast be account the most profitable of all other for the use of man : howbeit the Spaniard since their first come have replenish this country with horse , cow , sheep , and goat , and likewise with plenty of wheat . so that in few word this land have abundance of riches and victual , and be the healthfull place in the world . there be in time past king of this land which be mighty monarch , who dominion stretch 1200. league , and their law be very civil , save that they be worshipper of the sun . at what time the Spaniard first enter this land there be two brethren of Atabalipa and the blood royal which strive who shall have the king-^rethren^com d°me > the one call Guascar , and the other Atabalipa . petitoursfor ' now Guascar have possession of all the mountain and the empire of the land within they : and Atabalipa be lord of all the pen . sea coast , and of the valley situate between the say mountain and the sea . the Indians see the Spaniard at the first arrive upon their shore call they vera coach , which in their language signify , the foam of the sea . also Atabalipa the indian prince send unto they to know what they do in his land , and what they seek for : the Spaniard make answer that they be the messenger of a great lord , and that they come to speak with the prince himself : who send they word that they shall come with a very good will ; and so Atabalipa stay for they at a city call Caxamalca , be thirty league distant from the sea side . whither be come , they find the indian prince sit in a chariot of gold , carry upon [ three . 800. ] man shoulder , and accompany with above 60000 Indians all ready arm for the war . then the Spaniard tell they that they be send from a 282 emperor ( unto who the pope have give all that land ) to convert they unto the christian faith . whereunto Atabalipa answer , that he will glad be friend with the emperor , because he be so great a monarch , but in no case with the pope , because he give to another that which be none of his own . A.D. 1572-87 . now while they be thus in talk , the Spaniard discharge their two field piece , and their caliver , set upon the Indians , cry Sant Iago . the Indians hear the noise of the ordinance and small shot , and see the fire , think that flame of fire have be come down from heaven upon they : whereupon they flee , and leave their prince as a booty for the Spaniard . who they at the first entreat very gentle , wish he not to fear , for that their come be only to seek for gold and silver . during the time of Atabalipas imprisonment , his captains have slay his brother Guascar , and have subdue all the mountain and plain country . upon which news Atabalipa tell the Spaniard , that if they will release he , he will give they all that they shall demand . this communication have continue a whole day , at length a soldier name Soto say unto Atabalipa : what will thou give we to set thou free ? the prince answer , i will give whatsoever you will demand . whereunto the soldier reply , thou shall give we this house full of gold and silver thus high , lift up his sword , and make a stroke upon the wall . and Atabalipa say , that if they will grant he respite to send into his kingdom , he will fulfil their demand . whereat the Spaniard much marvelling , give he three month time , but he have fill the house in two month and a half , a matter scarce credible , yet most true : for i know above twenty man that be there at that time , who all aflirme , that it be above ten million of gold and silver . howbeit for all this they let not the prince go , but think that in kill of he they shall become lord of the whole land , and so the Spaniard on a night strangle he . but 283 God the righteous judge see this villainous act , suffer none of those Spaniard to dye by the course of nature , but bring they to evil and shameful end . upon the news of these great riches there come store of people out of Spain , and inhabit many place in this country . the king in recompense of the good service of the two foresay partner , appoint Diego de Almagro governor of half the land , and Francisco Pizarro of the other half , who also he make a mark . but these two consort in part of a land belong unto other man , fall at variance and sharp war between themselves : and at length Pizarro have slay Almagro get all the land into his own hand . howbeit this prosperity of Pizarro continue not long : for a bastard-sonne of Diego de Almagro , to be revenge of his father death , slay Pizarro , for which act he lose his head . in this controversy between these two partner be slay also two brother of Pizarro , and the three be carry prisoner into Spain and there die in prison ; but the four call Gonsalvo Pizarro rebel with the whole country and become a cruel tyrant , vanquish many of the emperor captain in battle , and possess the country in peace for two year : howbeit be in the end overcome he lose his head like a traitor . and thus die they all a evil death that be cause of the death of that innocent king Atabalipa . and yet there be mutiny raise oftentimes by the Spaniard , but the Indians never rebel , after they have once peace grant unto they . the indian people of this land be part among the Spaniard , some be slave unto the gentleman that conquer their land , other some to other , and the residue to the king : and these Indians pay each man for his tribute seven pezo of fine gold , which be about ten ducat and a half . there be in this ricks^and’one country above forty city and town inhabit by archbishopric Spaniards : also they have here erect nine bishopin Peru. rick and one archbishopric . 284 now after this country be full conquer and bring in good order , certain Spaniards be desirous to discover the land on the other side of the snowy mountain , find a very wholesome country and there inhabit . the say province situate behind the mountain be call the province of Tucuman , wherein the province be five town inhabit by the Spaniard , the last of °ftucuman-them call Cordova , from which town unto Santa fee Cordova . situate upon the river of plate it be seventie league . this town of Santa fee be build in that place , to seek a way to Peru by the river of plate . and from hence down the say river to Buenos air be 120 league , and from Buenos air unto Sealisland you have 40 league . now have put down all that i know concern the country of Peru , and of the way from the river of plate unto Tucuman , i will return unto Atacama the Atacama . southermost town upon the coast of Peru , where i leave . from this town of Atacama till you come to Arica , all the coast be inhabit by Indians subject unto the Spaniard . but since captain Drake be here they [ three . 801. ] have build tower by the sea side , whereon , see any sail that they do mistrust , they presently'make smoke , and so from tower to tower they warn all the country . have before speak of Arica all that i can , i will now proceed to the next port call Camena be a Camena . town of Spaniards and contain about two hundred house . here they make store of wine , and have abundance of fig and reisin . the next town call Acari Acari . contain about three hundred house , and here be make the best and great store of wine in all Peru. from hence pass along the coast you come to el Calao el Calao . the port of Lima consist of about two hundred house : and here be a strong fort build since captain Drake be upon the coast . the city of Lima stand Lima. two league within the land , and contain two thousand house , be very rich , and of more trade than all the city of Peru beside : and this city be the seat of the viceroy , the archbishop , and the inquisition . 285 Paita . Guaiaquil . Tumbez . Salsaperilla . ship build at Guaiaquil . Puerto Viejo a place where emrald abound . la Buenaventura . la governacion de Popaian . Negros flee from their master . Panama . the english Voyages next unto this stand a small town of the Spaniard by the sea side call Santa : and next unto Santa be another small town of Christians call Cannete . from hence they sail unto a rich city call Truxillo , be one of the principali town of Peru , and contain about five hundred house . then follow Paita which have to the number of two hundred house . leave this town they pass to Guaiaquil which stand forty league up into a great bay or river , at the entrance of which river stand Tumbez a town of the Indians . all this coast along from Atacama to Tumbez it never rain , as i have before say : so that all the house in their town be not tile , but cover with bourd to keep off the heat of the sun , for they fear no rain at all . Guaiaquil be the first place where it rain , and here they gather Salsaperilla ; here be also great store of timber , and at this place they build many ship . hence they sail along the coast to a small and poor town call Puerto Viejo , which in time pass have be rich with emrald : but now since these stone in regard of their plenty be grow nothing worth , this town likewise be wax very poor . below this village stand another call la buena Ventura : but whosoever go thither must needs meet with evil fortune , the place it self be so waterish and unwholesome . here abide not above 20 man , who serve only to transport good unto a city stand fifty league within the main , in a province call la governacion de Popaian . from buena ventura and Popaian till you come to Panama there be no other town , by reason of the high mountain , the manifold river , and the unholesomenesse of the country . in this place do inhabit the negro that run from their master , and upon these mountain be Oxnam the english captain and his man take , as be before mention . beyond these mountain stand the city of Panama , be a rich place , by reason that all the treasure which come from Peru 286 be bring thither , and it consist of about four hundred house . the coast run along between this city and Nueva Espanna be call Costa rica . Costa rica . next unto Costa rica , which be a mountainous and the province desolate place , lie the coast of Nicaragua , be inhabit by the Spaniard , and have many good port belong to it , and be frequent with trade of merchandise ; but have no knowledge of the situation thereof , nor of the town therein contain , i surcease to speak any more of it . a certain viceroy of Nueva Espanna call don Luis de Velasco cause certain ship to be build for the discovery of the Malucos and of the coast of China : which ship in sail thitherward find certain the discovery island 80 league distant from the main land , which pmip-the Spaniards , accord to the name of their king , call * mass ' the philippinas : and have conquer one of these island call manilla , inhabit with a barbarous kind the isle of of people , they build a fort and a town thereupon , manilla . from whence they have trade with the people of China . unto these island they have four great ship that usual trade , two of they continual go , and two come : so that such spice and silk as the Portugal bring home out of the east Indies , the very same do the Spaniard bring from these island and from China , for Mexico the chief city of Nueva Espanna . the principali port-town of the coast of Nueva Espanna be Guatulco , and Acapulco . all the viceroy and governor that the king of Spain send for Peru and Nueva Espanna have a custom , for the obtain of his favour , to seek and discover new country . but the great and most notable discovery that have be from those part now of late , be that of the isle of Salomon , which be the discovery find in manner follow . the licenciate Castro be governor of Peru send forth a fleet of ship to ’ discover certain island in the south sea upon the coast of Peru , appoint as generali of the same fleet 287 a kinsman of his call Alvares de Mendanio , and Pedro Sarmiento as lieutenant , and in the vice-admiral go Pedro the Ortega . this fleet depart forth of the haven of Lima , and sail 800 league westward [ three , 802. ] off the coast of Peru , find certain island in eleven degree to the south of the equinoctial inhabit with a kind of people of a yellowish complexion , and all naked , who weapon be bow and arrow , and dart . the beast that they see here be hog and little dog , and they find some hen . here also they ckmes^ing / ir , find a muster of clove , ginger , and cinnamon , although andsinamon . the cinnamon be not of the best ; and here appear unto they likewise some show of gold . the first island that the Spaniard discover , they name Santa Izabella ; and here they build a small pinnace , with the which and with their ship boat they find out between nine and fifteen degree of southerly latitude eleven great island be one with another of 80 league in compass . the great island that they discover the isle of be according unto the first finder call Guadalcanal , Guadalcanal . on t^e coast whereof they sail 150 league , before they can know whither it be a island or part of the main land : and yet they know not perfect what to make of it , but think that it may be part of that continent which stretch to the strait of Magellan ; for they coast it to eighteen degree and can not find the end thereof . the gold that they find be upon this island or main land of Guadalcanal , whereas they land and take a town , find small grain of gold hang up in the house thereof . but because the Spaniard understand not the language of the country , and also for that the indian be very stout man , and fight continual against they , they can never learn from whence that gold come , nor yet what store be in the land . Theise Indians use to go to sea in great canoas that will carry 100 man a piece , wherein they have many conflict one against another : howbeit unto the Christians 288 they can do no great hurt ; for that with a small pinnace and two falcon a few may overcome 100 of they . at this place fourteen man mistrust nothing , row to land , to take in fresh water , who on the sudden certain Indians in four canoas set upon , take the ship boat , and slay all the man therein : wherefore a man can go on shore too strong , nor yet be too wary in a strange land . hereupon the Spaniard go on shore in their pinnace , and burn the town , a town burn . and in this town they find the small grain of gold before mention . they be discover of these island from one to another about fourteen month , at the end of which time ( because that upon the coast where they be , the wind continue still in one place , may be a occasion of long tarry ) they consult which way to return . southward they dare not go for fear of great tempest which be that way usual : wherefore sail to the north of the line , they fall with the coast of Nueva Espanna ; on which coast they meet with such terrible storm , that they be force to cut their main mast over-bourd , and to lie nine month beat it up and down in the sea , before they can get into any harbour of the Christians . in which time by reason of evil government , and for lack of victual and fresh water , most of the man in their admiral die ; for five whole day together they have neither water nor meat : but in the other ship they behave themselves so well , that the great part of they come safe unto the land . he that pass the strait of Magellan , or sail from the coast of Chili direct for the Malucos must needs run in sight of some of these island before speak of . at which island lie so furnish hen , excellent almond , potatos , sugar-cane , with diverse other sort fit for the sustenance of man in great abundance . also among these island you shall have some quantity of gold , which the Indians will give you in truck for xi 289 t abundance of good victual upon the isle of Salomon . convenient in the way to the Malucos you may your self with plenty of victual , as hog , A.D. 1572-87 . a new rich trade for gold , clove , ganger , and cinnamon . why these isle be call the isle of Salomon . [ in . 803. ] other commodity . for the Spaniard in their discovery of these island not seek nor be desirous of gold , bring home notwithstanding 40000 pezo with they , beside great store of clove and ginger , and some cinnamon also which be not so good as in other place . the discoverer of these island name they the isle of Salomon , to the end that the Spaniard suppose they to be those isle from whence Salomon fetch gold to adorn the temple at Jerusalem , may be the more desirous to go and inhabit the same . now the same time when they think to have send colony unto these island , captain Drake enter the south sea : whereupon commandment be give , that they shall not be inhabit , to the end that such Englishman , and of other nation as pass the strait of Magellan to go to the Malucos may have no succour there , but such as they get of the indian people . 