Certeine testimonies concerning K. Arthur and [I- *•] the North regions, taken his conquests of out of the historie of the Kings of Britaine, written by Galfridus Monumetensis, and newly printed at Heidelberge, Anno 1587. Lib. 9. cap. 10. Nno Christi, 517. Arthurus, secundo regni sui anno, subjugatis totius Hyberniae partibus, classem suam direxit in Islandiam, eamque debellato populo subjugavit. Exin divulgato per caeteras insulas rumore, quod ei nulla Provincia resistere poterat, Doldavius rex Gotlandiae, & Gunfacius rex Orcadum ultro venerunt, promissoque vectigali subjectionem fecerunt. Emensa deinde hyeme, reversus est in Britanniam, statiimque regni in firmam pacem renovans, moram duodecim annis ibidem fecit. The same in English. IN the yere of Christ, 517. king Arthur in the second yeere of his reigne, having subdued all parts of Ireland, sailed with his fleet into Island, and brought it and the people thereof under his subjection. The rumour afterwards being spread thorowout all the other Islands, that no countrey was able to withstand him, Doldavius the king of Gotland, and Gunfacius the king of Orkney, came voluntarily unto him, and yeelded him their obedience, promising to pay him tribute. The Winter being spent, he returned into Britaine, and establishing his kingdome in perfect peace, he continued there for the space of twelve yeres. Lib. 9 cap. 12. Missis deinde in diversa regna Legatis, invitantur tarn ex Galliis, quam ex coUateralibus Insulis Oceani, qui ad curiam venire deberent, &c. Et paulo post: Ex coUateralibus autem Insulis, Guillaumurius rex Hyberniae, Malvasius rex Islandiae, Doldavius rex Gotlandiae, Gunnasius rex Orchadum, Lot rex Noruegiae, Aschilius rex Danorum. The same in English. AFter that king Arthur sending his messengers into divers kingdomes, he summoned such as were to come to his Court, aswell out of France, as out of the adjacent Islands of the sea, &c. and a little after : From those adjacent Islands came Guillaumurius king of Ireland, Malvasius king of Island, Doldavius king of Gotland, Gunnasius king of Orkney, Lot the king of Norway, and Aschilius the king of Denmarke. Lib. 9 cap. 19. AT reges caeterarum Insularum, quoniam non duxerant in morem equites habere, pedites quot quisque debebat, promittunt, ita ut ex sex Insulis, videlicet, Hyberniae, Islandiae, Gotlandias, Orcadum, Noruegias, atque Daciae, sexies viginti millia essent annumerata. [I. 2.] The same in English. B1 >Ut the kings of the other Islands, because it was * not their custome to breed up horses, promised the king as many footmen, as every man was bound to send : so that out of the six Islands, namely, of Ireland, Island, Gotland, Orkney, Norway, and Denmarke, the king had sixe score thousand souldiers sent him.