Hetha, he had Gotland on leerboord, and Silland, with Hetha but two divers other Islands. men, before they came into this land. And these 2. dayes //^»^/J^ he had upon his leereboord the Islands that are subject to be Winner or Denmarke. In that countrey dwelt English Rostocke. fl Wolstans navigation in the || East sea, from Hetha to Trusco, which is about Dantzig. within the f Olstan sayd, that he departed from Hetha, and arrived at Trusco, in the space of 7. dayes, and 7. nights : during which time, his shippe kept her course continually under saile. All this voyage Wenedland was still upon his steerboord, and on his leerboord was Langland, Layland, Falster, and Sconie : all which countreyes are subject to Denmarke. Upon his leerboord also, was Bargenland, which hath a private king, unto whom it is subject. Having left Bargenland, he passed by Blekingie, Meere, Eland and Got- land, having them on his leerboord : all which countreys are subject to Sweden : and Wenedland was all the way upon his steerboord, until he came to Wixel mouth. Wixel is a very great river which runneth along betwixt Witland and Wenedland. Witland is apperteining to the Easterlings: and the river of Wixel runneth out of || Wenedland into Eastmeere, which Eastmeere is at the least 15. miles in breadth. There runneth also another river called Using from the East, and falleth into Eastmeere, out of another lake upon the banke, whereupon is situated Fruso. So that Using comming out of II Eastland, and Wixel out of Wenedland, fall both together into Eastmeere, and there Wixel depriveth Using of his name, and runneth thence West & North into the sea ; whereof the place is called Wixelmouth. Eastland is a very large land, and there be many cities and townes within it, and in every one of them is a king: whereby there is continually among them great strife 15 Bargenhnd, ov Bornholme. Wixel is the 1 j v e r ^ Dantzig. \\ Or, Prussia. Fruso. || Or, Lituania. The descripn™ °f and contention. There fish. is great plentie of hony and Mares milke a chiefe drinke. ^ The wealthiest men drinke commonly Mares milke, and p O o re people and slaves meade. There is no ale the Easterlings, but of mead there is brewed among plentie. The navigation of King Edgar, taken out of Florentius Wigorniensis, Hoveden, and M. Dee his discourse of the Brittish Monarchie, pag. 54, 55, &c. Have often times (sayd he) and many wayes looked into the state of earthly kingdomes, generally the whole world over (as farre as it may be yet knowen to Christian men commonly) being a studie of no great difficultie, but rather a purpose somewhat answerable to a perfect Cosmographer, to finde himselfe Cosmopolites, a citizen and member of the whole and onely one mysticall citie universall, and so consequently to meditate of the Cosmopoliticall government thereof, under the King almightie, passing on very swiftly toward the most dreadfull and most comfortable terme prefixed. And I finde (sayd he) that if this Brittish Monarchie would heretofore have followed the advantages which they have had onward, they might very well, yer this, have surpassed by justice, and godly sort, any particular Monarchie els, that ever was on earth since mans creation : and that to all such purposes as to God are most acceptable, and to all perfect common wealths, most honorable, profitable, and comfortable. But yet (sayd he) there is a little locke of Lady Occasion flickering in the aire, by our hands to catch hold on, whereby we may yet once more (before all be utterly past, and for ever) discreetly and valiantly recover and enjoy, if not all our ancient & due appurtenances to this