The same in English. TAlgo succeeded Vortiporius which was the goodliest man in person of all Britaine, a prince that expulsed many tyrants. He was strong and valiant in warre, taller then most men that then lived, and exceeding famous for his vertues. This king also obteined the government of the whole Island of Britaine, and by most sharpe battailes he recovered to his Empire the sixe Islands of the Ocean sea, which before had bene made tributaries by king Arthur, namely Ireland, Island, Gotland, Orkney, Norway, and Denmarke. The conquest of the Isles of Anglesey and Man by Edwin the Saxon king of Northumberland written in the second Booke and fift Chapter of Beda his Ecclesiasticall historie of the English nation. jjDuinus Nordanhumbrorum gentis, id est, ejus quae ad borealem Humbri fluminis plagam inhabitat, majore potentia cunctis qui Britanniam incolunt, Anglorum pariter & Britonum populis praefuit, praeter Cantuarios tanthm, necnon & Menavias Britonum insulas, quae inter Hiberniam & Britanniam sitae sunt, Anglorum subjecit potestati. The same in English. EDwin king of the people of Northumberland, that is to say, of them which inhabit to the North of the river Humber, being of greater authoritie then any other potentate in the whole Isle of Britaine, bare rule as well over the English as the British nation, except onely the people of Kent : who also brought in subjection under the English, the Isles of Man and Anglesey, and the other Northwesterne Isles of the Britons, which are situate Another testimonie alledged by Beda to the same purpose. Lib. 2. cap. 9. ANno ab incarnatione Domini sexcentesimo vicesimo quarto, gens Nordanhumbrorum, hoc est, ea natio Anglorum quae ad aquilonarem Humbri fluminis plagam habitat, cum rege suo Eduino, verbum fidei (praedicante Paulino, cujus supra meminimus) suscepit : cui videlicet regi in auspicium suscipiendae fidei, & regni coelestis potestas,. & terreni creverat imperii : ita ut (quod nemo Anglorum ante eum fecit) omnes Britanniae fines, qua vel ipsorum vel Britonum Provinciae habitabantur, sub ditione acceperit. Quin & Menavias insulas (sicut & supra docuimus) imperio subjugavit Anglorum. Quarum prior quae ad austrum est, & situ amplior, & frugum proventu atque ubertate foelicior, nongentarum sexaginta familiarum mensuram, juxta aestimationem Anglorum, secunda trecentarum & ultra spatium tenet. hundreth twentie and foure, IN the yeere from the incarnation of our Lord, sixe the people of Northumberland, to wit, those English people which inhabit on the North side of the river of Humber, together with their king Edwin, at the Christian preaching and perswasion of Paulinus above mentioned, embraced the Gospel. Under which king, after he had once accepted of the Christian faith, the power both of the heavenly & of his earthly kingdome was inlarged ; insomuch, that he (which no English king had done before him) brought under his subjection all the provinces of Britaine, which were inhabited either by the English men themselves, or by the Britons. Moreover, he subdued unto the crowne of England (as we have above signified) the Hebrides, commonly called the Westerne Islands. The principall wherof being more commodiously and pleasantly seated towards the South, and more abounding with corne then the rest, conteineth according to the estimation of the 9 The same in English. English, roome enough for 960. families, and the second for 300. and above. The voyage of Bertus, generall of an armie sent into Ireland by Ecfridus king of Northumberland, in the yere of our Lord 684, out of the 4. Booke and 26. Chapter of Beda his Ecclesiasticall Hystorie. Nno Dominicae incarnationis sexcentesimo octogesimo quarto, Ecfridus rex Nordanhumbrorum, misso Hiberniam cum excer- citu duce Berto, vastavit misere gentem innoxiam, & nationi Anglorum semper amicissimam, ita ut nee ecclesiis quidem aut monasteriis manus parceret hostilis. At insulani & quantum valuere armis arma repellebant, & invocantes divinae auxilium pietatis coelitus se vindicari continuis diu imprecationibus postulabant. Et quamvis maledici regnum Dei possidere non possint, creditum tamen est, quod hi qui merito impietatis suse maledicebantur, ocyhs Domino vindice, poenas sui reatus luerent. The same in English. IN the yeere of our Lord 684, Ecfrid the king of Northumberland sent captaine Bert into Ireland with an armie, which Bert miserably wasted that innocent nation being alwayes most friendly unto the people of England, insomuch that the fury of the enemy spared neither churches nor monasteries. Howbeit the Islanders to their power repelled armes with armes, and craving Gods aid from heaven with continuall imprecations and curses, they pleaded for revenge. And albeit cursed speakers can by no meanes inherit the kingdome of God, it was thought notwithstanding, that they which were accursed for their impiety did not long escape the vengeance of God imminent for their offences. 