Queeneland. Boats carted on mens backs. [I. 6.] || Or, streight. It seemeth to be about E/senborg. The description of the sound of Denmarke, Gotland. || Vandals. THE ENGLISH VOYAGES South, lieth Swethland, and against the same towards the North, lieth Queeneland. The Queenes sometimes passing the mountaines, invade and spoile the Normans : and on the contrary part, the Normans likewise sometimes spoile their countrey. Among the mountaines be many and great lakes in sundry places of fresh water, into the which the Queenes use to carie their boats upon their backs over land, and thereby invade and spoile the countrey of the Normans. These boats of theirs be very little and very light. The voyage of Octher out of his countrey of Halgoland into the sound of Denmarke unto a port called Hetha, which seemeth to be Wismer or Rostorke. OCther sayd that the countrey wherein he dwelled, was called Halgoland : and affirmed that there was no man dwelling towards the North from him. From this countrey towards the South, there is a certeine II port called Scirings hall, whither, he sayth, that a man was not able to saile in a moneths space, if he lay still by night, although he had every day a full winde. And he shall saile all the way along the coast, having on his steereboord, first Jutland and the Islands which lie betwixt this countrey & Jutland, still along the coast of this countrey, till he came to Scirings hall, having it on his larboord. At Scirings hall there entreth into the land a maine gulfe of the Sea, which is so broad, that a man cannot see over it: and on the other side against the same, is Gotland, and then Silland. This sea stretcheth many hundreth miles up into the land. From Scirings hall he sayd that he sailed in 5. dayes to the port which is called Hetha, which lieth betwixt the countries of II Wendels, Saxons, and Angles, whereunto it is subject. And as he sailed thitherward from Scirings hall, he had upon his steereboord Denmarke, and on his leereboord the maine sea, for the space of 3. dayes : and 2. dayes before, he arrived in Hetha, he had Gotland on leerboord, and Silland, with Hetha but two divers other Islands. men, before they came into this land. And these 2. dayes //^»^/J^ he had upon his leereboord the Islands that are subject to be Winner or Denmarke. In that countrey dwelt English Rostocke. fl Wolstans navigation in the || East sea, from Hetha to Trusco, which is about Dantzig. within the f Olstan sayd, that he departed from Hetha, and arrived at Trusco, in the space of 7. dayes, and 7. nights : during which time, his shippe kept her course continually under saile. All this voyage Wenedland was still upon his steerboord, and on his leerboord was Langland, Layland, Falster, and Sconie : all which countreyes are subject to Denmarke. Upon his leerboord also, was Bargenland, which hath a private king, unto whom it is subject. Having left Bargenland, he passed by Blekingie, Meere, Eland and Got- land, having them on his leerboord : all which countreys are subject to Sweden : and Wenedland was all the way upon his steerboord, until he came to Wixel mouth. Wixel is a very great river which runneth along betwixt Witland and Wenedland. Witland is apperteining to the Easterlings: and the river of Wixel runneth out of || Wenedland into Eastmeere, which Eastmeere is at the least 15. miles in breadth. There runneth also another river called Using from the East, and falleth into Eastmeere, out of another lake upon the banke, whereupon is situated Fruso. So that Using comming out of II Eastland, and Wixel out of Wenedland, fall both together into Eastmeere, and there Wixel depriveth Using of his name, and runneth thence West & North into the sea ; whereof the place is called Wixelmouth. Eastland is a very large land, and there be many cities and townes within it, and in every one of them is a king: whereby there is continually among them great strife 15 Bargenhnd, ov Bornholme. Wixel is the 1 j v e r ^ Dantzig. \\ Or, Prussia. Fruso. || Or, Lituania. The descripn™ °f 