Queenes Majesties royaltie over the British Ocean sea, round about the British Empire. An. Dom. 1017. THE ENGLISH VOYAGES of his regalitie, as with the testimonie annexed of the states and nobles of his Empire, to commit to perpetuall memorie, the stile of his chiefe worldly dignitie, in this very tenor of words before also remembred. Ego iEdgarus Anglorum Basileus, omniumque Regum, Insularum, Oceanique Britanniam circumjacentis, cunctarumque nationum, quae infra earn includuntur, Imperator, & Dominus. The voyage of Edmund and Edward the sonnes of King Edmund Ironside into Hungarie, Anno D. 1017. Recorded by Florentius Wigorniensis Pag- 391Edit consilium Edricus Canuto regi, ut clitunculos Eadwardum & Eadmundum regis Eadmundi filios necaret. Sed quia magnum dedecus sibi videbatur, ut in Anglia perimerentur, parvo elapso ternpore, ad regem Suavorum occidendos misit. Qui, licet foedus esset inter eos, precibus illius nullatenus voluit acquiescere, sed illos ad regem Hungarorum Salomonem nomine misit nutriendos vitaeque reservandos. Quorum unus scilicet Eadmundus processu temporis ibidem vitam finivit. Eadwardus vero Agatham filiam Germani Imperatoris Henrici in matrimonium accepit, ex qua Margaretam Scotorum reginam, & Christinam Sanctimonialem, & Clitonem Eadgarum suscepit. to murther EDric counselled king Kanutus the yong princes Edward and Edmund the sonnes of King Edmund. But because it seemed a thing very dishonourable unto him to have them put to death in England, hee sent them, after a short space, unto the king of Sweden to be slaine. Who, albeit there was a league betweene them, would in no case con24 [I. 10.] descend unto Canutus his bloody request, but sent them unto Salomon the king of Hungarie to be nourished and preserved alive. The one whereof namely Edmund in processe of time there deceased. But Edward received to wife Agatha daughter unto the Germane Emperour Henry, of whom he begot Margaret the Queene of the Scots, and Christina a Nunne, and Clito Edgar. A Chronicle of the Kings of Man, taken out of M. Camdens Chorographie. |N the yeere of our Lord 1066. Edward King of England, of famous memory deceased, whom Harald sonne of Godwin succeeded in his kingdome; against which Harald the king of Norwaie called Harald Harfager fought a battel at Stainford bridge, where the English winning the fielde put all the Norwegians to flight: out of which flight one Godredus sirnamed Crovan (the sonne of Harald the blacke, who had before time fled out of Island) repaired unto Godred sonne of Syrric, who then reigned in Man, and was right friendly and honourably enterteined by him. In the very same yeere William the Conquerour subdued England, and Godred the sonne of Syrric, king of Man, deceased, after whom succeeded his sonne Fingal. FingaL In the yeere 1066. Godredus Crovan gathered a fleete of ships, and sailed unto Man, and giving battell unto the people of the countrey, was vanquished and put to flight. The second time also having gathered his armie and ships together, hee came unto Man, fought with the inhabitants, lost the victorie, and was chaced away. Yea, the third time he assembled a great multitude, and comming by night unto the port which is called Ramsa, hid 300. of his men in a wood standing upon the side of the hill called Scacafel. The Sunne was no sooner up, but the Mannians arranged themselves and with great furie set upon Godred.