and before Calice, during the siege there, as it appeareth the in the accompts of William Norwel keeper of the 21. day of April in the kings Wardrobe, from 18 yeere of the reigne of the said king, unto the foure and twentieth day of November in the one and twentieth yeere of his reigne, is iii. hundreth xxxvii. thousand li. ix.s. iiii.d. A note out of Thomas Walsingham touching the huge Fleete of eleven hundred well furnished ships wherewith king Edward the third passed over unto Calais in the yeere ANno gratias 1359. Johannes Rex Francise sub umbra pads, & dolose obtulit Regi Angliae Flandriam, Picardiam, Aquitaniam, aliasque terras quas equitaverat & vastarat: pro quibus omnibus ratificandis idem Rex in Franciam nuncios suos direxit; quibus Edwardus omnibus Franci contradixerunt. Unde motus Rex Angliae, celeriter se & suos prasparavit ad transfretandum, ducens secum principem Walliae Edwardum suum fere primogenitum, ducem Henricum Lancastrian, & proceres omnes, quos comitabantur vel sequebantur poene mille currus, habuitque apud Sanwicum instructas optime undecies centum naves, & cum hoc apparatu ad fastum Franciam navigavit, humiliandum Francorum relicto domino Thoma de Woodstock filio suo juniore admodum parvulo, Anglici regni custode, sub tutela tamen. The same in English. IN the yeere of our Lord 1359. John the French king craftily, and under pretence of peace, offered unto Edward the third king of England, Flanders, Picardie, Gascoigne, and other territories which he had spoyled and wasted: for the ratifying of which agreement, the foresaid king Edward sent his ambassadors into France, but the Frenchmen gainsaied them in all their articles and demaunds. Whereupon the king of England being provoked, speedily prepared himselfe and his forces to crosse the seas, carying with him Edward Prince of Wales his heire apparant, and Henry duke of Lancaster and almost all his Nobles, with a thousand wagons and cartes attending upon them. And the said king had at Sandwich eleven hundred ships exceedingly well furnished: with which preparation he passed over the seas, to abate the Frenchmens arrogancie: leaving his yonger sonne Thomas of Woodstocke, being very tender of age, as his vicegerent in the Realme of England; albeit not without a protectour, &c. The voyage of Nicholas de Lynna a Franciscan Frier, and an excellent Mathematician of Oxford, the Regions situate under the North pole, in the yeere 1360. and in the 3. king of the England. raigne of Edward to all Uod ad descriptionem partium Septen- The words of J trionalium attinet, earn nos accipimus Oerardus f'TT'tl ex Itinerario Jacobi Cnoyen Buscodu- the foote of his . ' censis, qui quaedam ex rebus gestis generai Map, Arthuri Britanni citat, majorem autem upon the departem & potiora, a Sacerdote quodam scriptionofthe apud Regem Noruegi^e, An. Dom. 1364. North Parte5' . , didicit. Descenderat is ex illis quos Arthurus ad has habitandas insulas miserat, & referebat, An. 1360. Minoritam quendam Anglum Oxoniensem Mathematicum in relictis ad ulteriora arte eas insulas venisse, ipsisque Magica profectum descripsisse omnia, & Astrolabio dimensum esse in hanc subjectam formam fere, uti ex Jacobo coUegimus. Euripos illos quatuor dicebat tanto interiorem voraginem rapi, ut naves semel impetu ad ingressae nullo vento retroagi possent, neque vero unquam frumentariae Simillima his habet Giraldus circumagendae sufficiat. 301 ibi ventum esse, ut molas 