minimus Edwardi 3. Reditus. The voyage of Thomas of Woodstocke Duke of into Prussia, in the yeere 1391. Glocester written by Thomas Walsingham. Odem tempore dux Glovernise Dominus II Thomas de Woodstock, multis moerentibus, iter apparavit versus le Pruys: quern non Londinensium gemitus, non communis vulgi moeror retinere poterant, quin proficisci vellet. Nam plebs communis tarn Urbana quam rustica metuebant quod eo absente aliquod novum detrimentum succresceret, quo praesente nihil tale timebant. Siquidem in eo spes & solatium totius patriae reposita videbantur. Ipse vero mox, ut fines patrias suae transiit, illico adversa agitatus fortuna, nunc hac nunc iliac turbinibus procellosis circumfertur; & in tantum destituitur, ut de vita etiam desperaret. Tandem post Daciam, post Norwagiam, post Scoticam bar- bariem non sine mortis pavore transcursam, pervenit Northumbriam, & ad castellum se contulit de Tinnemutha velut assylum antiquitias notum sibi: ubi per aliquot dies recreatus, iter assumpsit versus manerium suum de Plashy, magnum apportans gaudium toti regno, tarn de ejus evasione, quam de adventu suo. The same in English. AT the same time the Duke of Glocester Lord Thomas of Woodstock (the yongest sonne of Edward the third) to the great griefe of many, tooke his journey towards Prussia: whom neither the Londoners mones nor yet the lamentation of the communaltie could restraine from his intended expedition. For the common people both of the Citie and of the countrey feared lest in his absence some newe calamitie might happen; which they feared not while he was present. For in him the whole nation seemed to repose thtir hope and comfort. Howbeit having skarce passed as yet the bounds of his owne countrey, he was immediatly by hard fortune tossed up and downe with dangerous stormes and tempests, and was brought into such distresse, that he despaired even of his owne life. At length, having not without danger of death, sailed along the coastes of Denmarke, Norway, and Scotland, he returned into Northumberland, and went to the castle of Tinmouth as unto a place of refuge knowen of olde unto him : where, after hee had refreshed himselfe a fewe dayes, hee tooke his journey toward his Mannour of Plashy, bringing great joy unto the whole kingdome, aswell in regard of his safetie as of his returne. The verses of Geofrey Chaucer in the knights [I. 124.] that the English Knights after time Prologue, who living in the yeere 1402. (as hee writeth himselfe in his Epistle of Cupide) the shewed losse of Aeon, were wont to travaile into Prussia and Lettowe, and other heathen lands, to advance the Christian faith against Infidels and miscreants, and to seeke honour by feats of armes. in his T he English Knights Prologue. I Knight there was, and that a worthie man, I that from the time that he first began 1 to riden out, he loved Chevalrie, trouth, honour, freedome, and Curtesie. full worthy was he in his lords warre: and thereto had hee ridden no man farre, As well in Christendome as in Heathennesse, and ever had honour for his worthinesse. full oft time hee had the bourd begon aboven all nations in Pruce, In Lettowe had hee riden, and in Ruce, no Christen man so oft of his degree: In Granade at the siege had he bee 3°7 At Alisandre hee was, when it was wonne: Alexandria. Long travaile.