demaunds. Whereupon the king of England being provoked, speedily prepared himselfe and his forces to crosse the seas, carying with him Edward Prince of Wales his heire apparant, and Henry duke of Lancaster and almost all his Nobles, with a thousand wagons and cartes attending upon them. And the said king had at Sandwich eleven hundred ships exceedingly well furnished: with which preparation he passed over the seas, to abate the Frenchmens arrogancie: leaving his yonger sonne Thomas of Woodstocke, being very tender of age, as his vicegerent in the Realme of England; albeit not without a protectour, &c. The voyage of Nicholas de Lynna a Franciscan Frier, and an excellent Mathematician of Oxford, the Regions situate under the North pole, in the yeere 1360. and in the 3. king of the England. raigne of Edward to all Uod ad descriptionem partium Septen- The words of J trionalium attinet, earn nos accipimus Oerardus f'TT'tl ex Itinerario Jacobi Cnoyen Buscodu- the foote of his . ' censis, qui quaedam ex rebus gestis generai Map, Arthuri Britanni citat, majorem autem upon the departem & potiora, a Sacerdote quodam scriptionofthe apud Regem Noruegi^e, An. Dom. 1364. North Parte5' . , didicit. Descenderat is ex illis quos Arthurus ad has habitandas insulas miserat, & referebat, An. 1360. Minoritam quendam Anglum Oxoniensem Mathematicum in relictis ad ulteriora arte eas insulas venisse, ipsisque Magica profectum descripsisse omnia, & Astrolabio dimensum esse in hanc subjectam formam fere, uti ex Jacobo coUegimus. Euripos illos quatuor dicebat tanto interiorem voraginem rapi, ut naves semel impetu ad ingressae nullo vento retroagi possent, neque vero unquam frumentariae Simillima his habet Giraldus circumagendae sufficiat. 301 ibi ventum esse, ut molas T HE ENGLISH VOYAGES Cambrensis (qui floruit, An. 1210.) in libro de mirabilibus Hyberniae, sic enim scribit. Non procul ab insulis Hebridibus, Islandia, &c. ex parte Boreali, est maris quaedam miranda vorago, in quam a remotis partibus omnes undique fluctus marini tanquam ex condicto fluunt, & recurrunt, qui in secreta naturae penetralia se ibi transfundentes, quasi in Abyssum vorantur. Si vero navem h&c forte transire contigerit, tanta rapitur, & attrahitur fluctuum violentia, ut earn statim irrevocabiliter vis voracitatis absorbeat. Quatuor voragines hujus Oceani, a quatuor oppositis mundi partibus Philosophi describunt, unde & tarn marinos fluctus, quam & flatus causaliter pervenire nonnulli conjectant. iEolicos The same in English. 'T^Ouching the description of the North partes, I have JL taken the same out of the voyage of James Cnoyen of Hartzevan Buske, which alleageth certaine conquests of Arthur king of Britaine: and the most part, and chiefest things among the rest, he learned of a certaine priest in the king of Norwayes court, in the yeere 1364. This priest was descended from them which king Arthur had sent to inhabite these Islands, and he reported that in the yeere 1360, a certaine English Frier, a Franciscan, and a Mathematician of Oxford, came into those Islands, who leaving them, and passing further by his Magicall Arte, described all those places that he sawe, and tooke the height of them with his Astrolabe, according to the forme that I (Gerard Mercator) have set downe in my mappe, and as I have taken it out of the aforesaid James Cnoyen. Hee sayd that those foure Indraughts were drawne into an inward gulfe or whirlepoole, with so great a force, that the ships which once entred therein, could by no meanes be driven backe againe, and that there is never in those parts so much winde blowing, as might be sufficient to drive a Corne mill. Giraldus Cambrensis (who florished in the yeere 1210, table whirlepoole on the coast of Norway, called Malestrande, about the latitude of 6$. NICHOLAS DE LYNNA towards under king John) in his booke of the miracles of Ireland, hath certaine words altogether alike with these, videlicet: Not farre from these Islands (namely the Hebrides, Island &c.) there is a certaine the North woonderful whirlpoole of the sea, whereinto all the waves of the sea from farre have their course and recourse, as it were without stoppe: which, there conveying themselves into the secret receptacles of nature, are swallowed up, as it were, into a bottomlesse pit, and if it chance that any shippe doe passe this way, it is pulled, and drawen with such a violence of the waves, that eftsoones without remedy, the force of the whirlepoole devoureth the same. The Philosophers describe foure indraughts of this Ocean sea, in the foure opposite quarters of the world, from whence many doe conjecture that as well the flowing of the sea, as the blasts of the winde, have their first originall. A Testimonie of learned Mathematician the foresaid the touching master John Dee, voyage of Nicholas De Linna. Nno 1360. (that is to wit, in the 34. yeere of the reigne of the triumphant king Edward the third) a frier of Oxford, being a good Astronomer, went in companie with others to the most Northren Islands of the world, and there leaving his company together, hee travailed alone, and purposely described all the Northerne Islands, with the indrawing seas: and the record thereof at his returne he delivered to the king of England. The name of which booke is Inventio Fortunata (aliter fortunae) qui liber Invent™ incipit a gradu 54. usque ad polum. Which frier for Fortunatasundry purposes after that did five times passe from England thither, and home againe. It is to be noted, that from the haven of Linne in Norfolke (whereof the foresaid Francisan frier tooke his