The league betweene Carolus Magnus and Offa King of Mercia concerning safe trade of the the Emperours English Marchants Dominion. This Offa died in the yeere of our Lord 795. in all Ffa interea Carolum magnum Regem Francorum legationibus frequentibus amicum paravit: quamvis non facile quod suis artibus conduceret in Caroli animo invenerit. Discordarunt antea, adeo ut magnis motibus utrobique concurrentibus, etiam negociatorum commeatus prohiberindex, cujus entur. Est Epistola Albini hujusce rei partem hie apponam. Nesico quid de nobis venturum sit. Aliquid enim dissentionis diabolico fomento inflammante, nuper inter Regem Carolum & Regem Offam exortum est: ita ut utrinque navigatio interdicta negociantibus cesset. Sunt qui dicant nos pro pace in illas partes mittendos. Et nonnullis interpositis, Nunc, inquit, ex verbis Caroli foedus firmum inter eum & Offam compactum subjiciam. Carolus gratia Dei Rex Francorum, & Longobardorum, fratri & patricius Romanorum, viro venerando & charissimo Offae Regi Merciorum Primo gratias agimus omnipotenti deo, de salute animarum, de Catholicae fidei sinceritate, quam in vestris laudabiliter paginis reperimus exaratam. De peregrinis vero qui pro amore Dei, & salute animarum suarum beatorum Apostolorum limina desiderant adire, cum pace sine omni perturbatione vadant. Sed si aliqui, non religioni servientes, sed lucra sectantes, inveniantur inter eos, locis opportunis statuta solvant telonia. Negociatores quoque volumus ut ex mandato nostro patrocinium habeant in Regno nostro injusta legitime. Et si aliquo affligantur oppressione, reclament ad nos vel nostros judices, & plenam videbimus justitiam fieri. salutem. loco 310 Malmsbur. de gestis Regum Anglorum 1. cap. 4. lib. Navigatio interdicta. Negociatorum Anglicanorum The same in English. IN the meane season Offa by often legacies solicited Charles le maigne the king of France, to be his friend: albeit he could not easily finde king Charles any whit to further and promote his craftie attempts. enclined Their mindes were so alienated before, that, bearing hauty stomacks on both parts, even the mutuall traffique of Traffique their Marchants was prohibited. The Epistle of Albinus P rohib'ltedis a sufficient testimony of this matter: part whereof I will here put downe. insomuch I know not (quoth he) what will become of us. For there is of late, by the instigation of the devill, some discord and variance sprung up betweene king Charles and king Offa: forbidden unto the Marchants of both their dominions- Navigation Some say that we are to be sent, for the obtaining of a forbiddenpeace, into those partes. And againe, after a fewe lines. Nowe (quoth he) out of Charles his owne words, I will ^ leaSue be~ make report of the league concluded betweene him and MaTan^K Offa. that sailing to and fro is [I. 126.] offa. Charles by the grace of God king of the Franks and Lombards and Senatour of the Romanes, unto the reverend and his most deare brother Offa king of the Mercians sendeth greeting. First we doe render unto almightie God most humble thankes for the salvation of soules, and the sinceritie of the Catholique faith, which we, to your great commendation, have found signified in your letters. As touching those pilgrimes, who for the love of God and their owne soules health, are desirous to resort unto the Churches of the holy Apostles, let them goe in peace without all disturbance. But if any be found amongst them not honouring religion, but following their owne gaine, they are to pay their ordinarie customes at places convenient. that your marchants shall have lawfull patronage and **i En&tsh Marchants. TTTI T 1 J i . . . ' It is our pleasure also and commandement, Protection 0/ protection in our dominions. Who, it in any place they make their supplication unto us, or unto our Judges, and we will see justice executed to the full. An ancient testimonie translated out of the olde Saxon lawes, containing among other things the advancement of Marchants for their thrise crossing the learned Gentleman Master William Lambert pagina 500. of his perambulation of Kent. the wide seas, set downe by IT was sometime in English lawes, that the people and the lawes were in reputation: and then were the wisest of the people worship-worthy, every one after his degree: Earle, and Churle, Thein, and under-Thein. And if a churle thrived so, that hee had fully five hides of his owne land, a Church and a Kitchin, a Belhouse, and a gate, a seate, and a severall office in the Kings hall, then was he thenceforth the Theins right worthy. And if a Thein so thrived, that he served the king, and on his message rid in his houshold, if he then had a Thein that followed him, the which to the kings journey five hides had, and in the kings seate his Lord served, and thrise with his errand had gone to the king, he might afterward with his foreoth his lords part play at any great neede. And if a Thein did thrive so, that he became an Earle; then was he afterward an Earles right worthie. And if a Marchant so thrived, that he passed thrise over the wide seas, of his owne craft, he was thencefoorth a Theins right worthie. And if a scholar so prospered thorow learning that he degree had, and served Christ, he was then afterward of dignitie and peace so much worthie, as thereunto belonged: unlesse he forfaited so, that he the use of his degree use ne might.