The T HE ENGLISH VOYAGES is mention the second and league betweene Henry Fredericke Barbarossa Emperour of Gerfriendly manie, wherein the traffike betweene the Empire yeere of our Lord n 57. recorded the first Booke and seventeenth Chapter of Radevicus Canonicus Frisingensis, being an appendix to Otto Frisingensis. the Marchants of in in and England, confirmed of si imperatori Bidem tune affuere etiam Henrici Regis Angliae missi, varia & preciosa donaria multo lepore verborum adornata praestantes. Inter quae papilionem unum quantitate maximum, qualitate optimum quantitatem perspeximus. Cujus instrurequiris, non nisi machinis & mentorum genere & adminiculo levari poterat: si qualitatem, nee materia nee opere ipsum putem aliquando ab aliquo hujusce apparatu superatum iri. Literas quoque mellito sermone plenas pariter direxerat, quarum hie tenor fuit. Praecordiali amico suo, Frederico Dei gratia Romanorum invictissimo, Henricus Rex Angliae, dux Normanniae, & Aquitaniae, & Comes Andegavensis, salutem, & verae dilectionis concordiam. Excellentiae vestrae quantas possumus referimus grates, dominantium optime, quod nos nunciis vestris visitare, salutare literis, muneribus praevenire, & quod his charius amplectimur, pads & amoris invicem dignatus estis foedera inchoare. Exultavimus, & quodammodo animum nobis crescere, & in majus sensimus evehi dum vestra promissio, in qua nobis spem dedistis, in disponendis Regni nostri negociis, alacriores nos reddidit, & prompinquam, & tota mente magnifi- tiores. Exultavimus centiae vestrae assurreximus, id vobis in sincero cordis afFectu respondentes, quod quicquid ad honorem vestrum spectare noverimus, pro posse nostro effectui mancipare , • , . indivisa, commercia tuta : Ita tamen ut tnter • parati sumus. Regnum nostrum, & quicquid ubique nostrae subjicitur ditioni vobis exponimus & vestrae committimus potestati, ut ad vestrum nutum omnia disponantur, & in omnibus vestri fiat voluntas imperii. Sit igitur inter nos & populos nostros dilectionis & Commercia pacis unitas r • j. vobis, qui dignitate praeminetis, imperandi cedat authontas, nobis non deerit voluntas obsequendi. Et sicut vestrae Serenitatis memoriam vestrorum excitat in nobis munerum largitio, sic vos nostri quoque reminisci praeoptamus, mittentes quae pulchriora penes nos erant, & vobis magis placitura. Attendite itaque dantis affectum, non data, & eo animo quo dantur accipite. De manu beati in ore magistri Jacobi, super qua nobis scripsistis, Hereberti & Guilielmi Clerici nostri verbum posuimus. Teste Thoma Cancellario apud Northanton. c9e?mT nos is Anglos. . ,. , The same in English. THere were present also the same time, the messengers of Henry king of England presenting divers rich and precious gifts, and that with great learning & eloquence of speech. Amongst the which we saw a pavilion, most large in quantity, & most excellent in quality. For if you desire to know the quantitie therof, it could not be erected without engines and a kinde of instruments, and maine force : if the qualitie, I thinke there was never any furniture of the same kinde, that surpassed the same either in stuffe or workemanship. The said king directed his letters also, full of sugred speeches, the tenour whereof was this that folioweth. To his entirely beloved friend Frederick by the grace of God Emperour of the Romanes most invincible, Henry king of England, duke of Normandie and Aquitaine, Earle of Anjou wisheth health and concord of sincere amitie. We doe render unto your highnes (most renowmed and peerelesse Prince) exceeding great thanks for that you have so graciously vouchsafed by us, with your gifts to prevent us, and (which wee doe more highly esteeme of then all the rest) to beginne a league of peace and friendship betweene us. We rejoyced, and in a maner sensibly felt our selves to bee greatly emboldened, and our courage to encrease, whilest your promise, whereby you put us in good comfort, did make us more cheerefull and resolute, in managing the affaires of our kingdome. We rejoyced (I say) & in our secret cogitations did humble obeisance unto your Majestie, giving you at this time to understand from the sincere & unfained affection of our heart, that whatsoever we shal know to tend unto your honour, we are, to our power most ready to put in practise. is under our jurisOur kingdome, and whatsoever diction we doe offer unto you, and commit the same unto your highnesse, that all matters may be disposed according to your direction, and that your pleasure may in all things be fulfilled. Let there be therefore betweene our selves and our subjects, an indivisible unitie of friendship and peace, and safe trade of Marchandize: yet so, as that unto you (who excell in dignitie) authoritie in commanding may bee ascribed, and diligence in obeying shall not want in us. And as the liberalitie of your rewards doeth often put us in remembrance of your Majestie, even so in like maner sending unto [I. 129.] your Highnesse the most rare things in our custodie, and which we thought should be most acceptable unto you, wee doe most heartily wish that your selfe also would not altogether bee unmindefull of us. Have respect therefore not unto the gifts, but unto the affection of the giver, and accept of them with that minde, wherewith they are offered unto you. Concerning the hand of S. James, about which you wrote unto us, we have sent you word by M. Herbert, the Clerke. Witnes Thomas our and by William Chancelour at Northanton.