kingdome so soone, &c. Witnesse our selfe at Lamhith the tenth of October. Another letter in the same forme and to the same effect was there and then sent unto S. Duke of Norway. Mandatum pro Coga Regis Norwegian Anno 13. Henrici 3. [jAndatum est omnibus Ballivis portuum in quos ventura est Coga de Norwegia, in qua venerint in Angliam milites Regis Norwegiae & Mercatores Saxoniae, quod cum prsedictam Cogam in portus suos venire contigerit, salvo permittant ipsam Cogam in portubus suis morari, quamdiu necesse habuerit, & libere sine impedimento inde recedere quando voluerint. Teste Rege. The same in English. A Mandate for the King of Norway his Ship called the Cog. WEe will and commaund all bailifes of Portes, at the which the Cog of Norway (wherein certaine of the king of Norwaie his souldiers, and certaine Marchants of Saxonie are comming for England) shall touch, that, when the foresaid Cog shall chance to arrive at any of their Havens, they doe permit the said Cog safely to remaine in their said Havens so long as neede shall require, and without impediment also freely to depart thence, whensoever the governours of the sayd ship shall thinke it expedient. Witnesse the King. Carta pro Mercatoribus de Colonia anno 20. Henrici 3. Confirmata per Regem Edwardum primum 8. Julii Anno Regni 18. prout extat in rotulo cartarum de Anno 18. Regis Edwardi primi. || Antiqua consuetudo Gildhall* Coloniensium Londini. [Ex Archiepiscopis &c. salutem. Sciatis nos quietos 1 clamasse pro nobis & haeredibus nostris dilectos nostros, Cives de Colonia, & mercandisam suam de illis duobus solidis, II quos solebant dare de Gildhalla sua London, & de omnibus aliis consuetudinibus & demandis, [I. 131.] quae pertinent ad nos in London, & per totam terram nostram ; & quod libere possunt ire ad ferias, per totam terram nostram & emere & vendere in villa London & alibi, salva libertate Civitatis nostrae London. Quare volumus & firmiter praecipimus pro nobis & haeredibus nostris, quod praedicti cives de Colonia praenominatas libertates & liberas consuetudines habeant per totam terram nostram Angliae sicut praedictum est. His testibus, venerabili patre Waltero Caerleolensi Episcopo, Willielmo de Ferariis, Gilberto Basset, Waltero de Bello campo, Hugone Disspenser, Waltero Marescallo, Galfrido Dispenser, Bartholomseo Pech, Bartholomaeo de Saukevill, & aliis. Data per manum venerabilis patris Radulphi Cicistrensis Episcopi, Cancellarii nostri apud Davintre Octavo die Novembris, Anno Regni nostri vicesimq. The same in English. A Charter graunted for the behalfe of the Marchants of Colen in the twentieth yeere of Henry the third, confirmed by King Edward the first, as it is extant in the roule of Charters, in the eighteenth yeere of King Edward the first. King unto Archbishops &c. greeting. Be it A knowen unto you, that wee have quite claimed, and for us and our heires released our welbeloved the Citizens of Colen and their marchandize, from the payment of those two shillings which they were wont to pay out of their Gildhall at London, and from all other customes and The ancient ^l^jfthe demaunds, which perteine unto us, either in London, or in any other place of our Dominions : and that they may G-/X// in safely resort unto Fayers throughout our whole Kingdome, London. and buy and sell in the Citie of London. Wherefore we will and firmely command for us and our heires, that the forenamed Marchants of Colen may enjoy the liberties and free priviledges above-mentioned, throughout our