A testimonie of certaine priviledges obtained for William of the English and Danish Marchants of Con- Malmb.lib. radus the Emperour and John of Rome by Canutus the King of England Angkrum in his journey to Rome, extracted out of a letter of his written unto the Cleargie of England. the Bishop ^f^g in It vobis notum quia magna congregatio nobilum ipsa solemnitate Pascali, Romae cum Domino Papa Joanne, & imperatore Conrado erat, scilicet omnes principes gentium a monte Gargano, usque ad istum proximum Mare : qui omnes me & honorifice suscepere, & magnificis donis honoravere. Maxime autem ab imperatore donis variis & muneribus pretiosis honoratus sum, tarn in vasis aureis & argenteis, quam in palliis & vestibus valde pretiosis. Locutus sum igitur cum ipso imperatore, & Domino Papa, & principibus qui ibi erant, de necessitatibus totius populi mei, tarn Angli quam Dani, ut eis concederetur lex aequior, & pax securior in via Romam adeundi, & ne tot clausuris per viam arcerentur, & propter teloneum fatigarentur. Annuitque postulatis Imperator, & Rodulphus Rex, qui maxime ipsarum clausurarum dominatur, cunctique principes edictis firmarunt, ut homines mei tarn Mercatores, quam alii orandi gratia viatores, absque omni anguria clausurarum & teloneariorum, cum firma pace Romam eant & redeant. injustum The same in English. [I. 127.] YOu are to understand, that at the feast of Easter, there was a great company of Nobles with Pope John and Conradus the Emperour assembled at Rome, Gar£a*us a y namely all the Princes of the nations from mount Apuiia in Garganus unto the West Ocean sea. Who all of them italic -r* • x. mountawe of A.' 11 \.i 1 1 c r honourably interteined me, and welcomed mee with rich and magnificent gifts: but especially the Emperour bestowed divers costly presents and rewards upon mee, both in vessels of golde and silver, and also in cloakes and garments of great value. Wherefore I conferred with the Emperour himselfe and the Pope, and with the other Princes who were there present, concerning the necessities of all my subjects both Englishmen and Danes; that a more favourable law & secure peace in their way to Rome might bee graunted unto them, and that they might not bee hindered by so many stops & impediments in their journey, and wearied by reason of injust exactions. And the Emperour condescended unto my request, and King Rodulphus also, who hath greatest authoritie over the foresaid stops and streights, and all the other princes confirmed by their Edicts, that my subjects, as well Marchants, as others who travailed for devotions sake, should without all hinderance and restraint of the foresaid stops and customers, goe unto Rome in peace, and returne from thence in safetie. The flourishing state of Marchandise in the Citie of London in the dayes of Willielmus Maimesburiensis, which died in the yeere 1142- in the reigne of K. Stephen. ||T^n|Aud longe a Rofa quasi viginti quinque milliariis Gu/iel Malmesb. de U gn il est Londonia Civitas nobilis, opima civium ^ lib. terra, divitiis, constipata negociatorum ex omni & maxime ex Germania venientium, commerciis. Unde fit ut cum ubique in Anglia caritas victualium pro sterili proventu messium sit, ibi necessaria distrahantur & emantur minore, quam alibi, vel vendentium compendio, invehit merces vel ementium dispendio. Civitatis finibus Tamesis fluvius famosus, qui citra urbem ad 80. milliaria fonticulo fusus, ultra plus 70. nomen profert. Peregrinas 