greeting and sincere love. Wee received the complaint of our welbeloved Merchants Thomas de Swyn of Waynfleet, and Simon the sonne of Alanus of the same towne : the contents whereof are, that whereas of late, the saide parties sent certaine of their servants to traffike in your kingdome, your Treasurer upon the feast of S. Michael last past, without any just or reasonable occasion, caused the goods and merchandise of the foresaide Thomas and Simon, to the value of fortie pound, which their said servants had under their custodie at the towne of Northberne, to be arrested, and as yet also injuriously deteineth the same under the same arrest, to the great damage and impoverishing of the sayd Thomas and Simon. And forasmuch as our desire is to succour these our marchants so far foorth as we can, Justice requiring no lesse in this [I. 140.J behalfe, we doe right earnestly request you, that having hearde the complaint and supplication of the foresayde Thomas and Simon, or of their Atturneyes, you woulde of your love and friendship, vouchsafe them speedie administration of Justice, about the restitution of their goods and marchandise aforesaide: least that for want of the exhibiting of Justice about the foresaid arrest, we be constrained to provide some other remedie for our marchants aforesaid. Our request is, that you would by the bearer of these presents, returne an answere unto us, what you are determined to doe, at this our instant motion. Given as above. A third letter of King Edward the second, to Haquinus King of Norway in the behalfe of certaine English Marchants. MAgnifico Principi Domino Haquino Dei gratia Regi Norwegiae illustri, amico suo charissimo, Edwardus eadem Dei gratia Rex Angliae, dominus Hyberniae, & dux Aquitaniae, salutem cum dilectione sincera. Pro mercatoribus nostris Lennse, & partium vicinarum, quos Ballivus & Officiarii vestri civitatis vestrae Bergen dudum jam intelleximus, propter alimentorum subtractionem & duritiam, ac asperitatem carceris perierunt, ut ipsorum & bonorum suorum deliberationem praecipere curaretis, vestrae serenitati Regiae nostras nuper transmisimus literas speciales. Sed vos, retentis adhuc in carcere nostris mercatoribus sicut prius, nobis per literas vestras quas audivimus & intelleximus diligenter, inter caetera rescripsistis, quod quidam mercatores de regno vestro de injuriis, violentiis & arrestationibus, quibus in regno nostro his diebus sunt, ut asserunt, contra justitiam aggravati, multipliciter conqueruntur, adjiciendo in vestris literis memoratis, quod quidam iniquitatis filii in villa Lennae, ad piscandum ut dicebant halecia venientes, quendam militem Ballivum vestrum, in Vikia una cum decem aliis subditis vestris, in vestris & regni vestri negotiis existentibus crudeliter occiderunt. Super quibus mens nostra gravatur quamplurimum & turbatur, praesertim quum nunquam nostrae fuerit voluntatis, quod injuriae, violentiae, seu arrestationes aliquae mercatoribus, vel aliis de regno vestro per aliquos de regno & potestate nostris fierent indebite vel injuste: nee adhuc intelligere possumus, quod mercatoribus vestris per aliquem vel aliquos de subditis nostris hue usque aliter factum fuerit: Scientes pro certo quod si nobis per inquisitiones legitimas constare poterit hujusmodi gravamina subditis vestris infra regnum nostrum illata fuisse, nos sufficientes emendas, & satisfactiones debitas super illis, celerisque justitiae complementum fieri faciemus. Et insuper si malefactores praedicti, qui praefatum militem, & alios secum existentes, ut praemittitur, occiderunt, de regno, seu potestate nostra sint, vel infra idem regnum vel potestatem poterunt inveniri, de ipsis judicium & justitiam fieri praecipiemus, secundum Leges & consuetudines regni nostri. Et quia inter nos & vos, nostrosque & vestros subditos hinc inde foveri desideramus mutuam concordiam & amorem; ita quod merca- tores nostri & vestri mercandisas suas in nostris & commerm in- v a i e a nt exercere, prout temporibus progenitorum nos% Nof-wT gjtam. t r o r um fieri consuevit, & ex dictarum literarum vestrarum serie collegimus evidenter vos promptos esse similiter, & paratos ad omnia & singula, quae pro vobis & vestris subditis super discordiis, contentionibus, aut gravaminibus inter nostros & vestros subditos qualitercunque suscitatis pro bono pacis & justitiae fuerint aequanimiter facienda: Nos consimilia pro nobis & nostris, quantum ad nos & ad ipsos attinet, illius amore, qui pacis author fore dinoscitur, & pro quiete & commodo populi utriusque regnorum nostrorum, quatenus jus & ratio dictitaverint, promittimus nos facturos: Vestram amicitiam requirentes obnixius & rogantes, quatenus mercatores nostros praedictos, qui adhuc superstites relinquuntur, quos etiam tempore, quo dicta felonia committi dicebatur, interclusos tenebat custodia carceralis, jubere velitis nostri contemplatione, zeloque justitiae ab hujusmodi custodia fuerit liberari, bona ab ipsis capta eis prout justum restitui faciendo. Et ut deliberatio mercatorum nostrorum praedictorum, & bonorum suorum e6 facilius con- cedatur, placeat vobis cum diligentia debita ponderare, quod Galfridus Drewe, & quidam alii mercatores nostri de Lenne, quibusdam mercatoribus de regno vestro occasione ejusdem gravaminis ipsis mercatoribus vestris, ad sectam Tidemanni Lippe infra regnum nostrum, libras sterlingorum perut dicebatur, illati, centum solverunt, sicut inter in quodam Ingelramum Lende de Thorenden, & quosdam alios mercatores vestros ex parte una, & praefatum Galfridum, & quosdam alios de regno nostro similiter ex altera confecto, vidimus contineri. Si qui vero de subditis vestris de aliquibus subditis nostris, de aliqua injuria ipsis facta querelas in curia nostra deponere voluerint, & prosequi cum efFectu, ipsorum subditorum vestrorum petitiones admitti, & eis super querelis hujusmodi plenam & celerem justitiam fieri faciemus. Ita quod iidem subditi vestri exinde reputare debebunt meritd se contentos. 346 indentato scripto Et interim de exce,ssibus & gravaminibus subditis vestris infra regnum nostrum qualitercunque illatis inquiri faciemus cum diligentia veritatem. Vestrae igitur voluntatis beneplacitum in praemissis nobis rescribere velitis per prsesentium portitorem. Datae apud Westminster tertio die Aprilis. The same in English. T3 the mightie Prince king Haquinus, by the grace of God the famous king of Norway, his most deare friend Edward by the same grace of God, king of England, lord of Ireland, Duke of Aquitaine, greeting and sincere love. We sent of late unto your royall majestie our special letters, for the behalfe of our late marchants of Lenne, and of the coast adjoyning (whome your baily and officers of the citie of Bergen lately apprehended, committing them to close prison, many of whome, as we understand, are, for want of due nourishment, and by reason of the extremitie & loathsomnesse of the prison, quite perished) that you would cause them and their goods to bee released. Howbeit, you reteining as yet our marchants in durance as before, in your letters, which we have diligently heard, and throughly understood, have, amongst other matters, returned this answere unto us: that certaine marchants of your kingdome doe make sundrie complaints of injuries, violences and arrests, whereby they have lately (as themselves avouch) contrary to justice bene aggrieved and oppressed in our dominions : adding moreover in your sayde letters, that certaine sonnes of iniquitie of the towne of Lenne, comming, as they saide, to fish for herrings, cruelly murthered a certaine Knight, who was in times past your bayliffe of Vikia, together with ten others of your subjects, being imployed about the In consideration whereof affaires of your kingdome. our minde is exceedingly and above measure grieved and troubled, especially sithence it was never any part of our intent, that any injuries, violences, or arrests any others of your realme by any of our kingdomes: neither can we as yet have any intelligence, that any such hard measure hath bene offered unto any of your marchants, by any one or moe of our subjects: giving you for a certaintie to understand, that if upon lawfull inquisition we shalbe advertised of any such grievances, which have bene offered unto your subjects within our realme, we will cause speedie justice to be administred, to be and sufficient made in regarde thereof. And moreover, if the saide malefactors, which, as it is aforesaid, slewe the forenamed Knight, and others of his companie, either be appertaining unto our kingdome and dominion, or may at any time be found within our saide kingdome or dominion, we will command justice and judgement to be executed upon them, according to the lawes and customes of our realme. And forasmuch as our desire is, that mutuall concord and amitie should be mainteined and cherished between your and our subjects on both recompence, and due satisfaction The antiquity parts: so that our and your marchants may, in both ofttajfique our Realmes and dominions, freely and without impediland and Nor- m e nt exercise their trafnque, as in the times of our progenitors it hath bene accustomed: Whereas also we way. evidently gathered out of the contents of your letter, that you are in like sort readie and willing to put all things in practise, which are by you and your subjects (for the taking away of discords, contentions, and molestations howsoever occasioned, and sprung up betweene your and our subjects) lovingly to be performed: we also doe promise for our selves, and our subjects, so much as in us and them lieth, for his sake who is knowen to be the author of peace, and for the benefite & justice and reason shall move us) to doe the like. Desiring and earnestly requesting at your hands, that of your love and friendship, having regard of us, and consideration foresaide of justice, you would commaund tranquilitie of both our Realmes (as that our the saide felonie committed, were shut the time of up in close prison, be delivered out of the saide thraldome, causing their goods which have bene taken from them, to bee, according unto justice, restored to them again. And that the deliverie of our foresaide marchants and goods, may be the more easily yeelded unto, may it please you with diligent observation to consider, that Gefferey Drew, and certaine other of our marchants of Lenne, upon occasion of the greivances offered unto your marchants within our Realme, (as the report goeth) at the suite of Tidman Lippe, paide unto the same your marchants an hundreth pound sterling : even as in a certain Indenture made betweene Ingelram Lende of Thorenden, and some other of your marchants on the one part, and betweene the foresaide Geffrey, and certaine of our marchants on the other part, wee sawe conteined. Moreover, if any of your to subjects be minded prosecute their complaints in our Court, concerning any of our subjects, or of any injury done unto them, we will cause the petitions of those your subjects to be to be admitted, and also full and speedie justice administred, upon any such like complaints of theirs. Insomuch, that those your subjects shal thinke themselves right well and sufficiently contented therewithall. And in the meane space we will cause diligent inquisition of the trueth to be made, of all excesses and grievances howsoever offered unto your subjects within our dominions. May it please you therfore, by the bearer of these presents, to returne an answere unto us, what you are determined to doe in the premisses. Given at Westminster, the third day of April. to exhibite, and effectually [I. 142.] 349