Gripeswold. Item, they of Gripeswold exhibited 5. articles, the summe whereof amounted unto 2092. nobles and an halfe. For the which there was promised satisfaction of 153. nobles and an half. And the said men of Gripeswold have of in possession, to the value of 22015. nobles, 18.S, as it is reported by them of Linne. And the same libertie is reserved unto them that was unto the Hamburgers. Item, they of Campen propounded ten articles, the summe whereof extended unto 1405. nobles. There is no satisfaction promised unto the same liberty them, which was unto the is reserved unto other above mentioned. the goods of English men them: but Campen. Item, the ambassadors of England demanded of the citizens of Rostok & Wismer, for damages & injuries by them committed against the subjects of the foresayd sovereigne king 32407. nobles, 2.s. io.d. And albeit every of the foresayd cities sent one of their burgomasters unto the towne of Hage in Holland, to treat with the English ambassadours, it was in the end found out, that they had not any authority of negotiating or concluding ought at al. And therfore they made their faithfull promises, that every of the said cities should send unto our soveraigne Lord the king one or two procurator or procurators sufficiently instructed to treat & conclude with our said sovereigne lord the king about the damages and injuries aforesaid at the feast of the nativitie of Saint John the Baptist. Compositions and ordinances concluded between the messengers of Frater Conradus de Jungthe ingen master generall of Prussia: and chancelor and realme of England 1403. treasurer of the rN the yere of our Lord 1403, upon the feast of 1 S. Michael the Archangel, the right hono: Henrie bishop of Lincoln, chancelor of England, and the lord de Roos high treasurer of England, & the ambassadors 36 THE ENGLISH COMPOSITIONS of Prussia, John Godek of Dantzik, & Henry Monek of Elbi ng, masters of the same cities have at Westminster in maner of composition about the articles underwritten: between the most sovereigne lord the king of England, and the right reverend & honorable Conradus de Jungingen Master general of Prussia, as concerning the injuries offered unto the people of Prussia and Livonia upon the sea by the English. treated First, that all ships with their appurtenances, & the commodities of the mariners, according unto the condition of the things, and all other goods taken away by the English, which are actually undivided & whole, are incontinently & with al speed to bee restored. And if there bee any defect in ought, the value of the said defect is to be accounted, & with other losses of goods to be restored, at the terme of the restitution to be made and delivered. Item, that all ships, damages, and goods (as they are conteined in our bill of accusation) which are not now immediately restored, are to be restored and payd in the land of Prussia, between this and the terme appointed, with full execution and complement of justice. Item, concerning the persons throwen over boord or slaine in the sea: it shall remayne to bee determined at the will and pleasure of the most mighty prince the king of England, and of the right reverend the Master of Prussia. Item, betwene this and the terme appointed for the restoring of the goods taken away, & untill there be due payment & restitution of the said goods performed, the marchants of England and of Prussia are in no wise to exercise any traffique of marchandise at all in the foresaid lands. Memorandum, that the third day of the moneth of 1403. October, in the yere of our Lord 1403. and in the fift yere of the reigne of the most mighty prince and lord, king Henrie the fourth, by the grace of God king of England and France &c. betweene the reverend father the right Henrie bishop of Lincoln, chancelor, and honorable William lord de Roos, high treasurer of England, both of them counsellers unto the sayd soveraigne king on the one party, and the right worshipfull John Godeke, and Henrie Moneke, sent as messengers by the right reverend and religious personage, Frater Conradus de Jungingen Master generall of the Dutch knights of the Order of S. Mary on the other party: it was, at the request and instancie of the sayd messengers, appoynted, and mutually agreed upon, that all the liege people and subjects of the sayd soveraigne lord and king shall have free licence and liberty untill the feast of Easter next ensuing, safely to travel unto the land of Prussia aforesayd, there to remaine, and thence, with their ships, marchandises, & other their goods whatsoever, to returne unto their owne home: which on the other side, all the subjects of the sayd Master general may, within the terme prefixed, likewise doe, in the foresaid realme of England. Provided alwaies, that after the time above limited, neither the sayd marchants of the realme of England may in the land of Prussia, nor the marchants of that land, in the realme of England, exercise any traffique at al: unles it be otherwise ordained by some composition, betweene the foresaid king of England, & the said Master general in the meane time concluded. In witnesse wherof, one part of this present Indenture is to remaine in the custodie of the foresaid messengers. Given in the Chapter-house of the Church of S. Paul at London, the day and yere above written. The treasurer of the chancelor and England, unto Frater Conradus de Jungingen, master generall of Prussia 1403. 1 Ight reverend and mighty lord, your honorable messengers John Godeke, and Henry Moneke, the bearers hereof comming of late before the presence of our most sovereigne lord the king of England and of 38 R1