England and France &c. betweene the reverend father the right Henrie bishop of Lincoln, chancelor, and honorable William lord de Roos, high treasurer of England, both of them counsellers unto the sayd soveraigne king on the one party, and the right worshipfull John Godeke, and Henrie Moneke, sent as messengers by the right reverend and religious personage, Frater Conradus de Jungingen Master generall of the Dutch knights of the Order of S. Mary on the other party: it was, at the request and instancie of the sayd messengers, appoynted, and mutually agreed upon, that all the liege people and subjects of the sayd soveraigne lord and king shall have free licence and liberty untill the feast of Easter next ensuing, safely to travel unto the land of Prussia aforesayd, there to remaine, and thence, with their ships, marchandises, & other their goods whatsoever, to returne unto their owne home: which on the other side, all the subjects of the sayd Master general may, within the terme prefixed, likewise doe, in the foresaid realme of England. Provided alwaies, that after the time above limited, neither the sayd marchants of the realme of England may in the land of Prussia, nor the marchants of that land, in the realme of England, exercise any traffique at al: unles it be otherwise ordained by some composition, betweene the foresaid king of England, & the said Master general in the meane time concluded. In witnesse wherof, one part of this present Indenture is to remaine in the custodie of the foresaid messengers. Given in the Chapter-house of the Church of S. Paul at London, the day and yere above written. The treasurer of the chancelor and England, unto Frater Conradus de Jungingen, master generall of Prussia 1403. 1 Ight reverend and mighty lord, your honorable messengers John Godeke, and Henry Moneke, the bearers hereof comming of late before the presence of our most sovereigne lord the king of England and of 38 R1 France, and being welcomed by our said lord with a chearefull and favourable countenance, they presented certaine letters on your behalfe unto the kings Majestie, with that reverence which beseemed them: expounding unto his highnes, sundry piracies & molestations offered of late upon the sea, by his liege people & subjects unto yours, contrary to the leagues of peace and amitie, which hitherto (by Gods grace) have bene maintained and continued on both parts. In consideration of which piracies and molestations, your messengers demanded full restitution and recompense to be made, either unto the damnified parties, or unto their procurators. We therefore at that time, especially being in the presence of our soveraigne (who with his puissant army tooke his progresse towards the remote part of Wales being subject unto his dominion, to see justice executed upon his people of those parts, who very rashly have presumed to rebell against him their sovereigne, contrary to their allegeance) right well perceived that it was his highnesse intention, that every one should have due justice faithfully administred unto him, especially your subjects, and that with all favour, whom he hath alwayes in times past right graciously intreated, as if they had bene his owne liege subjects and native countrey men, whome also hee purposeth hereafter friendly to protect: insomuch that betweene him and his subjects on the one party, and betweene you and yours on the other party, great abundance and perfection of mutuall therefore we offered unto amity may increase. And your foresayd messengers, after they had particularly declared unto us such piracies and wrongs, to sende the kings letters unto them of whom complaint was made, firmely injoyning them, under grievous penalties, that without delay they restore or cause to bee restored unto the parties damnified, or unto their procuratours, all ships, marchandises, wares, and goods, by them taken or violently stolne from your subjects. And that your said messengers may partly attaine their desire, we have [I. 159.] t Namely the commaunded certaine J ships, marchandises, wares, and in certaine havens, to be delivered unto shipofEdgard goods, found ^T&Mptf*' t l l e m - Howbeit, as touching other goods, which are Tidman Dor- perhaps perished or wanting by infortunate dissipation or destruction, and for the which the said messengers dewantand to be made unto them Tidman War- of yOUrs demand satisfaction limited: m*y [t Please h y us TnZfswtf within a certain time epuwic . ^^ honor to understand, that in the absence of our sayd sovereigne lord the king, being as yet farre distant from us, wee can in no wise limit or set downe any such terme of time. Notwithstanding, at the prosperous returne of our soveraigne, we are determined to commune with him about this matter. Of whose answere so soone as we be certified, we purpose to signifie his intention unto you by our letters. Sithens also (right reverend and mighty lord) your sayd messengers are contented, for the present, to accept of our offer aforesayde, as indeede by all reason they ought thereat to rest content, especially whereas by this meanes they shall the more speedily attaine unto the effect of their purposes (to the shorte and wished execution and performance of which offer, we will, by Gods helpe, endevour, to the utmost of our ability) may it be your will and pleasure, that as in the kingdome of England, your marchants and subjects are courteously intreated : even so the marchants and liege people of our soveraigne lord the king and of his kingdomes peaceably frequenting your parts, either in regard of trafBque or of any other just occasion, may there in like manner friendly bee used, and with your marchants and subjects suffered to communicate, and to have intercourse of traffique, injoying the commodities of the ancient league. By this also the fervent zeale and affection which you beare unto the royall crowne of England shall undoubtedly appeare : albeit betweene the famous houses of England and of Prussia, the bandes of unfained love and friendship have bin successively confirmed and kept inviolable in times lord) reverend and mighty past. And Note well (right thus KING HENRY IV.'S LETTERS wishing unto you increase of honour and prosperity, wee take our leaves. Written at London the fift of October, in the yeare of our lord 1403. By the chancelor, the treasurer, and other lords of the hono: counsell of the king of England and France, being personally present at London. The letters of king Henry the 4. unto Conradus de Jungingen the master general of Prussia, intercourse of for mutual conversation and traffique to continue between the marchants of England and of Prussia, for a certaine terme of time. llEnry by the grace of God, king of England & France, and lord of Ireland, to the noble and mighty personage of sacred religion, Frater Conradus de Jungingen Master generall of the Order of the Dutch knights of S. Marie &c. our most deare and welbeloved friend, greeting, and continuall increase of our auncient and sincere amity. By the grievous complaynts of our liege subjects concerning traffique, as it were circularwise too & fro both our dominions, we have often bene advertised that in regard of divers injuries and damages, which as well our as your marchants (who by their dealings in marchandise were woont peaceably to use mutual conversation together, whereupon very many commodities are knowen to have proceeded) have, by occasion of pirates, roving up and downe the sea, sometimes heretofore sustayned: both the sayd marchants of our & of your dominions do abstaine themselves from their wonted mutual conversation & traffique, as they have likewise carefully abstained at sometimes heretofore, and especially from instant request of your messengers, being of late before our presence, the free accesse of our marchants unto your territories and dominions, & of your marchants unto therefore our realmes hath bene forbidden. that time, wherein at the Sithens 