The letters of Conradus de Jungingen, Master generall of Prussia, written unto Richard the second, king of England, in the yeere 1398, for the renouncing of a league and composition concluded betweene England and Prussia, in regard of manifold injuries offered unto the Prussians. OUr humble commendations, with our earnest prayers unto God for your Majestie, premised. Most renowmed prince and mighty lord, it is not (we hope) out of your Majesties remembrance, how our famous predecessour going immediately before us sent certaine letters of his unto your highnesse, effectually contayning sundry complaints of grievances, injuries and losses, wherewith the marchants of his lande and Order being woont in times past to visite your kingdome with their goods and marchandises, have bene contrary to their liberties and priviledges annoyed with manifold injuries and wrongs. Especially sithens they have beene molested in your realme, being contrary to the friendly composition made and celebrated by the hono: personages, master Nicholas Stocket, Thomas Graa and Walter Sibil, in the yeare 1388, with the assistance of their coarbiters on our part, and contrary to God and all justice, oppressed with manifold damages, losses, and grievances: as in certaine articles exhibited unto our predecessors aforesayd it doeth more manifestly appeare. In consideration whereof being vehemently moved by the damnified parties, he humbly besought your highnesse by his messengers and letters, for complement and execution of justice. About the which affayres your Majestie returned your letters of answere unto our sayd predecessor, signifying that the sayd businesse of articles concerned al the communalty of your realme, and that your highnesse purposed, after -consultation had in your parliament, to send a more deliberate answere concerning the premisses, unto our predecessour aforesayd. Howbeit he being by death translated out of this present world, and our selves by the providence of God succeeding in his roome, and also long time expecting an effectuall answere from your highnesse, are not yet informed as we looked for: albeit the complaints of injuries and losses offered unto our subjects doe continually increase. But from hencefoorth to provide a remedie and a caveat for the time to come, the sayd complaynt doeth upon great reasons moove and invite me. Sithens therefore in regard of the sayd composition, neither you nor your subjects may be judged in the empire: and sithens plaine reason requireth that the one be not inriched by the others losse: as undoubtedly our subjects should sustaine great damage by the composition aforesayd, by vertue whereof your subjects doe enjoy all commodities in our lande, and contrariwise our subjects in your realme have suffered, & as yet sundrie wayes do suffer manifold discommodities, losses and injuries. Wherefore (most soveraigne prince and mighty lord) being reasonably mooved upon the causes aforesayd, we doe, by the advise of our counsellers, revoke and repeale the sayd composition concluded as is above written, together with the effect thereof, purely and simply renouncing the same by these presents : refusing hereafter to have either our selves or our subjects in any respect to stand bound by the vertue of the sayd composition : but from henceforth, and for the times heretofore also, bee it altogether voide and of none effect. Provided notwithstanding, that from the time of the notice of this denunciation given unto the hono: Maior of your citie of London, for the space of a yeare next ensuing, it shall be lawfull for all marchants of your kingdome whatsoever, with their goods and marchandises to returne home, according to the forme in the foresayd composition expressed: conditionaly that our subjects may even so in all respects be permitted to depart, with the safety of their goods and lives out of your dominions: this present renuntiation, revocation, and retractation of the order and composition aforesayd, notwithstanding. Howbeit in any other affayres whatsoever, devoutly to submit our selves unto your highnesse pleasure and command, both our selves, and our whole order are right willing and [I. 154-] desirous: and also to benefite and promote your subjects we wil indevour to the utmost of our ability. Given in our castle of Marienburg in the yeare of our Lord 1398, and upon the 22. day of February. Frater Conradus de Jungingen, master generall of the Order of the Dutch knights of S. Maries hospital at Jerusalem. A briefe relation of William Esturmy, and John into ambassages Kington concerning Prussia, and the Hans-townes. their INprimis, that in the moneth of July, and in the 1403. into England the ambassadours of yeare of our Lord 1403, and the fift yeare of the reigne of our sovereigne Lord the king that nowe is, there came the mighty lord Fr: Conradus de Jungingen, being then Master general of Prussia, with his letters directed unto our foresayd sovereigne lord the king, requiring amends and recompense for certaine injuries unjustly offered by English men unto the subjects of the sayd Master generall, written in 20. articles, which amounted unto the summe of 19120. nobles and a halfe &c. the reverend father the reigne of our soveraigne lord Item, that the third day of the moneth of October, in the in the yeare of our Lord abovewritten, and the fift yere of in God, Henrie king, between then bishop of Lincolne lord chancelor, and William lord de Roos high treasurer of England, on the one party and the sayd ambassadours on the other party, it was (according to their petition) amongst other things ordayned: namely liege people of our soveraigne lord the king should freely be permitted, untill the feast of Easter then next after ensuing to 27 that 