the first article on the behalfe of England exhibited in the land of Prussia, conteining losses which amounted to the summe of 900. nobles : after many things alleadged on both parts, relation thereof shall be made in the audience of the king and of the Master generall : so that they shall set downe, ordaine, and determine such an ende and conclusion of those matters, as shall seeme most expedient unto them. Now concerning the Livonians who are subject unto the great Master of Prussia. INprimis, that the Master of Prussia demaunded of the sayd English ambassadours, at their being in Prussia, on the behalfe of them of Livonia, who are the sayd Master his liege people, to have restitution of their losses, unjustly (as he sayth) offered unto them by the English, namely, for the robbing and rifling of three ships. The These ships value of which ships and of the goods contained in them, were take? h according to the computation of the Livonian marchants, 2Q J^ ^ e doeth amount unto the summe of 8037. pound, 12. shil- 1404. lings 7. pence. Howbeit afterward the trueth being inquired by the sayd ambassadors of England, the losse of the Livonians exceedeth not the summe of 7498. pound, 13. shillings, 10. pence halfepeny farthing. Item, forasmuch as in the sayd ships, on the behalfe of the sayd Master, and of certaine cities of the Hans, there are alleadged above 250. men very barbarously to be drowned, of whome some were noble, and others honourable personages, and the rest common marchants & mariners, there was demaunded, in the first dyet or convention holden at Dordract, a recompense at the handes of the sayd English ambassadors : albeit this complaint was exhibited in the very latter end of al the negotiations, in forme of a scedule, the tenor whereof is in writing at this present, & beginneth in maner following: Cum vita hominum &c. Howbeit in the last convention holden at Hage, as is aforesaid, it was concluded betweene 33 11 the ambassadours of England, and the messengers and commissioners of the land of Prussia, and of the cities of the Hans; that our sayd soveraigne lord the king, should, of his great pietie, vouchsafe effectually to devise some convenient and wholesome remedie for the soules of such persons as were drowned. Item, that our sayd soveraigne lord the king will signifie in writing his full purpose & intention as touching this matter, unto the aldermen of the Hans marchants residing at Bruges, upon the sixteenth day of March next following. Otherwise, that from hencefoorth all amity and friendship, betweene the realme of England and the land of Prussia shall be dissolved. Neither is it to be doubted, but that a great part of the sayd goods, for the which they of Livonia doe demaund restitution, namely waxe and furres, redounded unto the use and commoditie of our soveraigne lord the king. And also our said soveraigne lord the king gave commandement by his letters, that some of the sayd goods should be delivered unto others. And a great part of them is as yet reserved in the towne of Newcastle. One Benteld also hath the best of the sayd three ships in possession. Also it is reported and thought to be true, that certaine Furriers of London, which will be detected in the end, have had a great part of the sayd goods, namely of the Furres. Now as concerning the cities of the Hans. Hamburg. T Nprimis the Hamburgers exhibited nine articles, wherein A they demaunded restitution for certaine damages offered, as they sayd, by the English men, the value of which losses amounted unto the summe of 9117. nobles, 20. pence. For the which, after due examination, there was promised restitution to the summe of 416. nobles, [I. 157.] 5. shillings. Besides the two articles propounded against them of Scardeburg, the summe wherof was 231. pounds, 15.S. 8.d. concerning the which there was sentence given in England by the commissioners of our lord the king, the