TheVitaliam. the Vitalians perceived, (who, whilest their king was Concerning this surprise Albertus Krantzius in the sixt book of his history of Norway, and the 8. Chapter writeth in maner following. "N the meane while Norway enjoyed peace under the . government of a woman: until Albertus king of Suecia, who had now seven yeeres continued in captivity under Queen Margaret, was to be set at liberty. Which, when the common souldiers of Rostok & Wismer, called r therfore, seeing an end of holden captive, in the right of the forenamed cities, for the behalfe of their lord the king being prince of Mekleburg by birth, undertooke and waged warre al the time of his captivitie) banding their forces together, they resolved, at their own costs & charges, but in the right of the said cities, to saile into the 3. kingdoms, and to take such spoiles as they could lay hold on. These their common souldiers tyrannical and violent dealing to approch, sailed into Norway, unto the towne of Norbern, being a mart town for al the marchants of Germanie: who transporting fishes from thence, doe bring thither marchandises of all kinds, especially corne, unto the scarcitie wherof, unlesse it be brought out of other countreys, that kingdome (as we have said) is very much subject. Departing out of their ships and going on shore, they set upon the towne, and by fire and sword they easily compelled the inhabitants dwelling in weake wodden houses, to give place. Thus these Vitalians entring and surprising the towne conveyed such spoiles unto their ships as them pleased, and having laden their ships with those booties, they returned home frolike unto the ports of their own cities. Without all respect, they robbed and rifled the goods, aswel of the Germanes, as of the Noruagians: and like lewde companions, wasting and making havock of all things, prooved themselves never the wealthier. For it is not the guise of such good fellowes to store up or to preserve 68 ought. The citizens, at the first, seemed to be inriched: (no man misdoubting any such howbeit afterward, calamitie) goods ill gotten were worse spent. Thus farre Krantzius. Item, pitifully complaining, the foresaide marchants Lenne. avouch, verifie, and affirme, that upon the 14. day after the feast of S. George, in the yeere of our Lord next above written, as 4. ships of Lenne, laden with cloth, wine, and other marchandises, were sailing upon the maine sea, with all the goods and wares conteined in them, for Prussia, sundry malefactors of Wismer and Rostok, with others of the Hans, being in divers ships, came upon them, and by force of armes and strong hand tooke the said ships-, with the goods and marchandises contained in them: and some of the people which were in the saide foure ships, they slew, some they spoyled, and others they put unto extreame ransomes. And carying away with them those foure ships with the commodities and marchandise therin, they parted stakes therwith, as them listed, to the great impoverishment & losse of the said marchants of Lenne, namely in cloth of William Silesden, Tho. Waterden, Joh. Brandon, Joh. Wesenham, & other marchants of Lenne, to the value of 3623.H. 5.S. n . d. Item, pitifully complaining the foresaid marchants doe Lenne. affirme, that one Henry Lambolt and other his adherents, in the yeere of our Lord 1396. tooke upon the maine sea betweene Norway and Scaw, one crayer laden with osmunds, and with divers other marchandises, perteining unto John Brandon of Lenne, to the summe and value of they tooke from John 443.li. 4.S. 2.d. Moreover, Lakingay 4. lasts and an halfe of osmunds, to the value of 22o.lib. io.s. Item, the foresaid marchants complaine, that certain Lenne. malefactors of Wismer, with other their complices of the Hans, in the yeere of our Lord 1396. tooke from Thomas Ploket of Lenne, out of a certaine ship sailing upon the maine sea towards Sconeland (whereof James Snycop was master) cloth and other marchandise, to the summe and value of 13.11b. 13.S. 4.A. Lenne. Item, the above-named marchants complaine saying, that certaine malefactors of Wismer, with others of the Hans society, in the yere of our Lord 1397. wickedly and unjustly took out of a certaine ship of Dantzik (whereof Laurence van Russe was master) from Ralph Bedingam of Lenne, one fardel of cloth worth 52.K. 7.S. 6.d. Also, for the ransome of his servant, 8.11. 6.s. 8.d. Item, they tooke from Thomas Earle divers goods, to the value of 24. pounds. Lenne. Item, the foresaid marchants complaine, that certaine malefactors of Wismer & Rostok, with others of the Hans, in the yeere of our Lord 1399. wickedly & unjustly tooke one crayer pertayning unto John Laking- lich of Lenne, laden with divers goods and marchandise pertaining unto sundry marchants of Lenne, namely from the forenamed John one fardel of cloth, and one chest full of harneis, and other things, to the value of 9O.lib. Item, they took out of the foresaid ship from Roger Hood, one fardel of cloth, and one chest with divers goods, to the value of 58.lib. Item, from John Pikeron, one fardell of cloth, and one chest with divers goods, to the value of 44O.lib. Item, from Andrew Purser one fardell of cloth, and one chest with divers commodities therein, to the value of ten pounds. Lenne. Item, the above-named marchants complaine saying, that certaine malefactors of Wismer & Rostok, and others of the Hans, namely, Godekin Mighel, Henrie van Hall de Stertebeker, with other of their confederates, in the yeere of our Lord 1399. wickedly and unjustly took from John Priour of Lenne, out of the ship of Michael van Burgh, namely 160. nests of masers, worth ioo.lib. 13.S. 4.d. Item, 30. furres rigges of Kaleber woorth 13.S. 4.d. a piece, the summe totall amounting to 20.K. Item, 20. furres wombys of Kalebre worth &c. Item, one girdle of silver, and one dagger adorned with silver Item, two coates, and one long jacket, and worth 30.S. other goods, to the value of 30.S. his ransome 4.1ib. 13.S. 4.d. Item, he paide for Unto all and singular the articles above-written, the ambassadors of England aforesaid do further adde, that the doers and authors of the damages, injuries, and robberies set down in the articles above written, (of Note the se~ cr^re^ms whom some are named of the Hans. 1 r in particular, and others in 1 11 i\ 1 1 • general) performed and committed all those outrages, being hired thereunto at the expenses and charges of the common societies of the cities aforesaid. And that the inhabitants of every houshold in the foresaide cities (ech man according to his ability) wittingly & purposely set foorth one, two, or more men, for the very same expedition, wherein all and singular the foresaid trespasses were committed. The foresaid English ambassadors doe exhibite the articles above-written unto the procurators of the cities of Wismer and Rostok aforesaid: leave and libertie being alwayes reserved unto the said ambassadors, to enlarge, or to diminish, or to expound all, or every, or any of the said Articles whatsoever, so often as it shall seeme expedient unto them. 71