inviolable, we have also be kept thought good once again to send one of our foresaid ambassadors, namely William Esturmy knight to Dordract, giving him charge thither to make haste, and there to stay, till some of your messengers, at your commandement doe in time that place, there (by Gods convenient repayre unto assistance) to bring the matter unto an happy conclusion. May it please you therefore of your unfayned friendship, without all inconvenience of delay, to returne, not unto us, but unto our forenamed knight an answere in writing, what your will and determination is. Neither let it seeme strange unto you, that we have not at this present sent our forenamed John Kington clerke together with the sayd William: for the cause of his abode with us is, that he may in the meane season employ his care and diligence about those matters which must be preparatives for the finall conclusion of the foresayd busines. Honorable sir, and most deare friend, we doe most heartily wish increase of prosperity and joy unto your person. Given in our palace of Westminster the 14. day of Feb. in the yeare of our Lord 1407. To t he r i g ht noble and valiant k n i g ht Sir William Sturmy sent at this present by the most sovereigne King of England &c. as his ambassadour unto Dordract, his most sincere friend. HOnorable sir, our most entier friend, wee received the royall letters of the most mighty prince and lord, our lord the king of England and France and lord of Ireland, sent unto us under the date of the 14. day of February (which we received at our castle of Marienburgh the 11. of April) containing, amongst other matters, that his Majesties purpose was once againe to sende one of his ambassadors, namely your selfe our very sincere friend unto Dordract, giving you in charge that you would make haste thither & there stay, untill 85 1407. some of our subjects might at our commandement, in convenient time repaire unto the same place, there (by Gods assistance) to bring our matters unto a happy conclusion. And then he requested that wee should without delay write our determination unto you, as the conclusion of the said letter importeth. Howbeit (our most deare friend) the treaties & conferences about the redresse or reformation of unjust attempts committed by the subjects of our sayd lord the king & our subjects, one against another, are both on our behalfe, and on the behalfe of the common societie of the Hans marchants, hitherto had, made, and continued common. And so our commissioners upon our full and absolute commandement, shal, for the managing of these and of other affaires of the foresaid societie, many waies urgent and difficult, upon the feast of our Lords Ascension next to come, meet with the said societie at Lubec, there to give notice what they have determined to conclude in this present busines & in others for their owne behalfe. For we wil give our ambassadours which are there to appeare, streightly in charge that according to the kings request aforesayde they doe without delay procure an answere to be written unto your honour concerning the determination of the foresayd societie. Given at the place and upon the day above named, in the yeare of our Lord 1407. Fr. Wernherus de Tettingen, commander in Elbing, general vice-master and lieutenant in the roome of the Master generall of the Dutch knights of the Order of S. Marie &c. of late deceased. The letters of Henry the 4. king of England &c. unto Ulricus de Jungingen Master generall of Prussia, 1408. wherein he doth ratifie and accept the last agreement made at Hage in Holland. HEnry &c. unto the honourable and religious personage Fr. Ulricus de Jungingen Master generall of the Dutch knights of S. Marie &c. our most deare friend, greeting and dayly increase of our accustomed amity and friendship. We doe by these presents give your honour to understand, that our faithfull & welbeloved William Esturmy knight, and Master John Kington clerke, our ambassadors and messengers sent of late on our behalfe, unto the presence of your predecessour for the redressing of certaine grievances and damages being contrary to justice offered against us and our liege subjects by the people & subjects of your predecessors, & against them also by our subjects as it is aforesayd, in friendly maner to be procured, of late returning out of the parts of Alemain made relation unto us and to our counsell, that having conferred with your forenamed predecessour about the foresayd affayres, the particulars following were at length concluded : namely first of all, that at a certaine day and place they should meete in Holland with his ambassadors and messengers, to hold a friendly conference between them about the redressing and reformation of the grievances and damages aforesayd: and that they should by the equall waight of diligent examination ponder, & in the balance of justice discusse & define al & singular the foresaid grievances & damages inflicted on both parts. Howbeit at length after sundry prorogations then made & continued on this behalfe, our ambassadors & messengers aforesaid upon the 28. of August last past, assembling themselves for our part at the towne of Hage in Holland, the hon. & discreete personages Arnold Heket burgomaster of the 1407. ^f^ 0/ju^ st T HE ENGLISH VOYAGES towne of Dantzik, & John Crolowe, for the behalf of your subjects of Prussia, and Tidman de Meule, & John Epenscheid for the behalfe of Livonia, being assembled as messengers and commissioners about the redresse and reformation aforesayd, did then and there demaund in certaine articles, of our ambassadours and messengers abovenamed 25034. nobles & half a noble, for the grievances & damages offered (as it was then said) to your subjects of Prussia, and 24082. nobles, 12.S. 8d. in recompense of the damages offered unto those your subjects of Livonia. And when the substance of those articles about the grievances & losses aforesayd was by the sayd ambassadours and messengers throughly examined and discussed, by their generall consent it was finally agreed, that your subjects, in consideration of all and singular the foresayd grievances and damages offered unto them by our people, should within three yeares after the feast of Easter next ensuing, at three equall payments receive from us, namely they of Prussia, 8957. nobles, and they of Livonia 22496. nobles, sixe pence, halfe peny, farthing, and no more, so that we our selves thought good to condescend thereunto. Howbeit, forasmuch as certaine other articles of your subjects of Prussia, and also certaine articles in the behalfe of our subjects containing grievous complaints in them, being propounded before the ambassadors & messengers aforesaid, for the attaining of reformation in regard of the damages & grievances offered on both parts, could not as then, for the great obscurity of divers of the sayd articles, and also for want of sufficient proofe at the last meeting appointed and held by the foresayd ambassadors at the towne of Hage in Holland, sufficiently to be examined, discussed, and defined, it was agreed upon by the ambassadors and messengers of both partes, that from the 15. day of October then last expired unto the feast of Easter now next ensuing, and from thenceforth within one whole yere immediatly following, the plaintifes of both parts should throughly declare before our chancelour of England for the time being, the foresayd obscurities concerning the substance of their articles, and that they should, for the obtaining of execution, and complement of justice at our sayd chancelours hands, peremptorily minister necessary probations, under paine of perpetuall exclusion from the petition of those things which are contayned in the articles above mentioned. Provided alwayes, that if at the last it shall be by lawfull proofes made manifest concerning the summes above written or any part or parcell thereof, that due satisfaction hath beene made to him or them unto whom it was due, or that those goods of and for the which complaint hath bene made on the behalfe of your subjects have pertained or doe appertaine unto others, or any other just, true, and reasonable cause may lawfully bee alleaged, why the payment of all the foresayd summes or any of them ought not to be performed : that then so much only is to be cut off or deducted from the sayd summes as shall be found to be already payd or to pertaine unto others, or else upon some true, just, and reasonable cause (as is aforesayd) not to be due. We therefore considering that the sayd friendly conference, and the finall agreement ensuing thereupon are agreeable unto reason and equitie, doe, for our part ratifie and willingly accept the very same conference and agreement. And forasmuch as it hath bene alwayes our desire, and is as yet our intention, that the league of amity and the integritie of love, which hath of olde time bene observed betweene our and your subjects, may in times to come perpetually remaine inviolable, and that your and our people may hereafter, not onely for the good of our common weale but also for the commodity and peace of both parts, according to their woonted maner, assemble themselves and enjoy the faithfull and mutuall conversation one of another : we will cause in our citie of London, with the summe of 8957. nobles satisfaction to bee made unto the Prussians, and with the summe of 22496. nobles, sixe pence, halfe peny, farthing, recompense to be performed unto the Livonians, in regard of the damages and injuries (which in very deede proceeded not of our consent) by our subjects offered unto them, as it is afore sayd, and within three yeares after the feast of Easter next ensuing the sayd summes of money to three payments, and by three equall bee payed at portions. Conditionally that unto our subjects which be endamaged correspondent satisfaction be likewise on your part within the terme of the foresayd three yeeres performed, with paying the summes of 766. nobles and of 4535. nobles, demaunded on our behalfe, and also with the payment of such summes as within one yeere immediately ensuing the feast of Easter aforesayd, shalbe found by sufficient declarations and proofes to be made on the behalfe of our subjects (as is aforesayd) to be due. Even as we in like maner will make satisfaction unto your subjects within our citie aforesayd. Now as touching the request of your ambassadors and of the Livonians, whereby we were required to procure some holesome remedy for the soules of certaine drowned persons, as conscience and religion seemeth to chalenge (in regard of whom we are moved with compassion, and do for their sakes heartily condole their mishaps) you are (our entier friend) of a certaintie to understand, that after we shall be by your letters advertized of the number, state, and condition of the sayd parties drowned, we will cause suffrages of prayers and divers other holesome remedies profitable for the soules of the deceased and acceptable to God and men, religiously to be ordained and provided : upon condition, that for the soules of our drowned countrey men there be the like remedie provided by you. The almighty grant unto your selfe and unto your whole Order, that you may prosperously triumph over the enemies of Christ his crosse. Given under our privie seale at our palace of Westminster the 26. of March, in the yere of our Lord 1408. and in the ninth yere of our reigne.