diction of ye same his Uncle above remembred, & in contempt of the same, upon paine of forfeiture of all their moveable goods & imprisonment of their persons at the kings will. Another branch of a statute made in the tenth the reigne of Henry the sixt conthe English Marchants yeere of cerning the state of in the dominions of the king of Denmarke. ITern because that our soveraigne Lord the king at the grievous complaint to him made in this Parliament by the commons of his realme of England being in this Parliament is informed, that many of his faithfull liege people be greatly impoverished, undone, & in point to be destroyed by the king of Denmarke & his lieges, which be of the amitie of the king our soveraigne Lord, because that they do daily take of his said faithful subjects their goods, so that they have taken of marchants of York and Kingston upon Hul goods & marchandises to the valour of v.M.li. within a yeere, and of other lieges & marchants of ye Realme of England goods & cattals to the valour of xx.M.li. wherof the said king of Denmarke, nor of none other, forasmuch as none of the Realme of England, nor them commeth within nothing have in the same Realme of England, & that ye goods be taken out of the same Realme: The king willing to provide remedy for his said liege people, hath ordeined & established, that if ye goods of any of ye said his lieges be or shalbe taken by the said king of Denmarke or any of his said lieges, the keeper of the privie seale for ye time being, shall have power to make to ye partie grieved letters of request under the privie seale, w'out any other pursuite to be made to any for restitution to be had of ye goods so taken & to be taken. And if restitution be not made by [I. 187.] they have no remedie of 11 113 of his counsel shal provide to the partie grieved his covenable remedy, according as ye case requireth. H e re b e g i n n e th t he P r o l o g ue of t he processe of t he Libel of English policie, e x h o r t i ng all E n g l a nd t he sea, and namely the narrowe s e a: s h e w i ng w h at profite c o m m e th thereof, and also w h at w o r s h ip and salvation to E n g l a n d, and to all E n g l i s h - m e n. to keepe Incipitliberde ' T H He true processe of English policie custodiaMaris X Of utterward to keepe this regne in PamiZur Doveram fcf Ner say of sooth but it is one of the best, Ga/isiam. England, that no man may deny, Of o ur Is this, that who seeth South, North, East and West, Cherish Marchandise, keepe the admiraltie; That we bee Masters of the narrowe see. Wich yet reigneth, when he was in this land fiftj p r i n ce o f honour, Sigismonddied For Sigismond the great Emperour, 1438. He was here W kh k i ng H e n ry Videmimper- Here much glory, as him thought, he found, ator Sigismun- A mightie land which had take in hand dm duas villas To werre in France3 and make mortalitie, And ever wdl k e p t r o u nd about the see%£SL Calisiam & And to the king thus hee sayd: My brother, t he r To werre outwards and your regne to recover: (When hee perceived two Townes Caleis and Dover) / )_ r overeanty ponens suos duos digitos Of all your Townes to chuse of one and other, super duos suos To keepe the sea and soone to come over oculosy ait Imtodite^tslal Keepe these two Townes sure, and your Majestee duas villas As your tweyne tync: so keepe the narrowe see. stcut duos vestros oculos. TTT1 p or ^ ^{s r . , ., Who can heere passe without danger and woe? wa^ coined by Who may escape, who may mischiefe differre? Edward the What Marchandie may forby bee agoe? third Anno For needs hem must take trewes every foe: s ea bee kept in time of werre, ' . 