of his counsel shal provide to the partie grieved his covenable remedy, according as ye case requireth. H e re b e g i n n e th t he P r o l o g ue of t he processe of t he Libel of English policie, e x h o r t i ng all E n g l a nd t he sea, and namely the narrowe s e a: s h e w i ng w h at profite c o m m e th thereof, and also w h at w o r s h ip and salvation to E n g l a n d, and to all E n g l i s h - m e n. to keepe Incipitliberde ' T H He true processe of English policie custodiaMaris X Of utterward to keepe this regne in PamiZur Doveram fcf Ner say of sooth but it is one of the best, Ga/isiam. England, that no man may deny, Of o ur Is this, that who seeth South, North, East and West, Cherish Marchandise, keepe the admiraltie; That we bee Masters of the narrowe see. Wich yet reigneth, when he was in this land fiftj p r i n ce o f honour, Sigismonddied For Sigismond the great Emperour, 1438. He was here W kh k i ng H e n ry Videmimper- Here much glory, as him thought, he found, ator Sigismun- A mightie land which had take in hand dm duas villas To werre in France3 and make mortalitie, And ever wdl k e p t r o u nd about the see%£SL Calisiam & And to the king thus hee sayd: My brother, t he r To werre outwards and your regne to recover: (When hee perceived two Townes Caleis and Dover) / )_ r overeanty ponens suos duos digitos Of all your Townes to chuse of one and other, super duos suos To keepe the sea and soone to come over oculosy ait Imtodite^tslal Keepe these two Townes sure, and your Majestee duas villas As your tweyne tync: so keepe the narrowe see. stcut duos vestros oculos. TTT1 p or ^ ^{s r . , ., Who can heere passe without danger and woe? wa^ coined by Who may escape, who may mischiefe differre? Edward the What Marchandie may forby bee agoe? third Anno For needs hem must take trewes every foe: s ea bee kept in time of werre, ' . Therefore I cast mee by a little writing To shewe at eye this conclusion, For conscience and for mine acquiring Against God and ageyne abusion, And cowardise, and to our enemies confusion. For foure things our Noble sheweth to me, King, Ship, and Swerd, and power of the see. Where ben our ships, where ben our swerds become ? Our enemies bed for the ship set a sheepe. Alas our rule halteth, it is benome. Who dare well say that lordship should take keepe? I will assay, though mine heart ginne to weepe, To doe this werke, if wee will ever thee, For very shame to keepe about the see. Shall any Prince, what so be his name, Which hath Nobles moch leche ours, Bee Lord of see: and Flemings to our blame, Stop us, take us, and so make fade the flowers Of English state, and disteyne our honours ? For cowardise alas it should so bee. Therefore I ginne to write nowe of the see. Of the commodities of Spaine and of Flanders. T he first Chapter. KNowe well all men that profits in certaine Commodities called comming out of Spaine And Marchandie, who so will weete what it is, Bene Figs, Raisins, wine Bastard, and Datis, And Licoris, Sivill oyle, and graine, White Pastill Sope, and Waxe is not vayne. Yron, Wooll, Wadmolle, Gotefell, Kidfell also: For Poynt-makers full needefull bene they tweyn: Saffron, Quickesilver, which owne Spaine Marchandy, Is into Flanders shipped full craftily, Unto Bruges as to her staple fayre: "5 A.D. c H37In regni 18. Quatuor considerantur in moneta aurea Jng/ica, qua dicitur Nobile : scilicet Rex, Navis, gladius, 13 Mare: Qua designant potestatem An- glicorum super Mare. quorum opprobrium his diebus Britones minores \3Flandrenses 13 alii dtcunt Anglicis: Tollite de vestro Nobile navem 13 imponite ovem. dentesy quod shut quondam a tempore Edwardi tertii Anglici erant domini Marisy modo his diebus sunt vecordesy victi, 13 ad bellandum 13 Mare observandum velut oves, [I. 188.] Figgesy Raisinsy Wine Bastardy Dates, LycoraSy Civil Oyle, Graynes, So/>e, Waxe, Wadmolle, Gotefell, Kidfell, Saffron, Quickesilver. Flemish cloth made of English Wooll. The necessarie conjunction of Spaine and Fla?iders. T HE ENGLISH VOYAGES The Haven of Scluse hir Haven for her repayre Which is cleped Swyn tho shippes giding: Where many vessels and fayre are abiding. But these Marchandes with their shippes great, And such chaffare as they bye and get By the weyes must nede take on hand By the coasts to passe of our England, Betwixt Dover and Caleis, this is no doubt. Who can well els such matter bring about? And when these sayd Marchants discharged bee Of Marchandie in Flanders nere the see, Then they bee charged againe with Marchandy, That to Flanders bougeth full richly. Fine cloth of Ypre that named is better than ours. Cloth of Curtrike, fine cloth of all colours, Much Fustian, and also Linen cloth. But Flemings, if yee bee not wroth, The great substance of your cloth at the full Yee wot ye make it of our English woll. Then may it not sinke in mannis brayne, But that it must this Marchandy of Spaine Both out and in by our costes passe: Hee that sayd nay in witte was like an asse. Wee should have peace with the grounds tweyne Thus if this see were kept, I dare well sayne. For Spaine and Flanders is as eche other brother. And nether may well live without other: They may not liven to maintaine their degrees, Without our English commodities: Wolle and Tynne: for the woolle of England Susteineth the Commons Flemings I understand. Then if England would her wolle restraine From Flanders, this followeth in certaine, Flanders of nede must with us have peace, Or els shee is destroyed without lees. Also if Flanders thus destroyed bee: Some Marchandy of Spaine will never ythee: THE ENGLISH POLICY For destroyed it is, and as in cheeffe The wolle of Spaine it commeth not to preefFe, But if it be costed and menged well Amongst the English wolle the greter delle. For Spanish wooll in Flaunders draped is, And ever hath bee, that men have minde of this: And yet Wooll is one of the chiefe Marchandy That longeth to Spaine: who so will espie, It is of little value, trust unto mee, With English wooll but if it menged bee. Thus if the sea be kept, than herken hether, If these two lands comen not together: So that the Fleete of Flanders passe nought That in the narrowe see it be not brought Into the Rochelle to fetch the fumose wine, Ner into Bytonuse Bay for salt so fine, What is then Spaine ? What is Flanders also ? As who sayd, nought, the thrift is agoe. For the little land of Flanders is But a staple to other lands ywis: And all that groweth in Flanders graine and seede May not a Moneth finde hem meate and brede. What hath then Flanders, bee Flemings liefFe or loth, But a little Mader and Flemish Cloth: By Drapering of our wooll in substance Liven her commons, this is her governance, Without wich they may not live at ease. Thus must hem sterve, or with us must have peace. Of the commodities of Portugal. T he second Chapter. THe Marchandy also of Portugal By divers lands turne into sale. Portugalers with us have trouth in hand: Whose Marchandy commeth much into England. They ben our friends, with their commodities, And wee English passen into their countrees. Waxe, Graine, Figs, Reisens,Hony, Cordeweyne, Dates, Salt, Hides. Note well. [I. 190.] The Britons great Rovers and Theeves. THE ENGLISH VOYAGES Her land hath wine, Osey, Waxe, and Graine, Figges, Reysins, Hony and Cordoweyne: Dates, and Salt, Hides, and such Marchandy: And if they would to Flanders passe for by, They should not bee suffred ones ner twyes, For supporting of our cruell enemies, That is to say Flemings with her gyle: For changeable they are in little while. Then I conclude by reasons many moe, If we suffred neither friend nor foe, What so enemies, and so supporting Passe for by us in time of werring, Seth our friends will not ben in cause Of our hindring, if reson lede this clause: Then nede from Flanders peace bee to us sought, And other lands should seeke peace, dout nought: For Flanders is Staple, as men tell mee, To all nations of Christianitie. The commodities of pety Britaine, with her Rovers on the sea. The third Chapter. Furthermore to write I am faine Somewhat speaking of the little Britayne. Commoditie thereof there, is and was, Salt, and wine, crest cloth and canvas. And the land of Flaunders sickerly Is the staple of their Marchandy. Wich Marchandie may not passe away But by the coast of England, this is no nay. And of this Britaine, who so trueth lovis, Are the greatest rovers and the greatest theevis, That have bene in the sea many one yeere: That our Marchants have bought full dere. For they have tooke notable goods of ours, On this side see, these false pelours Called of Saincte Malo, and ellis where: Wich to their Duke none obeysance will bere: And fayned peace is called no werre herefore. Thus they have bene in divers coasts many Of our England, more then rehearse can I: In Norfolke coastes, and other places about, And robbed and brent and slaine by many a rowte: And they have also ransomed Towne by Towne: That into the regnes of bost have run her sowne: Wich hath bin ruth unto this Realme and shame: They that the sea should keepe are much to blame. For Britayne is of easie reputation; And Saincte Malo turneth hem to reprobation. A storie of Edward the third his ordinance for Britayne. HEre bring I in a storie to mee lent, That a good Squire in time of Parliament Tooke unto mee well written in a scrowe: That I have commond both with high and lowe, Of which all men accorden into one, That it was done not many yeeres agone. But when noble King Edward the thrid Reigned in grace, right thus it betyd. For hee had a maner gelosie To his Marchants and loved them hartily. He feld the weyes to rule well the see, Whereby Marchants might have prosperitee. That for Harflew Houndflew did he maken; And great werre that time were undertaken, betwixt the King and the Duke of Britayne: At last to fall to peace both were they fayne: Upon the wich made with convencion Our Marchants made hem readie bowne Toward Britayne to loade their Marchandie, Wening hem friends they went foorth boldly: But soone anon our Marchants were ytake, And wee spedde never the better for truce sake. 119 Historiaostendens quam ordinationem Rex Edwardus tertius fecit contra depradatores marinos Britannia min- oris, ad debellandum eos & subjugandum Britannos They lost her good, her navy and spending: But their complaint came unto the king. Then wext he wroth, and to the Duke he sent, And complained that such harme was hent; By convention and peace made so refused: Wich Duke sent againe, and him excused, Rehearsing that the mount of Saincte Michael, [I. 191.] And Sainct Malo would never a dell Be subject unto his governance, Nor be under his obeysance: And so they did withouten him that deede. But when the king anon had taken heede: Hee in his herte set a judgement, Without calling of any Parliament, Or greate tarry to take long advise To fortifie anon he did devise Of English Townes three, that is to say, Dertmouth, Plymouth, the third it is Fowey: And gave hem helpe and notable puisance With insistence set them in governance Upon pety Bretayne for to werre. Those good sea men would no more differre, But bete hem home and made they might not rowte, Tooke prisoners, and made them for to lowte. And efte the Duke, an ensample wise, Wrote to the king as he first did devise, Him excusing: But our men wood With great power passed over the floode And werred foorth into the Dukes londe, And had ny destroyed free and bond. But than the .Duke knewe that the townes three Should have lost all his native Countrie, He undertooke by suretie true not false, For mount Michael and Saincte Malo als, And other parties of the litle Brytaine, Which to obey, as sayd was, were not fayne. The Duke hymselfe for all did undertake: With all his herte a full peace did hee make: Marchants had peace withouten werring: He made a statute for Lombards in this land, That they should in noe wise take on hande Here to inhabite, here to chardge and dischardge But fortie dayes, no more time had they large. This good king by witte of such appreifFe Kept his Marchants and the sea from mischiefe. Of the commodities of Scotland and draping of her wolles in Flanders. The fourth Chapiter. StatutumRegis Edwarditertii proLombardis. fire. MOreover of Scotland the commodities Are Felles, Hides, and of Wooll the Fleese. And all these must passe by us away Into Flanders by England, sooth to say. And all her woolle was draped for to sell In the Townes of Poperinge and of Bell; Which my Lord of Glocester with ire For her falshed set upon a And yet they of Bell and Poperinge Could never drape her wooll for any thing, But if they had English woU withall. Our goodly wooll which is so generall Needefull to them in Spaine and Scotland als, And other costes, this sentence is not false: Yee worthy Marchants I doe it upon you, I have this learned ye wot well where and howe: Ye wotte the Staple of that Marchandie, Of this Scotland is Flaunders sekerly. And the Scots bene charged knowen at the eye, Out of Flanders with little Mercerie, And great plentie of Haberdashers Ware, And halfe her shippes with cart wheeles bare, And with Barrowes are laden as in substance: Thus most rude ware are in her chevesance. So they may not forbeare this Flemish land. Therefore if wee would manly take in hand, 121 Anno Domini 1436.Hen.6. l4t' To keepe this Sea from Flanders and from Spaine, And from Scotland, like as from pety Britaine, Wee should right soone have peace for all her bosts, For they must needes passe by our English costs. Of the commodities of Pruce, and H i gh Dutch men, and Easterlings. T he fifth Chapitle. NOwe goe foorth to the commodities, That commeth from Pruce in two maner degrees. For two maner people have such use, That is to say, High Duch men of Pruse, And Esterlings, which might not be forborne, Out of Flanders, but it were verely lorne. For they bring in the substance of the Beere, That they drinken feele too good chepe, not dere. Yee have heard that two Flemings togider Will undertake or they goe any whither, Or they rise once to drinke a Ferkin full, Of good Beerekin : so sore they hall and pull. Under the board they pissen as they sit : This commeth of covenant of a worthie wit. Without Caleis in their Butter they cakked When they fled home, and when they leysure lacked To holde their siege, they went like as a Doe : Well was that Fleming that might trusse, and goe. For feare they turned backe and hyed fast, My Lord of Glocester made hem so agast With his comming, and sought hem in her land, And brent and slowe as he had take on hand : So that our enemies durst not bide, nor stere, They fled to mewe, they durst no more appeare, Rebuked sore for ever so shamefully, Unto her utter everlasting villanie. Nowe Beere and Bakon bene fro Pruse ybrought Into Flanders, as loved and farre ysought ; Osmond, Copper, Bow-staves, Steele, and Wexe, Peltreware and grey Pitch, Terre, Board, and flexe : Board, Flexe, Collein threedy Fustian, Canvas, Gardes, Bokeram, Silver-plate, Wedges of Silver and Mettall || Or, Woad. THE ENGLISH POLICY And Colleyne threed, Fustian and Canvas, Card, Bukeram : of olde time thus it was. But the Flemings among these things dere, In common loven best Bakon and Beere. Also Pruse men maken her adventure Of Plate of silver of wedges good and sure In great plentie which they bring and bye, Out of the lands of Beame and Hungarie : Which is increase full great unto their land, And they bene laden, I understand, With wollen cloth all maner of colours By dyers crafted full divers, that ben ours. And they adventure full greatly unto the Bay, for salt that is needefull withouten nay. Thus if they would not our friends bee, We might lightly stoppe hem in the see : They should not passe our streemes withouten leve, It would not be, but if we should hem greve. Of the commodities of the Genuoys and her great Caracks. Chap. 6. THe Genuois comen in sundry wises Into this land with divers marchandises In great Caracks, arrayed withouten lacke With cloth of gold, silke, and pepper blacke They bring with them, and of II crood great plentee, Woll Oyle, Woad ashen, by vessel in the see, Cotton, Rochalum, and good gold of Genne. And then be charged with wolle againe I wenne, And wollen cloth of ours of colours all. And they adventure, as ofte it doth befall, Into Flanders with such things as they bye3 That is their chefe staple sekerly : And if they would be our full enemies, They should not passe our stremes with marchandise. 1 23 The comodities and nicetees of the Venetians and Florentines, with their Gallees. Chap. 7. THe great Galees of Venice and Florence Be well laden with things of complacence, All spicery and of grossers ware : With sweete wines all maner of chaffare, Apes, and Japes, and marmusets tayled, Nifles and trifles that little have avayled : And things with which they fetely blere our eye : With things not induring that we bye. For much of this chafFare that is wastable Might be forborne for dere and deceivable. And that I wene as for infirmities In our England are such commodities Withouten helpe of any other lond Which by witte and practise both yfound : That all humors might be voyded sure, Which that we gleder with our English cure : That we should have no neede of Scamonie, Turbit, enforbe, correct Diagredie, Rubarbe, Sene, and yet they ben to needefull, But I know things al so speedefull, That growen here, as those things sayd. Let of this matter no man be dismayde ; But that a man may voyde infirmitie Without degrees fet fro beyond the sea. And yef they should except be any thing It were but sugre, trust to my saying : He that trusteth not to my saying and sentence, Let him better search experience. In this matter I will not ferther prease, Who so not beleeveth, let him leave and cease. [I. 194.] Thus these galeys for this licking ware, And eating ware, bare hence our best chafFare : Cloth, woll, and tinne, which as I sayd before, Out of this lond worst might be forbore, For ech other land of necessitie Have great neede to buy some of them three : And we receive of hem into this coste Ware and chaffare that lightly wilbe loste. And would Jesus, that our Lordis wold Consider this well both yong and old : Namely old that have experience, That might the yonge exhort to prudence ; What harme, what hurt, and what hinderance Is done to us, unto our great grievance, Of such lands, and of such nations: As experte men know by probations, By writings as discovered our counsailes, And false colour alwaies the countertailes Of our enimies; that doth us hindering Unto our goods, our Relme, and to the king: As wise men have shewed well at eye; And all this is couloured by marchandye. An example of deceite. ALso they bere the gold out of this land, And sucke the thrift away out of our hand: As the Waspe souketh honie fro the bee, So minisheth our commoditee. Now wol ye here how they in Cotteswold Were wont to borrow or they shold be sold Her woll good as for yere and yere. Of cloth and tinne they did in like manere: And in her galies ship this marchandie: Then soone at Venice of them men woll it bye. Then utterne there the chaffare by the peise, And lightly als there they make her reise. And when the goods beene at Venice sold, Then to carie her change they this money have, They will it profer, their subtiltie to save, To English marchants to yeve it out by eschange To be payed againe they make not strange, At the receiving and sight of a letter, Here in England, seeming for the better, by foure pence lesse in the noble round : That is twelve pence in the golden pound. And if wee wol have of payment A full moneth, than must him needes assent To eight pence losse, that is shillings twaine In the English pound; as eft soone againe, For two moneths twelve pence must he pay. In the English pound what is that to say, But shillings three? So that in pound fell For hurt and harme hard is with hem to dwell. And when English marchants have content This eschange in England of assent, That these sayd Venecians have in woone And Florentines to bere her gold soone Over the see into Flanders againe: And thus they live in Flanders, sooth to saine, And in London with such chevisance, That men call usury, to our losse and hinderance. [I. 195-] Another example of deceite. N' rOw lesten well how they made us a valeys When they borrowed at the town of Caleis As they were wont, their woll that was hem lent, For yere and yere they should make payment. And sometime als two yere and two yeare. || Or, lone. This was fayre II love: but yet will ye heare, How they to Bruges would her woll carie, And for hem take payment withouten tarie, And sell it fast for ready money in hand. For fifty pounds of money of losse they wold not wond In a thousand pound, and live thereby Till the day of payment easily, Come againe in exchange: making Full like usury, as men make undertaking. Than whan this payment of a thousand pound Was well content, they should have chaffare sound In Cotteswold also they ride about, And all England, and buy withouten doubte What them list with freedome and franchise, More then we English may gitten many wise. But would God that without lenger delayes These galees were unfraught in fortie dayes, And in fortie dayes charged againe, And that they might be put to certaine To goe to oste, as we there with hem doe. It were expedient that they did right soe, As we doe there. If the king would it: Ah what worship wold fall to English wit? What profite also to our marchandie Which wold of nede be cherished hertilie ? For I would witte, why now our navie fayleth, When manie a foe us at our doore assayleth. Now in these dayes, that if there come a nede, What navie should we have it is to drede. In Denmarke were full noble conquerours In time past, full worthy warriours: Which when they had their marchants destroyed, To poverty they fell, thus were they noyed: And so they stand at mischiefe at this day. This learned I late well writon, this no nay. Therefore beware, I can no better will, If grace it woll, of other mennis perill. For if marchants were cherished to her speede, We were not likely to fayle in any neede. If they be rich, then in prosperitee Shalbe our londe, lords, and commontee, And in worship. Now thinke I on the sonne Of marchandy Richard of Whitingdon; That load sterre, and chiefe chosen floure: What hath by him our England of honour, And what profite hath bin of his riches, And yet lasteth dayly in worthines? 127 A.D. 1437Note dili- gently. A woful complaint oflacke of navie if need come. A storie ofdestruction of Denmarke for destruction of their marchants. The prayse of Richard of WhitUngdon That pen and paper may not me suffice Him to describe: so high he was of price [I. 196.] Above marchants, that set him one of the best : I can no more, but God have him in rest. Now the principal matter. T i r H at reason is it that we should goe to oste VV In their countries, & in this English coste They should not so ? but have more liberty Then we our selves now also motte I thee. I would to gifts men should take no heede That letteth our thing publicke for to speede. For this we see well every day at eye, Gifts and fests stopen our policie. Now see that fooles ben either they or wee : But ever we have the worse in this countree. Therefore let hem unto oste go here, Or be we free with hem in like manere In their countrees : and if it will not bee, Compell them unto oste, and yee shall see Moch avantage, and moch profite arise, Moch more then I can write in any wise. Of our charge and discharge at her marts. COnceive wel here, that Englishmen at martes Be discharged, for all her craftes and artes, In Brabant of her marchandy In fourteene dayes, and ageine hastily In the same dayes fourteene acharged eft. And if they bide lenger all is bereft, Anon they should forfeit her goods all, Or marchandy : it should no better fall. And we to martis in Brabant charged beene With English cloth full good and fayre to seene : We ben againe charged with mercerie, Haburdasher ware, and with grosserie : To which marts, that English men call fayres, Ech nation oft maketh her repayres : English, and French, Lombards, Jennoyes, Catalones, thedre they take her wayes : Scots, Spaniards, Irishmen there abides, With great plenty bringing of sale hides. And I here say that we in Brabant bye, Flanders and Zeland more of marchandy In common use then done all other nations : This have I heard of marchants relations : And if the English ben not in the marts They ben feeble, and as nought bene her parts. For they byemore, and fro purse put out More marchandie then all the other rowte. Kept then the see, shippes should not bring ne fetch, And then the carreys wold not thidre stretch : And so those marts wold full evill thee, If we manly kept about the see. Of the commodities of Brabant and Zeland and Henauld and marchandy carried by land to the martes. Cap. 8. YEt marchandy of Brabant and Zeland The Madre and Woad, that dyers take on hand i 1 1 11 11 v 1 To dyen with, Garlike and Onions, And saltfishe als for husband and commons. But they of Holland at Caleis byen our felles, A i-* And wolles our, that Englishmen hem selles. And the chaiFare that Englishmen doe byen In the marts, that noe man may denien, Is not made in Brabant that cuntree : It commeth from out of Henauld, not by see, But al by land, by carts, and from France, Bourgoyne, Colein, Cameret in substance, Therefore at marts if there be a restraint, Men seyne plainely that list no fables paynt, If Englishmen be withdrawen away, Is great rebuke and losse to her affray: As though we sent into the land of France Ten thousand people, men of good puissance, Mader, Woad[L *97«] Garlkke, Onions, salt^ 11 129 To werre unto her hindring multifarie, So ben our English marchants necessarie. If it be thus assay, and we shall witten Of men experte, by whom I have this written. For sayd is that this carted marchandy Draweth in value as much verily, As all the goods that come in shippes thider, What our manhunts bye W h i ch Englishmen bye most and bring it hither. in that coste more then all other. For her marts ben rebel, shame to say, But Englishmen thider dresse her way. r i & ^ i i i , ^ A conclusion of this depending of keeping of the sea. THan I conclude, if never so much by land Were by carres brought unto their hand, If well the sea were kept in governance They should by sea have no deliverance. Wee should hem stop, and we should hem destroy, As prisoners we should hem bring to annoy. And so we should of our cruell enimies Make our friends for feare of marchandies, If they were not suffered for to passe Into Flanders. But we be frayle as glasse And also brittle, not thought never abiding; But when grace shineth soone are we sliding ; We will it not receive in any wise: That maken lust, envie, and covetise : Expone me this ; and yee shall sooth it find, Bere it away, and keepe it in your mind. Then shuld worship unto our Noble bee In feate and forme to lord and Majestie : Liche as the seale the greatest of this land On the one side hath, as I understand, A prince riding with his swerd ydraw, In the other side sitting, soth it is in saw, Betokening good rule and punishing In very deede of England by the king. By the Noble, that swerde should have power, And the ships on the sea about us here. What needeth a garland which is made of Ivie Shewe a taverne winelesse, also thrive I ? If men were wise, the Frenchmen and Fleming Shuld bere no state in sea by werring. Then Hankin lyons shuld not be so bold To stoppe wine, and shippes for to hold Unto our shame. He had be beten thence. Alas, alas, why did we this offence, Fully to shend the old English fames ; And the profits of England, and their names : Why is this power called of covetise ; With false colours cast beforn our eyes ? That if good men called werriours Would take in hand for the commons succours, To purge the sea unto our great avayle, And winne hem goods, and have up the sayle, And on our enimies their lives to impart, So that they might their prises well departe, As reson wold, justice and equitie ; To make this land have lordship of the sea. Then shall Lombards and other fained friends Make their chalenges by colour false offends, And say their chaffare in the shippes is, And chalenge al. Looke if this be amisse. For thus may al that men have bought to sore, Ben soone excused, and saved by false colour. Beware yee men that bere the great in hand That they destroy the policie of this land, By gifte and good, and the fine golden clothis, And silke, and other : say yee not this soth is ? But if we had very experience That they take meede with privie violence, Carpets, and things of price and pleasance, Whereby stopped should be good governance : A.D. c 1437[I. 198.J OfHaukin lions. Lombards are cause enough to hurt this land, although there were none other cause. False colouring of goods by Lombards. Jlas for bribes & gift of good, feasts W other means, that stoppen our policie. This is the very state of And if it were as yee say to mee, Than wold I say, alas cupiditie, That they that have her lives put in drede, Shalbe soone out of winning, all for meed, And lose her costes, and brought to poverty, That they shall never have lust to goe to sea. veilous thing that so great a sicknes and hurt of ye land may have no remedie of so many as take themselves wise men of governance. An exhortation to make an ordinance against colour of maintainers and excusers of folkes goods. FOr this colour that must be sayd alofte And be declared of the great full ofte, That our seamen wol by many wise Spoile our friends in steede of our enimies : For which colour and Lombards maintenance, The king it needes to make an ordinance With his Counsayle that may not fayle, I trowe, That friends should from enimies be knowe, Our enimies taken and our friends spared: The remedy of hem must be declared. Thus may the sea be kept in no sell, For if ought be spoken, wot yee well, We have the strokes, and enemies have the winning: But mayntainers are parteners of the finning. We live in lust and bide in covetise: This is our rule to maintaine marchandise, And policie that wee have on the sea. And, but God helpe, it will no other bee. [I. I99-] Of the commodities of Ireland, and policie and keeping thereof, and conquering of wild Irish: with an incident of Wales. Chap. 9. I Cast to speake of Ireland but a litle: Commodities of it I will entitle, Hides, and fish, Salmon, Hake, Herringe, Irish wooll, and linen cloth, faldinge, Mynes of tt THE ENGLISH POLICY And marterns goode ben her marchandie, Hertes Hides, and other of *Venerie. Skinnes of Otter, Squirell and Irish hare, Of sheepe, lambe, and Foxe, is her chaffare, Felles of Kiddes, and Conies great plentie. So that if Ireland helpe us to keepe the sea, Because the King cleped is Rex Angliae, And is Dominus also Hyberniae, Old possessed by Progenitours : The Irish men have cause like to ours Our land and hers together to defend, That no enemie should hurt ne offend, Ireland ne us : but as one commontie Should helpe well to keepe about the sea : For they have havens great, and goodly bayes, Sure, wyde and deepe, of good assayes, At Waterford, and costes many one. And as men sayne in England be there none Better havens, ships in to ride, No more sure for enemies to abide. Why speake I thus so much of Ireland ? For all so much as I can understand, It is fertile for things that there doe growe And multiplien, loke who lust to knowe, So large, so good, and so commodious, That to declare is strange and marvailous. For of silver and golde there is the oore, Among the wilde Irish though they be poore. For they are rude and can thereon no skill: So that if we had their peace and good will To myne and fine, and metal for to pure, In wilde Irish might we finde the cure, As in London saith a Juellere, Which brought from thence golde oore to us here, Whereof was fyned mettal goode and clene, As they touch, no better could be scene. Nowe here beware and heartily take intent, T HE ENGLISH VOYAGES That for slought and for racheshede Yee remember with all your might to hede To keepe Ireland that it be not lost. For it is a boterasse and a post, Under England, and Wales another: God forbid, but ech were others brother, Of one ligeance due unto the king. But I have pittie in good faith of this thing That I shall say with avisement: I am aferde that Ireland will be shent: It must awey, it wol bee lost from us, But if thou helpe, thou Jesu gracious, And give us grace al slought to leve beside. For much thing in my herte is hide, Which in another treatise I caste to write Made al onely for that soile and site, Of fertile Ireland, wich might not be forborne, But if England were nigh as goode as gone. God forbid that a wild Irish wirlinge Should be chosen for to bee their kinge, After her conqueste for our last puissance, And hinder us by other lands alliance. Wise men seyn, wich felin not, ne douten, That wild Irish so much of ground have gotten There upon us, as likenesse may be Like as England to sheeris two or three Of this our land is made comparable: So wild Irish have wonne on us unable Yet to defend, and of none power, That our ground is there a litle corner, To all Ireland in true comparison. It needeth no more this matter to expon. Which if it bee lost, as Christ Jesu forbed, Farewel Wales, then England commeth to dred, This is now to For aliance of Scotland and of Spaine, be greatly jeare . And other moe, as the pety Bretaine, And so have enemies environ round about. But all onely for perill that I see Thus imminent, it's likely for to bee. And well I wotte, that from hence to Rome, And, as men say, in all Christendome, Is no ground ne land to Ireland liche, So large, so good, so plenteous, so riche, That to this worde Dominus doe long. Then mee semeth that right were and no wrong, To get the lande: and it were piteous To us to lese this high name Dominus. And all this word Dominus of name Shuld have the ground obeysant wilde and tame. That name and people togidre might accord Al the ground subject to the Lord. And that it is possible to bee subject, Unto the king wel shal it bee detect, In the litle booke that I of spake. I trowe reson al this wol undertake. And I knowe wel howe it stante, Alas fortune beginneth so to scant, Or ellis grace, that deade is governance. For so minisheth parties of our puissance, In that land that wee lese every yere, More ground and more, as well as yee may here. I herd a man speake to mee full late. Which was a lord of full great estate; Than expense of one yere done in France Werred on men well willed of puissance This said ground of Ireland to conquere. And yet because England might not forbere These said expenses gadred in one yeere, But in three yeeres or foure gadred up here, Might winne Ireland to a finall conqueste, In one sole yeere to set us all at reste. And how soone wolde this be paied ageyne: Which were it worth yerely, if wee not feyne: A.D. c. 1437. This Lorde was the Earle ofOrmond that told to me this matter, that he would undertake it, in pain oflosse ofal his livelihood. But this proffer could not be admitted. Ergo mate. I wol declare, who so luste to looke, I trowe full plainely in my litle booke. But covetise, and singularitie Of owne profite, envie, crueltie, Hath doon us harme, and doe us every day, And musters made that shame is to say: Our money spent al to litle availe, And our enimies so greatly doone prevaile, That what harme may fall and overthwerte I may unneth write more for sore of herte. An exhortation to the keeping of Wales. BEware of Wales, Christ Jesu mutt us keepe, That it make not our childers childe to weepe, Ne us also, so if it goe his way, By unwarenes: seth that many a day Men have bee ferde of her rebellion, By great tokens and ostentation: Seche the meanes with a discrete avise, And helpe that they rudely not arise For to rebell, that Christ it forbede. Looke wel aboute, for God wote yee have neede, Unfainingly, unfeyning and unfeynt, That conscience for slought you not atteynt: Kepe well that grounde, for harme that may ben used, Or afore God mutte yee ben accused. Of the commodious Stockfish of Island, and keeping of the Sea, namely the Narrow sea, with an incident of the keeping of Caleis. Chap. 10. The trade of f\F Bhknl* Island to write is litle nede, S a ve of S t o c k - f i s h: Y et forsooth in deed ^ Out of Bristowe, and costes many one, Men have practised by nedle and by stone Thider wardes within a litle while, Within twelve yere, and without perill ii J. 11 Gon and come, as men were wont of old Of Scarborough unto the costes cold. And nowe so fele shippes this yeere there ware, r T»I_ 1 hat moch losse for unfreyght they bare : Island might not make hem to bee fraught Unto the Hawys: thus much harme they caught. Then here I ende of the commoditees For which neede is well to kepe the seas: Este and Weste, South and North they bee. And chiefly kepe the sharpe narrow see, Betweene Dover and Caleis: and as thus that foes passe none without good will of us: And they abide our danger in the length, What for our costis and Caleis in our strength. An exhortation for the sure keeping of Caleis. ANd for the love of God, and of his blisse Cherish yee Caleis better then it is. See well thereto, and heare the grete complaint That true men tellen, that woll no lies paint, And as yee know that writing commeth from thence: Doe not to England for slought so great ofFence, But that redressed it bee for any thing: Leste a song of sorrow that wee sing. For litle wenith the foole who so might chese What harme it were good Caleis for to lese: What wo it were for all this English ground. Which wel conceived the Emperour Sigismound, That of all joyes made it one of the moste, That Caleis was subject unto English coste. Him thought it was a jewel most of all, And so the same in Latine did it call. And if yee wol more of Caleis heare and knowe, I cast to write within a litle scrowe, Like as I have done before by and by In other parteis of our policie. Loke how hard it was at the first to get; And by my counsell lightly doe not it let. A.D. c 1437The oU trade of Scarborough to island and t^ North. [I. 202.] The joy of %£££ Caieis was For if wee lese it with shame of face Wilfully, it is for lacke of grace. Howe was Harflew cried upon, and Rone, That they were likely for shought to be gone; Howe was it warned and cried on in England, I make record with this pen in my hand. It was warened plainely in Normandie, And in England, and I thereon did crie. The world was defrauded, it betyde right so. Harflew was Farewell * Harflew: lewdly it was a go. lTintkinthe N ° We WarC Caleis > ly^yHenry My soule discharge I by this present letter. the sixth. l C an Sa ? n ° b e t t C r: After the Chapitles of commodities of divers lands, sheweth the conclusion of keeping of the sea environ, by a storie of King Edgar and two incidents of King Edward the third, and King Henrie the fifth. Chap. 11. rOwe see we well then that this round see To our Noble by pariformitee N< Under the ship shewed there the sayle, And our king with royal apparayle, With swerd drawen bright and extent For to chastise enimies violent; Should be lord of the sea about, To keepe enimies from within and without; To behold through Christianitee Master and lord environ of the see: All living men such a prince to dreed, Of such a regne to bee aferd indeed. Thus prove I well that it was thus of old; *Didt Chro- Which by a * Chronicle anon shalbe told, nka, quod iste Right curious: but I will interprete £ $ £ £T lt into Enslish>as l did '* s e t e: soribus suis Of king Edgar: O most marveilous fatlidor, nulli Prince living, wittie, and chevalerous: sanctitate inferior\ omnibus morum suavitate prastantior fuerit. ipse Anglis non minus memorabilisy quam Cyrus Persis, Carolus Francis Romulus verb Romanis. [I. ao3.] THE ENGLISH POLICY So good that none of his predecessours Was to him liche in prudence and honours. Hee was fortunate and more gracious Then other before, and more glorious: He was beneth no man in holines: Hee passed all in vertuous sweetnes. Of English kings was none so commendable: To English men no lesse memorable, Then Cyrus was to Perse by puissance, And as great Charles was to them of France, And as to the Romanes was great Romulus, So was to England this worthy Edgarus. I may not write more of his worthines For lacke of time, ne of his holines: But to my matter I him exemplifie, Of conditions tweyne and of his policie: Within his land was one, this is no doubt, And another in the see without; That in time of Winter and of werre, When boystrous windes put see men into fere; Within his land about by all provinces Hee passed through, perceiving his princes, Lords, and others of the commontee, Who was oppressour, and who to povertee Was drawen and brought, and who was clene in life, And was by mischiefe and by strife With over leding and extortion: And good and badde of eche condition Hee aspied: and his ministers als, Who did trought, and which of hem was fals: Howe the right and lawes of the land Were execute, and who durst take in hand To disobey his statutes and decrees, If they were well kept in all countrees: Of these he made subtile investigation Of his owne espie, and other mens relation. Among other was his great busines, Dicit Chronica, prtepar- averat naves robustissimas numero tria millta sexcenta : in quibus redeunte astate omneminsulam ad terrorem extraneorum, iff ad suorum excitationem cum maximo apparatu circumnavigare consueverat. [I. 204.] And men of might in citie nor in towne Should to the poore doe non oppression. Thus was hee wont in this Winter tide On such enforchise busily to abide. This was his labour for the publike thing, Thus was hee occupied: a passing holy King. Nowe to purpose, in the Sommer faire Of lusty season, whan clered was the aire, He had redie shippes made before Great and huge, not fewe but many a store: Full three thousand and sixe hundred also Stately inough on our sea to goe. The Chronicles say, these shippes were full boysteous: Such things long to kings victorious. In Sommer tide would hee have in wonne And in custome to be ful redie soone, With multitude of men of good array And instruments of werre of best assay. Who could hem well in any wise descrive ? It were not light for eny man alive. Thus he and his would enter shippes great Habiliments having and the fleete Of See werres, that joy full was to see Such a navie and Lord of Majestee, There present in person hem among To saile and rowe environ all along, So regal liche about the English isle; To all strangers terrours and perile. Whose fame went about in all the world stout, Unto great fere of all that be without, And exercise to Knights and his meynee To him longing of his natall cuntree. For courage of nede must have exercise, Thus occupied for esshewin of vice. This knew the king that policie espied; Winter and Somer he was thus occupied. Thus conclude I by authoritee Of Chronike, that environ the see nica &c. ut non minus quantam ei etiam in hac vita bonorum operum mercedem dona- verit: cum aliquando ad maximam ejus festhitatem, reges, comites, multarumque provinciarum protectores convenissent, 13c. THE ENGLISH POLICY Should bene our subjects unto the King, And hee bee Lord thereof for eny thing: For great worship and for profite also To defend his land fro every foo. That worthy king I leve, Edgar by name, And all the Chronike of his worthy fame: Saffe onely this I may not passe away, A worde of mighty strength till that I say, That graunted him God such worship here, For his merites, hee was without pere, That sometime at his great festivitee Kings, and Erles of many a countree, And princes fele were there present, And many Lords came thider by assent, To his worship: but in a certaine day Hee bad shippes to bee redie of aray: For to visit Saint Johns Church hee list Rowing unto the good holie Baptist, Hee assigned to Erles, Lords, and knights Many ships right goodly to sights: And for himselfe and eight kings moo Subject to him hee made kepe one of thoo, A good shippe, and entrede into it With eight kings, and downe did they sit; And eche of them an ore tooke in hand, At ore hales, as I understand, And he himselfe at the shippe behinde As steris man it became of kinde. Such another rowing I dare well say, Was not seene of Princes many a day. Lo than how hee in waters got the price, In lande, in see, that I may not suffice To tell, O right, O magnanimitee, That king Edgar had upon the see. 1 41 An incident of the Lord of the sea King Edward the third. O] |F king Edward I passe and his prowes On lande, on sea yee knowe his worthines: The siege of Caleis, ye know well all the matter Round about by land, and by the water, XT ~ .. Calets way yeeldedtoye Howe it lasted not yeeres many agoe, English 1347. After the battell of Crecye was ydoe: [I. 205.] , J ' , . J Howe it was closed environ about, Olde men sawe it, which liven, this is no doubt. Old Knights say that the Duke of Burgoyn, Late rebuked for all his golden coyne; Of ship on see made no besieging there, For want of shippes that durst not come for feare. It was nothing besieged by the see: Thus call they it no siege for honestee. Gonnes assailed, but assault was there none, No siege, but fuge: well was he that might be gone: This maner carping have knights ferre in age, Expert through age of this maner language. But king Edward made a siege royall, s ea w as kept, and thereof he was Lord. King Edward And wanne the towne : and in especiall kRdls°h shits ^ e and 14151 Thus made he Nobles coyned of record; English man- In whose time was no navie on the see ners before That might withstand his majestie. Caleis. Battell of Scluse yee may rede every day, e a' e of j j o we [^ w as d o ne J leve and goe my way: Scluse by sea. T . , , J It was so late done that yee it knowe, In comparison within a litle throwe: For which to God give we honour and glorie ; For Lord of see the king was with victorie. . ° ' Another incident of keeping of the see, in the the marveilous werriour and victhe fifth, and time of torious Prince, King Henric of his great shippes. ANd if I should conclude all by the King Henrie the fift, what was his purposing, Whan at Hampton he made the great dromons, Which passed other great ships of all the commons; The Trinitie, the Grace de Dieu, the holy Ghost, And other moe, which as nowe bee lost. What hope ye was the kings great intent Of thoo shippes, and what in minde hee meant ? It was not ellis, but that hee cast to bee Lorde round about environ of the see. And when Harflew had her siege about, There came caracks horrible great and stoute In the narrow see willing to abide, To stoppe us there with multitude of pride. My Lord of Bedford came on and had the cure, Destroyed they were by that discomfiture. This was after the king Harflew had wonne, Whan our enemies to siege had begonne; That all was slaine or take, by true relation, To his worshippe, and of his English nation. There was present the kings chamberlaine At both battailes; which knoweth this in certaine; He can it tell otherwise then I: Aske him, and witte ; I passe foorth hastily. What had this king of his magnificence, Of great courage, of wisedome, and prudence ? Provision, forewitte, audacitee, Of fortitude, justice, and agilitee, Discretion, subtile avisednesse, Attemperance, Noblesse, and worthinesse: Science, prowesse, devotion, equitie, Of most estate, with his magnanimitie 143 The great ships of Henry the fifty made at Hampton, Great caracks of Genua taken by the Duke of Bedford. 1416. The Trench navie thus overthrowen was of five hundred saile. Liche to Edgar, and the saide Edward, As much of both liche hem as in regard. Where was on live a man more victorious, And in so short time prince so marveilous? By land and sea, so well he him acquitte, To speake of him I stony in my witte. Thus here I leave the king with his noblesse, Henry the fift, with whom all my processe Of this true booke of pure policie Of sea keeping, entending victorie I leave endly: for about in the see No Prince was of better strenuitee. And if he had to this time lived here, He had bene Prince named withouten pere: t he e n de t h at he m e nt of in cheefe> The Trinitie, His great ships should have ben put in preefe, tieTthe hoi U n to Ghost. e °y F ° r doubt it not but that he would have bee Lord and master about the round see: And kept it sure to stoppe our enemies hence, And wonne us good, and wisely brought it thence: That no passage should be without danger, And his licence on see to move and sterre. Of unitie, shewing of our keeping of the see : with an endly or finall processe of peace by authoritie. Chap. 12. NOw than for love of Christ, and of his joy, Bring it England out of trouble and noy: Take heart and witte, and set a governance, Set many wits withouten variance, To one accord and unanimitee. Put to good will for to keepe the see, First for worship and profite also, And to rebuke of eche evill willed foe. Thus shall worship and riches to us long. Than to the Noble shall we doe no wrong, To beare that coyne in figure and in deede, To our courage, and to our enemies dreede: 144 Exhortatio generalis in custodiam totius Anglite, per diligentiatn custodite circuitusmaris circa littora ejusdem : qu<z As this processe hath proved by and by All by reason and expert policy; And by stories which proved well this parte: Or ellis I will my life put in jeoparte, But many londs would seche her peace for nede, The see wel kept: it must bee doo for drede. Thus must Flanders for nede have unitee And peace with us : it will non other bee, Within short while : and ambassadours Would bene here soone to treate for their succours. This unitee is to God pleasance : And peace after the werres variance. The ende of battaile is peace sikerly, And power causeth peace finally. Kept than the sea about in speciall, Which of England is the towne wall. As though England were likened to a citie, And the wall environ were the see. Kepe then the sea that is the wall of England : And than is England kept by Goddes hande ; That as for any thing that is without, England were at ease withouten doubt, And thus should every lond one with another Entercommon, as brother with his brother, And live togither werrelesse in unitie, Without rancour in very charitie, In rest and peace, to Christes great pleasance, Without strife, debate and variance. Which peace men should enserche with businesse, And knit it saddely holding in holinesse. The Apostle seith, if ye list to see, Bee yee busie for to keepe unitee Of the spirit in the bond of peace. Which is nedeful to all withouten lese. The Prophet biddeth us peace for to enquire To pursue it, this is holy desire. II 145 K A.D. c 1437unanimitat<z Consiliariorum regis, &• hominum bonte voluntatis. Tres sunt causa prtedict<z custodite : scilicet, honor, commodum regni, W" opprobrium inimicis. [I. 207.] Ephes.\, So/Iiciti sitis ser- vare unitatem spiritus in Our Lord Jesu saith, Blessed motte they bee That maken peace; that is tranquillitee. ld fihi _ b ^ jror peace makers, as Matthew writeth aright, Matth. 5. Beanpadfai, Sh quoniam £)^- mCabun- ^ °d give us grace, the weyes for to keepe Of his precepts, and slugly not to sleepe /«r. In shame of sinne : that our verry foo Might be to us convers, and turned so. f G od r ^ g^ d ^ s o n n es 1 . Cumplacue- For in the Proverbs is a text to this purpose tint Domino pj ai ne i n o u gh without any glose : ° via homints ejus inimicos When mens weyes please unto our .Lord, adpacemcon- It shall convert and bring to accord vertet. T T T1 T , J . Urbs beata Jerusalem, which of peace is the sight, Jerusalem With his brightnes of eternall light, dicta pads Mans enemies unto peace verray, In unitie, to live to Goddis pay, With unitie, peace, rest and charitie. Hee that was here cladde in humanitie, That came from heaven, and styed up with our nature, Or hee ascended, he yave to us cure, And left with us peace, ageyne striffe and debate, Mote give us peace, so well irradicate Here in this world : that after all this feste Wee may have peace in the land of beheste, T h e re giorifieci i n r e st w i th h is tuition. The Deitie to see with full fruition : Hee second person in divinenesse is, Who us assume, and bring us to the blis. Amen. Here endeth the true processe of the Libel of to English policie, exhorting all England keepe the sea environ : shewing what profit and salvation, with worship commeth thereof to the reigne of England. GOe furth Libelle, and meekely shew thy face ; Appearing ever with humble countenance : And pray my Lords to take in grace, Thou hast fro trought by full experience Authors and reasons : if ought faile in substance Remit to hem that yafe thee this science ; That seth it is soth in verray fayth, That the wise Lord Baron of Hungerford Hath thee overseene, and verely he saith That thou art true, and thus hee doeth record, Next the Gospel : God wotte it was his worde, When hee thee redde all over in a night. Goe forth trew booke, and Christ defend thy right. Explicit libellus de Politia conservativa marts. A.D. 1462. [I- 2°8-] ^mn'e!^ fordTmdxement ofthis booke. A large Charter granted by K. Edward the 4 in the second yere of his reigne, to the marchants of England resident especially in the Netherland, for their chusing of a master and governor among themselves, which governement was first appointed unto one William Obray : with expresse mention, what authoritie he should have. Dward by the grace of God king of 1462. France, & of England, & lord of Ireland, to al those which shal see or heare these letters, sendeth greeting, & good wil. Know ye, that whereas we have understood, as well by the report of our loving and faithfull Counsellors, as by the common complaint and report of all men, that many vexations, griefs, debates, discords, annoyes, dissentions, & damages, have heretofore bene done, moved, committed, and happened, and do daily fal out and happen among the common marchants & mariners, our subjects of our realmes of France & England, & our lordships of