unto us, shal thinke good in the meane season to make his abode here in our dominions (as in very deede it is expedient) he may both by serious consideration and deliberate consulting with our comissioners more conveniently and prosperously finde out wayes and meanes, for the more speedy expedition of all the premisses. Fare ye well in Christ. Given under our privie seale at our palace of Westminster, the seventh of March, in the yere of our lord 1408. according to the computation of the Church of England, and in the tenth yere of our reigne. A new concord concluded between king Henry the 4. and Ulricus de Jungingen Master generall of Prussia, in the yeare of our Lord 1409. Y this indenture or letters indented be it evidently knowen (for the perpetual memory of the matter) unto all faithfull Christians, that the noble & honourable personages Richard Merlowe Maior and citizen of London, Master John Kington clerke, and William Askham citizen and Alderman of the same citie, the commissioners of the most soveraigne prince and lord, L. Henrie by the grace of God king of England and France, and lord of Ireland, and Tidericus de Longenthorpe knight, Lefardus de Hereford burgomaster of Elbing, and John Crolowe citizen of the citie of Dantzik, the procurators, commissioners, deputies and messengers of the right noble and religious personage Fr. Ulricus de Jungingen Master general of the order of the Dutch knights of S. Maries hospital of Jerusalem, having in the names of the sayd king and Master by vertue of the power on both parts committed unto them, sufficient authority, have appointed and with one consent agreed upon all and singular the things underwritten. Imprimis for the conservation of mutuall love and 1. wonted amitie, and for the tranquilitie of sweete amiable [I- 181.] peace, it is decreed and ordained, that all and singular the liege people & subjects of the Realme of England and the Marchants of the territories & dominions of the said Realme and all other persons of what state or condition soever, shall and may safely and securely, as well by land as by water enter into the parts of Prussia, and there mutually converse, and freely after the maner of Marchants exercise trafRque aswell with the Prussians as with others, of what nation or qualitie soever, there also make their abode, and thence unto their owne homes and dwelling places returne, and depart unto any place whither and so often as they shall thinke good, as well by land as by water, with their goods, marchandize, and wares whatsoever ; faithfully paying in the meane time all rights & customes due in regard of their said wares and Marchandize. Reserved alwaies unto the said Master and. his successours all right and remedie ordained, granted, and vouchsafed in certaine obligations by our Lord the king, whereof mention shall be made in the articles following. Item it is ordained, that all and singular the subjects 2. of the said Master generall and of his order, of what state and condition soever, shall and may, as well by water as by land enter into the kingdome of England thereof, and and into the territories and dominions there mutually converse, and freely after the maner of Marchants exercise traffique as well with all English people as with others of what nation or qualitie soever, and there also make their abode, and thence returne unto their owne habitations and dwelling places, and to depart whither they will and as oft as they shall thinke good, as well by land as by water, with their goods, truely paying in marchandize and wares whatsoever: the meane time all rights and customes due in regard of their said wares and Marchandize. Reserved alwayes unto the said soveraigne king, his heires and successours, 3. 4. 5. all rights and remedies ordained and graunted unto them in certaine obligations, by the commissioners and procurators of the said Master generall above-named, and in the name of the said Master generall. Item it is with one consent agreed upon, promised, and graunted that for all and singular damages, grievances, and robberies howsoever done and committed before the date of these presents against the foresaid soveraigne Prince and his subjects whatsoever, and all others which at the time of the grievances, damages, and robberies aforesaid, were, or at this present are the said soveraigne king his subjects ; there are due to be payed unto the said king or his successours by the said Master generall or his successours, in full satisfaction and recompence of the damages, grievances, and robberies above-written, certaine summes of English money : even as in the letters obligatorie made by the said Master generall his procurators, and messengers above-named in this behalfe, and sealed with their seales, and delivered unto the forenamed procurators and commissioners of our said Lord the king it is expressed more at large. Item it is covenanted, graunted, and promised, that no subject of the said Master generall or of his successours, by reason or. occasion of the damages, grievances, and robberies aforesaid, shall, by the said soveraigne king or his successours, or by their authoritie or commandement, or by any other person whatsoever who in regard of the foresaid losses, grievances and robberies hath bene molested and damnified, or at the procurement or instant suite of any, be attached, arrested, imprisoned, or detained ; nor that the goods of the said Master generall, or of his successors, or of any of them, shalbe laid hold on, arrested, or detained. Item it is covenanted and ordained, that if any of the liege people and subjects of the sayde Master generall or of his successors shall, contrary to the forme of the concord and graunt next above-written, chance to be molested or endamaged : that then the foresaid soveraigne Lord the King and his successors the kings of England are bound to make full satisfaction for all such losses as the subjects of the said Master generall or of his successours or any of them shall for that cause have unjustly sustained, unto the parties endamaged. Which thing, if the foresaide soveraigne Prince, or his successours in the Realme of England, being conveniently requested by the letters of the said Master generall or of his successours, shall refuse to doe, that then after the terme of sixe moneths immediatly following the said deniall or refusall, it shalbe right lawfull for the Master generall that now is and for any of his successors in time to come (having first made convenient proofe that the foresaid request was by him or them exhibited) to arrest so many goods of the foresaid king his subjects found in the land of Prussia, as may suffice for the reasonable satisfaction and recompense of any person or persons whatsoever unjustly molested in this behalfe; and also to detaine the said goods under arrestes, untill condigne satisfaction and amends be made unto the party or parties molested. Item by the commissioners and procuratours often 6. above-named it is covenanted, promised, and graunted, that for all and singular the damages, molestations, and robberies by the foresayde soveraigne king his liege [I. 182.] people & subjects howsoever before the date of these presents committed and offred against the said Master general or against any of his subjects whether Prussians or Livonians, and against all others who at the time of the damages, grievances & robberies aforesaid were, or at this present are the subjects of the Master generall aforesaid (except notwithstanding certaine damages & grievances hereafter to be mentioned, whereof also some provisoes shalbe had in the articles following, which damages were before ye date of these presents by ye said soveraigne king his liege people and subjects inflicted upon certaine subjects of the foresaid general Master, especially them of Prussia which hereafter shalbe named) 7. 8. there are certaine summes of money due to be payed unto the said Master generall or unto his successors by the said soveraigne Prince or his successours for the full satisfaction of the foresaid damages, molestations and robberies inflicted upon the Prussians and Livonians, and the others above mentioned, even as in the leters obligatorie of the said soveraigne Lord the king made in this behalfe, being given and delivered unto the said Master generall his procuratours and messengers, it is declared more at large. Item, it is covenanted, graunted and promised, that none of the liege people or subjects of the foresaid soveraigne prince or of his heires shall, by reason or occasion of the damages, grievances, and robberies aforesaid, by the sayd Master generall or his successours or by their authoritie and commandement, or by any other who in respect of the said damages, grievances and robberies above mentioned, hath beene molested or damnified, or by any of their procurements or instant suites, shalbe attached, arrested, imprisoned or detained ; nor that any goods of the subjects of the said soveraigne king or his heires or any of them, shall bee attached, arrested, or detained. Reserved alwayes unto the forenamed Master generall and his subjects all right and remedie any way requisite or competent unto them by meanes of the obligations aforesaid. Item it is covenanted and agreed that if any of the liege people or subjects of the sayde soveraigne prince or of his heires and successours shall (contrary to the forme of concord and graunt next above-written) chaunce to bee molested or endamaged ; that then the saide Master generall and his successours, for all losses and hinderances which foresayde soveraigne prince or of his heires or successours, shall by that meanes have unjustly sustained, are bound to make the partie endamaged. Which if the Master generall aforesaid or his successours being conveniently requested by the letters of the sayde 102 liege people and subjects satisfaction unto full the soveraigne prince or of his heires, shall refuse to doe ; that then, after the space of sixe moneths next ensuing the time of the foresayde request, it may bee right lawfull for the forenamed soveraigne prince that nowe is, or that then for that time shall be (convenient proofe being first brought, that the foresayd request had conveniently beene exhibited) to arrest so many goods of the sayde Master generall his subjects founde in the Realme of England, as may suffice for the reasonable satisfaction and amends of any person or persons unjustly molested in this behalfe; and also to detaine the sayde goods under safe custodie, untill condigne satisfaction and amends be made unto the partie or parties aggrieved. Item it is covenanted, that besides the summes due 9. unto the sayde Master generall and his successours in the behalfe of his subjects both of Prussia and of Livonia (whereof mention is made in the former Articles) there are due to bee payed unto the sayde Master generall and his successours, for sundry other damages, grievances, and robberies against himselfe and divers other of his subjects of Prussia, namely Matthewe Ludekensson, Arnold Ashen, Henri Culeman, John Unkeltop, John Halewater, Egghard Scoffe of Dantzik, and Nicolas Wolmerstene of Elbing, done and committed by the sayde soveraigne king his liege people and subjects underwritten, even before the date of these presents, for the full satisfaction of the sayde damages, grievances and robberies, certaine summes of nobles hereafter following. Namely Inprimis by Tutburie, and Terry of Hull, 82. nobles, which are due unto ye foresaid Matthew Ludekinson. Item by Nicholas Scot of Caleis the sonne of Tutbury, and Hilg of Hull, 256. nobles, which are due unto the foresayd Arnold de Aschen. Item by the inhabitants of Scardeburgh, Blakeney, and Crowmer (who had one John Jolly of Blakeney for their captaine) 156. nobles, which are due unto Henrie Culeman aforesayd. Item by the inhabitants of Bayon (Whose Capitaine was one Pideville) 125. nobles which are due unto the said Item by the inhabitants of Plymmouth John Unkeltop. and Dertmouth (whose Captaines were Henry Pay, and William Gadeling) 600. nobles which are due unto the foresayde John Halewater, in respect of his goods by Item 334. nobles to be them violently taken away. payed by the selfe same parties, being due unto the sayde A ship of the John Halewater by reason that they detained his ship burthen of \xom him three moneths and more, which ship was of the 300. onnes. ^mt^n [L 183.] of ^^ hundreth tonnes of wine, and had in it all the foresayde time five and fourtie servants maintained at the expenses of the sayde John Halewater. item that Sir William de Ethingham knight, who was Vice-admirall for the sea, must bee summoned to alleage a reasonable cause (for that the sayd Sir William with his servants expelled the said John Halewater out of his ship for the space of fifteene dayes together, and tooke of the good and victuals of the said John to the summe of 114. nobles) why he ought not to pay the said summe of 114. nobles unto John Halewater aforesaid: which if hee shall not bee willing nor able to alleage before the first of April next ensuing, that then by the kings authoritie hee must be compelled to pay unto the foresaid John the said 114 nobles. Item by the inhabitants of Caleis (whose captaines were Michael Scot, Bishop, and William Horneby) 1900. nobles, which are due unto the foresayde Eggard Scoff, because the saide soveraigne king hath given them in charge by the said Michael Scot and the rest concerning the payment of the summe aforesaid. Item by John Bilis neere unto Crowmer, 68. nobles, which are due unto Nicholas Wolmersten of Elbing. Which summes of nobles must by the kings authoritie bee levied at the hands of his subjects abovementioned, betweene the time that nowe is and the feast of the Purification of the blessed virgine which shall fall in the yeere of our Lord 1411. effectually to bee delivered and payed unto the sayd Master generall or his lawfull procurator, or unto his successours or their lawfull procuratours, at aforesaid. the Citie of London, upon the feast Item it is covenanted that besides the summes specified in the foresayde letters obligatorie made in the behalfe of the said soveraigne prince, there are due to be paied unto one John Marion of Wersingham lately deceased being in his life-time the liege subject of the foresaid soveraigne prince 200. nobles of English money in regard of certaine injuries and robberies done and committed before the date of these presents against the foresayde John, by one Eghard Scoff subject unto the said Master generall, for the full satisfaction of the saide damages and robberies to bee made unto the said deceased John, his Tvife, children, heires or executors by the said Egghard, his heires, or by the administrators of his goods at the time and place above-mentioned. Item it is covenanted, confirmed, and promised, that 10. the date of for all the injuries and robberies done and committed against one John Dordewant of Elbing, being in his life time subject unto the sayd Master generall, by the liege people and subjects of the said soveraigne king the inhabitants of Scardeburgh before these presents ; for the full recompense of all such injuries and robberies, there must bee payed unto one John Gruk of Dantzik eight hundred nobles of English money, upon the feast of Easter next following in the Citie of London by them of Scardeburgh being guiltie and culpable in this behalfe; who are by definitive sentence condemned unto the said John in the summe of 800. nobles by reason of the injuries and robberies aforesaid. Except the lawful expenses in this behalfe layed out: they are also taxed an due time for the issue. And therefore the foresayde condemned parties (whose names are in the sentence against them pronounced in this behalfe, more expresly contained) must in the meane season by the kings authoritie be compelled and constrained really and actually to obey the foresaid sentence, namely by delivering and paying unto John Gruk the summe of 800. nobles at the time and place above mentioned, with reasonable expences, wherein also the said parties stand condemned, their lawfull taxation being reserved. Item it is covenanted and granted, that the heires of Lord Henrie de Percy the yonger after they shall come unto lawfull age, and shall have attained unto the possessions and goods of their inheritance, must be compelled by the kings authoritie (justice going before) to make satisfaction unto the great procurator of Marienburgh with the summe of 838. nobles in lieu of certaine corne and graine which the foresaid Lord Henrie, in the yeere 1403, bought and received of the said great procuratour, for the use of the castle of Zutberwik. In testimonie and confirmation of all the which premisses, the said Tedericus, Lefardus, and John Crolow, of their certaine knowledges have put their seales unto these present letters indented, in the presence of the above-named Richard Merlow, John Kington, and William Askam, commissioners for the behalfe of England. Given at the Citie of London in England the fourth day of Decemberx in the yeere of our Lord 1409. II H°4~ Carta Henrici quarti Anno || quinto regni sui con[I. 184.] H1 cessa mercatoribus Angliae in partibus Prussia^ Daciae, Norwegian, Swethiae, & Germaniae, de gubernatore inter ipsos ibidem constituendo. "Enricus Dei gratia Rex Angliae & Francias & Dominus Hiberniae omnibus, ad quos praesentes. literae pervenerint, salutem. Sciatis quod cum, ut accepimus, ob defectum boni & sani regiminis & gubernationis^ diversa damna, dissensiones, gravamina, & angustiae inter mercatores Regni nostri Angliae in partibus Pruciae, Daciae, Norwegiae, Hansae, & Swethiae commorantes. saepius ante haec tempora mota fuissent & perpetrata, ac majora exinde, quod absit, futuris temporibus verisimiliter evenire formidantur, nisi pro meliori gubernatione inter eosdem mercatores mutu6 habenda manus nostras adjutrices apponamus: Nos damnis & periculis in hac parte 