The names of the twelve Counsellors appointed in this voyage. 1 Q lr Hugh Willoughby Knight, Captaine generall. the Edward 2 O Richard Chancelour Captaine of Bonaventure, and Pilot generall of the fleete. George Burton Cape marchant. Master Richard Stafford Minister. Thomas Langlie Marchant. James Dalabere Gentleman. William Gefferson Master of the Bona Speranza 3 4 5 6 7 Stephen Borrough Master of the Edward BonaAdmirall. venture. 9 io 11 12 Cornelius Durfurth Master of the Confidentia. Roger Wilson. John Buckland. Richard Ingram. V Masters mates. Exemplar Epistolae seu literarum Missivarum, quas illustrissimus Princeps Eduardus ejus nominis Sextus, Angliae, Franciae, & Hiberniae Rex, misit ad Principes Septentrionalem, ac Orientalem mundi plagam inhabitantes juxta mare glaciale, nee non Indiam Orientalem ; Anno s ui anno septimo, & Domini 1553 Regn* ultimo. Duardus sextus, Angliae, Franciae, & Hiberniae Rex, &c. Omnibus Regibus & principibus ac dominis, & cunctis Judicibus terras, & Ducibus ejus, quibus- cunque est excellens aliqua dignitas in ea, cunctis in locis quae sunt sub universo coelo : Pax, tranquillitas, & honor vobis, terris, & regionibus vestris quae imperio vestro subjacent, cuique vestrum quemadmodum convenit ei. Propterea aliis viventibus, cor & desiderium tale, ut appetat quisque cum aliis societatem mire, amare, & vicissim amari, beneficiis afficere, & mutua accipere beneficia studeat, ideo cuique pro facultate sua hoc desiderium in omnibus quidem hominibus beneficiis fovere & conservare convenit, in illis autem maxime, qui hoc desiderio adducti, a remotis etiam regionibus ad eos veniunt. Quo enim longius iter ejus rei gratia ingressi sunt, eo ardentius in eis hoc desiderium fuisse declararunt. Insuper etiam ad hoc, nos patrum majorumque nostrorum exempla invitant, qui semper humanissime susceperunt & benignissime tractaverunt illos, qui turn a locis propinquis, turn a remotis, eos amice adibant, eorum se protectioni commendantes. Quod si omnibus id praestare aequum est, certe mercatoribus imprimis praestari debet, qui per universum orbem discurrunt, mare circumlustrantes & aridam, ut res bonas & utiles, quag Dei beneficio in regione eorum inveniuntur, ad remotissimas regiones & regna adferant, atque inde vicissim referant, quod suae regioni utile ibi repeterint : ut & populi ad quos eunt, non destituantur commodis quae non profert illis terra eorum, & ipsi sint participes rerum quibus illi abundant. Nam Deus coeli & terrae, humano generi maxime consulens, noluit ut omnia in quavis regione invenirentur, quo regio ope alterius regionis indigeret, & gens ab alia gente commodum aliquod expectaret, ac ita stabiliretur amicitia inter omnes, singulique omnibus benefacere quasrerent. Hoc itaque ineundae ac stabiliendae amicitiae desiderio moti viri quidam regni nostri, iter in remotas maritimas regiones instituerunt, ut inter nostros & illos populos, viam mercibus inferendis & efferendis aperirent, nosque rogaverunt ut id illis concederemus. Qui petitioni illorum annuentes, concessimus viro honorabili & forti, Hugoni Wilibeo, & aliis qui cum eo sunt servis nostris fidis & charis, ut pro sua voluntate, in regiones eis prius incognitas eant, quaesituri ea quibus nos caremus, & adducant illis ex nostris terris id quo illi carent. Atque ita illis & nobis commodum inde accedat, illos & nos, dum permittent 1111 nos accipere de rebus, [I. 231.] quibus superabundant in regnis suis, & nos concedemus illis ex regnis nostris res, quibus destituuntur. Rogamus itaque vos Reges & Principes, & omnes quibus aliqua est potestas in terra, ut viris istis nostris, transitum permittatis per regiones vestras. Non enim tangent quicquam ex rebus vestris invitis vobis. Cogitate quod homines & ipsi sunt. Et si qua re carverint, oramus pro vestra beneficentia, earn vos illis tribuatis, accipientes vicissim ab eis quod poterunt rependere vobis. Ita vos gerite erga eos, quemadmodum cuperetis ut nos, & subditi nostri, nos gereremus erga servos vestros, si quando transierint per regiones nostras. Atque promittimus vobis per Deum omnium quae coelo, terra & mari continentur, perque vitam nostram, & tranquillitatem regnorum nos- trorum, nos pari benignitate servos vestros accepturos, si ad regna nostra aliquando venerint. Atque a nobis & subditis nostris, ac si nati fuissent in regnis nostris ita benigne tractabuntur, ut rependamus vobis benignitatem, quam nostris exhibueritis. Postquam vos Reges, Principes, &c. rogavimus, ut humanitate & beneficentia omni prosequamini servos nostros nobis charos, oramus omnipotentem Deum nostrum, ut vobis diuturnam vitam largiatur, & pacem quae nullam habeat finem. Scriptum Londini, quae civitas est primaria regni nostri, Anno 5515. a creato mundo, mense lair, 14. die mensis, anno septimo regni nostri. 2 SIR ROBERT BOWES Master of rhe Rolls 3 E A RL OF P E M B R O KE 4 HANS H O L B E IN The copie of the letters missive, which the right the sixt sent to the noble Prince Edward Kings, Princes, and other Potentates, inhabiting the Northeast partes of the worlde, toward the mighty Empire of Cathay, at such time as Sir Hugh Willoughby knight, and Richard Chancelor, with company, their voyage thither in the yeere attempted of Christ 1553. and last yeere of his raigne. the seventh and their Dward the sixt, by the grace of God, King of England, France, and Ireland, &c. To all Kings, Princes, Rulers, Judges, and Governours of the earth, and all other having any excellent dignitie on the same, in all places under the universall heaven : peace, tranquillitie, and honour be unto you, and your lands and regions, which are under your dominions, and to every of you, as is convenient. Forasmuch as the great and Almightie God hath given unto mankinde, above all other living creatures, such an heart and desire, that every man desireth to joine friendship with other, to love, and be loved, also to give and receive mutuall benefites : it is therefore the duety of all men, according to their power, to maintaine and increase this desire in every man, with well deserving to all men, and especially to shew this good affection to such, as being moved with this desire, come unto them from farre countreis. For how much the longer voyage they have attempted for this intent, so much the more doe they thereby declare that this desire hath bene ardent in them. Furthermore also, the examples of our fathers and predecessors doe invite us hereunto, forasmuch as they have ever gently and lovingly intreated such as of friendly mind came to them, aswell 209 o from Countries neare hand, as farre remote, commending themselves to their protection. And if it be right and equity to shew such humanitie toward all men, doubtlesse the same ought chiefly to be shewed to marchants, who wandering about the world, search both the land and the sea, to carry such good and profitable things, as are found in their Countries, to remote regions and kingdomes, and againe to bring from the same, such things as they find there commodious for their owne Countries : both aswell that the people, to whom they goe, may not be destitute of such commodities as their Countries bring not foorth to them, as that also they may be partakers of such things, whereof they abound. For the God of heaven and earth greatly providing for mankinde, would not that all things should be found in one region, to the ende that one should have neede of another, that by this meanes friendship might be established among all men, and every one seeke to gratifie all. For the establishing and furtherance of which universall amitie, certaine men of our Realme, mooved heereunto by the said desire, have instituted and taken upon them a voyage by sea into farre Countreis, to the intent that betweene our people and them, a way may bee opened to bring in, and cary out marchandises, desiring us to further their enterprise. Who assenting to their petition, have licensed right valiant and worthy Sir Hugh Willoughby, knight, and other our trusty and faithfull servants, which are with him, according to their desire, to goe to countreis to them heeretofore unknowen, aswell to seeke such things as we lacke, as also to cary unto them from our regions, such things as they lacke. So that hereby not onely commoditie may ensue both to them and us, but also an indissoluble and perpetuall league of friendship be established betweene us both, things, such whereof they have abundance in their regions, and we againe grant them such things of ours, whereof they are destitute. We therfore desire you kings & princes, 210 take of their the and al other, to whom there is any power on the earth, to permit unto these our servants free passage by your regions and dominions : for they shall not touch any thing of yours unwilling unto you. Consider you that they also are men. If therefore they shall stand in neede of any thing, we desire you of all humanitie, and for the nobilitie which is in you, to ayde and helpe them with such things as they lacke, receiving againe of them such things as they shall bee able to give you in recompense. Shew your selves so towards them, as you would that we and our subjects should shewe ourselves towards your servants, if at any time they shall passe by our regions. Thus doing, we promise you by the God of all things that are contained in heaven, earth, and the Sea, and by the life and tranquillitie of our kingdomes, that we will with like humanitie accept your servants, if at any time they shall come to our kingdomes, where they shall as friendly and gently bee entertained, as if they were borne in our Dominions, that wee may hereby recompence the favour and benignitie which you have shewed to our men. Thus after we have desired you Kings and princes, &c. with all humanity and favour, to entertaine our welbeloved servants, we will pray our Almighty God, to graunt you long life, and peace, which never shall have ende. Written in London, which is the chiefe Citie of our kingdome, in the yeere from the creation of the world, 5515. in the moneth of liar, liar. 1 would the fourteenth day of the moneth, and seventh yeere of reade MairiSit* Sit « This letter was written also in Greeke, and divers gunge, mixt of other languages. & & Turkish and Jegyptian, Februarie, interpreted by them the moneth to set ships to the