The coines, weights and measures used in Russia, t 1- 256J written by John Hasse, in the yere, 1554. the coines of Orasmuch as it is most necessary for al marchants which seeke to have traffique in any strange regions, first to acquaint those themselves with lands with which they do to traffique, and how they are joyne called from the valuation of the highest piece to the lowest, and in what sort they make their paiments, as also what their common weights and measures be: for these causes I have thought good to write some thing thereof according to mine owne knowledge and experience, to the end that the marchants of that new adventure, may the better understand how the wealth of that new frequented trade will arise. intend in First, it is to be noted that the Emperour of Russia No coines of hath no other coines then silver in all his land, which gold in Russia, goeth for paiment amongst merchants, yet notwithstand- ?£* °f ing there is a coine of copper, which serveth for the reliefe of the poore in Mosco, & no where els, and that is but only for quasse, water and fruit, as nuts, apples, and such other like. The name of which money is called Pole or Poles, of which Poles there goe to the least of the silver coines, 18. But I will not stand upon is no currant money among merchants. this, because it Of silver coines there be three sortes of pieces: the least is a Poledenga, the second a Denga, the third, Nowgrote, which is as much to say in English as halfepenie, penie, and twopence, and for other valued money then this, there is none: there are oftentimes there coines of gold, but they come out of forrein countreys, whereof there is no ordinarie valuation, but they passe according to the agreement of merchants. Their order in summing of money is this: as we say 11 273 they Poledenga, Denga, Altine and Rubble: There goeth two Poledengas to a Denga, six Dengaes to an Altine, and 23 Altines, and two Dengaes to a Rubble. The weights Concerning the weights of Russia they are these: tn Russia. There are two sorts of pounds in use amongst them, the one great, ye other small: the great pound is just two small pounds: they call the great weight by the name of Beasemar, and the smal they call the Skalla weight: with this smal weight they weigh their silver coines, of the which the Emperor hath commanded to put to every small pound three Rubbles of silver, and with the same weight they weigh all Grocerie wares, and almost al other wares which come into the land, except those which they weigh by the Pode, as hops, salt, iron, lead, tinne & batrie with divers others, notwithstanding they use to weigh batrie more often by the small weight then by the great. Whensoever you find the prices of your wares rated by the Pode, consider that to be the great weight, and the pound to be the small. Also they divide the small pound into 48 parts, and they call the eight and fortieth part a Slotnike, by the which Slotnike the retailers sell their wares out of their shops, as Goldsmiths, Grocers, Silkesellers and such other like as we doe use to retaile by the ounce: and as for their great weight which they cal the Beasemar, they sel by pode, or shippond. The pode doth containe of the great weight, 40 pounds, and of the smal 80: there goe 10. podes to a shippond. Yet you must consider that their great weight is not full with ours : for I take not their great pound to be full 13 ounces, but above 12 I thinke it be. But for your just proofe, weigh 6 Rubbles of Russia money with our pound weight, and then shal you see what it lacketh: for 6 Rubbles of Russia is by the Emperors standerd, the great pound: so that I thinke it the next way to know the just waight, as well of the great pound as of the small. There is another weight needfull to be knowen, which The iveight of their drie fish by weight, which weight is the weight of Wardhouse, for so much as they weigh Wardhouse. all the Beasemar, as they of Russia doe use, notwithstanding there is another sorte in it: the names of those weights are these: the marke pound, the great pound, the weie, and the shippond. The marke pound is to be understood as our pound, and is 24 of their marke pound: the weie is 3 great pound, and 8 weie is a shippound. their great pound is Now concerning their measures. As they have two The Russia sortes of weights, so they have also two sortes of mea- m^^sur^ssures: wherewith they measure cloth both linnen and wollen: they cal the one an Areshine, and the other a the Areshine I take to bee as much as the Locut: their Locut halfe an English yard: Flanders ell, and with they may mete all such sorts of clothes as come into the land, and with the Locut all such cloth both linnen and wollen, as they make themselves. And whereas we use to give yard and inch, or yard and handfull, they do give nothing but bare measure. their Areshine They have also a measure wherewith they doe mete [I. 257.] their corne, which they cal a Setforth, and the halfe of that an Osmine: this Setforth I take to bee three bushels of London measure. And as for their drinke measure, they call it a Spanne, which is much like a bucket, and of that I never saw any true rate, but that some was greater then other some. And as for the measures of The measure Wardhouse wherewith they mete their cloth, there is no °fWardho^ m "Oth, IS the -..rr difference between which is halfe an English ell. , r TA the measure or Danske, measure of , -, that and Danske. J , I Concerning the tolles & customs of Russia, it was to me in Moscovia, reported Armenians pay the tenth penie custome of all the wares a¥ Arme~ they bring into the Emperors land, and above that they %^J^ pay for all such goods as they weigh at the Emperours The Emperors beame, two pence of the Rubble, which ye buyer or beam. the Turkes and The Turkes that seller must make report to of the Master of the beame: they also pay a certaine horse toll, which is in divers places of his Realme foure pence of a horse. c e r t aine offences, The Dutch nation are free of this : notwithstanding lost their priviledges they had fQT their The Dutch nation lost *lJjLf™~ which renuedthem great charge. with a great of that countrey, that they paied for it thirtie thousand summe. It was reported this Summer to me by a Justice they have recovered to Rubbles, and also that Rye, Dorpte and Revel have yeelded themselves under the government of the Emperour of Russia: whether this was a bragge of the Russes or not, I know not, but thus he sayd, and in deed whiles we were there, there came a great Amthe assurance of their bassadour out of Liefland, for priviledges. The commodi- To speake somewhat of this ties of Russia. c o u ntr ey) it is to be understood, that there is a certaine the commodities of place foure score miles from the Sea called Colmogro: to which place there resorte all the sortes of Wares that are in the North parts, as Oyles, Salt, Stockfish, their Salt they make of Salmon, Fethers and Furres: saltwater by the sea side: their Oyles they make of Seales, whereof they have great store which is brought out of the Bay where our shippes came in: they make it in the Spring of the yeere, and bring it to Colmogro to sell, and the merchants there carie it to Novogrode, and so sell it to the Dutch nation. Their Stockefish and Salmon commeth from a place called Mallums, not farre from Wardhouse: their Salt they carrie to Mosco, and their drie fish they carrie to Novogrode, and sell it there to the Lieflanders. their Salmon and The Furres and Fethers which come to Colmogro, as Sables, Beavers, Minkes, Armine, Lettis, Graies, Woolverings, and white Foxes, with Deere skinnes, they are brought thither, by the men of Penninge, Lampas, and Powstezer, which fetch them from the Samoedes that are counted savage people: and the merchants that bring these Furres doe use to trucke with the merchants and the merchants of Colmogro carie them to Novogrode, Vologda, or Mosco, & sell them there. The Fethers which come from Penning little esteeme. they doe If our merchants do desire to know the meetest place of Russia for the standing house, in mine opinion I take it to be Vologda, which is a great towne standing in the heart of Russia, with many great and good towns about it. There is great plentie of corne, victuals, and of all such wares as are raised in Rusland, but specially, flaxe, hempe, tallow and bacon : there is also great store of waxe, but it commeth from the Mosko. The towne of Vologda is meetest for our marchants, Vologda and because it lieth amongest all the best towns of Russia, the sta*e and there is no towne in Russia but trades with it: also eie°^' the water is a great commoditie to it. If they plant themselves in Mosco or Novogrode, their charge will be great and wonderfull, but not so in Vologda : for all things will there be had better cheape by the one half. And for their vent, I know no place so meet. It is likely that some will thinke ye Mosko to be the meetest by the reason of the court, but by that reason I take it to be woorse: for the charge there would be so great by cravers and expenses, that the moitie of the profite would bee wholly consumed, which in the other place will bee saved. And yet notwithstanding our marchants may bee there in the Winter to serve the Emperour and his court. The Tte Emperor Emperour is a great marchant himselfe of waxe and °fMoscovieu sables, which with good foresight may bee procured to their hands : as for other commodities there are litle or none in Moscovia, besides those above rehearsed : if there bee other, it is brought thither by the Turkes, who will be daintie to buy our clothes considering the charges of cariage over land. \™*n Our marchants may doe well to provide for the Russes such wares as the Dutch nation doeth serve them of, as Flanders and Holland clothes, which I beleeve, they shal THE ENGLISH VOYAGES serve better and with lesse charge then they of Rye or Dorpt, or Revel : for it is no smal adventure to bring their clothes out of Flanders to either of these places, and their charge not litle to cary them over lande to Novogrode, which is from Rye nine hundred Russian miles. This Novogrode is a place wel furnished with flaxe, Waxe, Hides, tallow and many other things : the best flaxe in Russia is brought thither and there sold by the hundred bundles, which is done also at Vologda, and they that bring the flaxe to Novogrode, dwell as neere Vologda, as Novogrode, and when they heare of the utterance which they may have with our nation, they wil as willingly come to them as goe to other. Two sorts of They have in Russia two sorts of flaxe, the one is flaxe. called great flaxe, and the other small : that which they call great flaxe is better by foure rubbles in 100. bundels then the small : It is much longer then the other, and cleaner without wood : and whereas of the small flaxe there goe 27. or 28 bundles to a shippound, there goeth not of the greater sort above 22. or 24 at the most. There are many other trifles in Russia, as sope, mats, &c. but I thinke there will bee no great account made of them. The letters of king Philip and Queene Marie to the Emperour of Russia Ivan Vasilivich written the first of April 1555 and in the second voyage. Hilip and Marie by the grace of God, King and Queene of England, France, Naples, Jerusalem, and Ireland, defenders of the faith, Princes of Spaine and Sicilie, Archdukes of Austrich, Dukes of Burgundie, Millaine, and Brabant, Counties of Haspurge, Flanders, and Tiroll: To the right High, right Mightie, and right excellent Prince, garnished with all gifts of nature, by Gods grace John Vasilivich