THE ENGLISH VOYAGES serve better and with lesse charge then they of Rye or Dorpt, or Revel : for it is no smal adventure to bring their clothes out of Flanders to either of these places, and their charge not litle to cary them over lande to Novogrode, which is from Rye nine hundred Russian miles. This Novogrode is a place wel furnished with flaxe, Waxe, Hides, tallow and many other things : the best flaxe in Russia is brought thither and there sold by the hundred bundles, which is done also at Vologda, and they that bring the flaxe to Novogrode, dwell as neere Vologda, as Novogrode, and when they heare of the utterance which they may have with our nation, they wil as willingly come to them as goe to other. Two sorts of They have in Russia two sorts of flaxe, the one is flaxe. called great flaxe, and the other small : that which they call great flaxe is better by foure rubbles in 100. bundels then the small : It is much longer then the other, and cleaner without wood : and whereas of the small flaxe there goe 27. or 28 bundles to a shippound, there goeth not of the greater sort above 22. or 24 at the most. There are many other trifles in Russia, as sope, mats, &c. but I thinke there will bee no great account made of them. The letters of king Philip and Queene Marie to the Emperour of Russia Ivan Vasilivich written the first of April 1555 and in the second voyage. Hilip and Marie by the grace of God, King and Queene of England, France, Naples, Jerusalem, and Ireland, defenders of the faith, Princes of Spaine and Sicilie, Archdukes of Austrich, Dukes of Burgundie, Millaine, and Brabant, Counties of Haspurge, Flanders, and Tiroll: To the right High, right Mightie, and right excellent Prince, garnished with all gifts of nature, by Gods grace John Vasilivich territories before Emperour of all Russia, great Duke of Volodemer, Mosco, and Novogrod, King of Cazan, King of Astracan, Lord of Plesco, and great Duke of Smolensko, of Tueria, Joughoria, Permia, Vadska, Bulghoria, and others, Lorde and great Duke of Novogrod of the lowe Countrey, of Chernigo, Rezan, Polotskay, Rostove, Yeraslave, Bealozera, Liefland, Oudoria, Obdoria, and Condensa, Com- mander of all Siberia, and of the North partes, and lord of many other countreys, greeting. Whereas by the consent and licence of our most deare and entirely beloved late brother, King Edward the sixt, whose soule God pardon, sundrie of our subjects marchants of the citie of London within this our realme of England did at three their owne proper costs and adventure furnish shippes to discover, serch, and find lands, Islands, regions, and this adventure not knowen, ne commonly haunted and frequented by seas. The one of the which three shippes, named the Edward Bonaventure, (whereof our right welbeloved Richard Chancelour was then governour and great Captaine) chanced by the grace of God, and the good conduct of the sayd Chancelour to arrive and winter in the North part of your Empire of Russia. Forasmuch as we be credibly informed by the report of our trustie and welbeloved subject, that your Majestie did not onely call him and certaine of his company to your emperiall presence and speech, enterthem with all humanitie and tayned and banqueted gentlenes : but also being thereunto requested partly by the letters of our said brother, & partly by request of the sayd Richard Chancelour, have by your letters patents under your seale among other things granted : That all such marchants as shall come forth of anie of our realms of England or Ireland with al maner of wares, if they wil travel or occupie within your dominions, The same marchants with their marchandises in al your lordship may freely, & at their libertie travaile out and in without hinderance or any maner of losse : And of your farther ample goodnesse have promised that our ambassadours, if wee send any, shall with free good will passe to and from you without any hinderance or losse, with such message as shall come unto you, and to returne the same to our kingdomes well answered, as by the same your letters, written in your lordly Palace and Castle of Mosco in the yeere 7063 the moneth of Februarie more at large appeareth. Like as wee cannot but much commend your princely favour and goodnesse, and in like manner thanke you for the aboundant grace, extended to the sayd Richard Chancelour, and others our subjects marchants: Even so these are to pray and request you to continue the same benevolence toward them, and other our marchants and subjects, which doe or heereafter shall resorte to your countrey : And for the more assurance and incouragement to trade and exercise the feate of marchandise with your subjects and all other marchants within your dominions, that it may please you at this our contemplation to assigne and authorise such Commissaries as you shall thinke meete to trade and conferre with our welbeloved subjects and marchants, the sayd Richard Chancelour, George Killingworth, & Richard Graie, bearers of these our letters : who are by us authorised [I. 259.J for that purpose : and to confirme and graunt such other liberties and priviledges unto the Governour, Consuls, Assistants, and Communaltie of the fellowship of the saide Marchants, as the said bearers in their name propone and require by you to be granted for their safe conduct, good government, and order to bee erected and continued among them in your saide dominions ; And this with such your clemencie and expedition, as wee, upon the next arrivall of the saide Richard Chancelour may bee enformed of your gracious disposition and answere. Which your benevolences so to bee extended, wee bee minded to requite towards any your subjects Marchants, that shal frequent this our realme at your contemplation therefore to be made. Thus right high, right Excellent, and right mightie, Almightie God the Father, the Sonne and the holy Ghost have you in his blessed keeping. Given under our seale at our Palace of Westminster, the first of April, in the yere from the blessed incarnation of our Saviour Jesus Christ, 1555. and in the first and second yeeres of our reignes. Articles conceived and determined for the Commission of the Merchants of this company resiant in Russia, and at the Warhouse, for the second voyage, 1555. the first of May, as followeth. Irst, the Governour, Consuls, Assistants and whole company assembled this day in open court, committeth and authorizeth Richard Gray and George Killingworth, jointly and severally to be Agents, Factors, and Atturneis generall and speciall, for the whole body of this companie, to buy, sel, trucke, change and permute al, and every kind and kindes of wares, marchandizes and goods to the said company appertaining, now laden & shipped in the good ship called the Edward Bonaventure, appointed for Russia, the same to utter and sell to the best commoditie, profit and advantage of the said corporation, be it for ready money, wares & marchandises, or truck, presently, or for time, as occasion & benefit of the company shal require: and all such wares as they or either of them shal buy, trucke, or provide, or cause to be bought for the company to lade them homeward in good order and condition, as by prudent course of marchandises, shall, and ought to appertaine, which article extendeth also to John Brooke for the Wardhouse, as in the 17. and 18. articles of this commission appeareth. 2 Item, it is also committed, as above, to the said Agents, to binde & charge the said company by debt for wares upon credit, as good opportunitie and occasion shal serve, with power to charge and bind the said company, and their successors, for the paiments of such things as