seventh of this present, and intendeth to passe by the Passage to and way of Sweden, by whom I sent a letter to the worshipfull ^M^j%T* Companie, and have written that I intend to come downe unto Colmogro to be readie there at the next shipping to imbarke my selfe for England, declaring that my service shal not be needfull here, for that you are a man able to serve their worships in greater affaires they have heere to doe, so farre as I perceive. As touching the Companies affaires heere, I referre you to Christopher that I am but newly arrived. Hudsons Having here but litle businesse to doe, I send you Richard Johnson to helpe you there in your affaires. Thus giving you most heartie thanks for my wench This was a Aura Soltana, I commend you to the tuition of God, letters, for ymjTZT then , 1 1 1 who send you health with hearts desire. • 1 1 ^ 1 • i wh &rk ° e t0 Queene afterYour assured to command, Anthonie Jenkinson. to you. twelfth day of AFter our heartie commendations A Letter of the Moscovie companie to their Agents in Russia, Master Henrie Lane, Christopher Hudson, and Thomas Glover sent in their seventh voyage to Saint Nicholas with three ships, the Swallowe, the Philip and Marie, and the Jesus the fifth of May, 1560. The the last moneth here arrived in safety, thanks be to God, our two ships, & by them we received your letters & invoices very well perceiving [I. 306.] what you have laden in them. The tallowe came evill Tallowe, conditioned and broken, by reason it came in Corrobias, wee lose and spoyle more then the Caske will cost, and much of this tallowe is verie evill, blacke, soft and putrified. Touching the Waxe, as yet wee knowe not Waxe, howe the weight will rise, by reason that some of it was lost in the barkes. The weight of the last yeeres waxe did not rise so well as the other yeeres before it did. There had neede good heede to bee taken in the 401 2 c weighing. Also much of this Waxe had a great foote and is not so faire waxe as in times past wee have had. You must cause the foote to bee taken off before you doe weigh it, or else you must seeke to have a good allowance Trains oyks. for it. The traine Oyles which you laded this yeere came well conditioned, and the caske was good and of a good sise. But if they were made a little bigger it were the better, for they be not hogsheads. You have written to us to send you caske which is not heere to be had, neither doe wee thinke it so best if it were heere, considering it must goe either shaken and bounde up, or else emptie, which will bee pesterable, and likewise will shrinke and drie, and not be fitte to lade oyles in. Therefore our minde is, you shall cause so much caske to bee made there of the sise of hogsheads as will serve both for your oyles and tallowe, and let them be well trimmed with pitch on the heads and seames, and stand full of water three or foure dayes before you put Oyles in them. Your Cowper may bee overseer to them that make them, that they be well hooped and cleere tymber without knottes, the woorst caske you may put the tallowe in. Hee that seeth the filling of the oyles had neede to looke well to it, for there was much water in this that came nowe. Wee perceive you have bought and have in a readinesse one hundred and fourtie tunnes of oyles, and that if neede be you may have more store. Wherefore we doe minde to send you shipping for three hundred tunnes and upwards, because we would have this next Sommer as great a returne as you can of the commodities of that Countrey, as also such of our wares as you have that are not vendible, or will not be solde or bartered, because we would have a ful knowledge and state of our accounts. The Sables which you sent this yeere be very base, among them all we could not make one principall timber : we have alwayes written unto you to send them that bee good or else none. Sables. Wolverhgs. The Wolverings were Luserns. wolves, the rest verie base, the Lusernes but meane, indifferent, and some of the the the trayne the Lettes not so large skinnes as we have had : the Lettes. best is, they were of a new death. As for the Ermines, Ermines. they cost more there with you, then we can sell them for here. Therefore buy no more of them, nor of Squirels, for wee lost the one halfe in the other. The Squirels. wares that we would have you provide against comming of the shippes are, Waxe, Tallowe, Oyles, Flaxe, Cables and Ropes, and Furres, such as Flaxe. we have written to you for in our last letters by the Cables and shippes : and from hencefoorth not to make any great 10^es' provision of any rich Furres except principall Sables & Lettes : for now there is a Proclamation made that no A proclamafurres shall be worne here, but such as like is ^on against growing here within this our Realme. Also we perceive Jorren uffeSm that there might be a great deale of tallowe more provided in a yeere then you send." Therefore our minde is, you should enlarge somewhat more in the price, and to send us if you can three thousand podes a yeere : for we 3000. podes doe most good you would give them a reasonable price for their wares, ^efe' woulde be the willinger to buy and sell with you, and not to carie so much to Novogrode as they doe, but woulde rather bring it to Vologda to you, both Waxe, Tallowe, Flaxe, Hempe, and all kinde of other wares fitte for our Countrey. Our minde is you should provide for them that be large and faire, and thickest in hand, and htdesto be circumspect in the choosing, that you buy them that bee killed in season and well dryed and whole. If they bee good we may sell them here for sixteene shillings and better the piece, wee would have the whole skinnes, that is, the necke and legges withall, for these that you sent now lacke their neckes and legges. Neverthelesse Note. for this time you must sende them as you may get them: if you coulde finde the meanes that the haire might bee clipped off them, they woulde not take so much roome in the shippes as they doe. We perceive by your letters that the prices of Waxe doe rise there with you, by reason 403 the next ships five hundred Losh hides, of 5°°- Losh likewise the Russes, \f tfTallm a it. And that the Poles and Lifelanders doe trade into Russia by licence : which, if there shoulde bee peace betweene them, woulde bee an occasion that all other commodities in Russia woulde rise to a bigger price, and not bee sufficient to serve them and us too, and likewise woulde bring downe there the prices of our commodities. Therefore we thinke it good you shoulde make a supplication to the Emperour in the name of The Companie to returne the trade from Rye and Revel to us, especially for such wares as wee doe buy : promising that wee will bee bounde to take them at a reasonable price, as wee have bought them in times past : and likewise that wee will bring to them such wares of ours, as are thought fitte for the Countrey, and to sell them at such reasonable prices as wee have done. If this shoulde not come to passe, wee might be out of hope of doing any good by the trade there : but that we have a further hope of ^ at [I. 307.J Hope of trade some good trade to be found out by Master Antonie to be found by Jenkinson : by reason we doe perceive by your-letters, r aw s ^ke *s as plentifull in Persia, as flaxe is in Antonie Jenkinson, Russia : beside other commodities that may come from thence. Wee understand by your letters that you be at a point with the Russe for the Waxe, Tallow, and Traine oyles that he shipped the last yere for 311 robles 20 altines, which is well : although much be not gotten they should not understand our by it, but because Seale skinnes tawed. reckonings We much marvel what you mean to buy Seale skins and tanne them. All that you have sent in times past lie here unsold, and will yeelde no money. If you send 100 of them tawed with the haire on, they In our shippe we will send will bee solde, or else not. you such things as you write to have for the ropers : Small cables and wee would they should make more store of small best vendible. c a b l es a nd r o p e Sj ag c a b l es of ?? ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^^ j For these great cables be not for every man ; and the greatest cables bee not best laded : and likewise small ropes for shroudes, sholes, and other small tackeling: and that you looke better to the spinning of their yarne to send you that it be even and well tarred. The sables that you doe mind to send us let them be principall and fayre, and not past foure or five timbars. For they will not be so commonly worne here as they have bin with noble men: and likewise of Luserns send fewe and principal in our shippes 100 good. We mind tunnes of sake. And because we perceive that balast is hardly to be had at our lading place there with you, we would you should have in a readinesse 100 tunnes of the white stones whereof you sent us home an example two yeres past. And likewise to have in a readinesse Masts of all mastes of all sortes for our shippes: for we know not sorts t0 j* what neede wee shall have of them. The bringer hereof Pre*are ' is Thomas Alcock, he could not be suffered the last yeare to passe through Poland. And as we wrote unto you in our shippes, hee is our servant for yeares: And for that we know him to be honest, true and painefull, our mind is he shalbe placed where he may do best service. He doth know the commodities and discommodities of all kinde of wares which you doe send us. Therefore we would you should credite his sayings both in quantitie of wares and goodnes, as also wherin is most our profit. We see by your letters that your opinion is that the ropemakers should remaine there two yeres more; and that you have provided great • plentie of hempe, which we are content withall. But as yet we have solde none of our cables nor halsers, neither is the proofe of them knowen; because the first you sent us were made of flaxe, which are worth no money: for after they be once wet they will rotte and moulder away like mosse. And those which you sent us now last, by misfortune there with you at the lading were wette and fretted in many places, and have lost their colour : by meanes whereof they be not so vendible as if they had come well conditioned. Of an hard beginning we trust God will send us a good ending. We hope in your next letters to heare good newes of the proceedings of Master Antonie Jenkinson. We Astracan no perceive by his letters that Astracan is not so good a great good jyj a rt t o w ne as t h e fame hath gone of it: and marvell much that round pewter should be so good, and good chepe there, and from whence it should come. And whereas you write that you wil come for England in our next shippes, we would gladly have you to remaine there untill the next yere following, for the better instruction of our servants there; who have not had so long time of continuance for the language, and knowledge of the people, countrey, and wares as you have had- Neverthelesse if you will needs come away, we have no doubt, but that you will leave good order servants Christopher with our there, namely with Christopher Hodson and Hodson and Thomas Glover, whom we appoint to Thomas pointed%ents OI>der bee taken: not doubting but that they will use I56o. in your roome, till further remaine there as Agents themselves so discreetely and wisely in all their doings, as shall be to the worship and benefite of this company. And as we have a good hope in them that they will be carefull, diligent and true in all their doings: so have we no lesse hope in all the rest of our servants there, that they will bee not onely obedient to them (considering what roome they be in) but also will be carefull, paineful, diligent, and true every one in his roome and place for the benefite and profite of the company: That hereafter in the absence of others they may be called and placed in the like roome there or elsewhere. And if you find any to be disobedient and stubborne, and will not be ruled; wee will you shall send him home in our shippes: who shall find such small favour and friendship during the time that he hath to serve, as by his disobedience and evill service hee hath deserved. And whereas Christopher Hodson hath written to come home, as partly he hath good cause, considering the death of his father and mother: yet in regard that Sir George Barne and the Ladie his wife were his special friends in his absence, we doubt not but that he wil remain in the roome, which we have appointed him, if you doe not tarie and remaine there, till farther order be taken: and for his service and paines hee shall be considered, as reason is, as friendly as if his friends were living. Thus we trust you will take such order the one to remaine at the Mosco, and the other at Colmogro, or elsewhere, as most neede is. Thomas Alcocke is desirous to be in the Mosco: neverthelesse you shall find him reasonable to serve where he may doe most good. The 62 robles [I. 308.] which you received of John Boucher we have payed him here, and also the 8 robles, which you received the yere before of Christopher Rose, and the money which you received more of George Burton, for the which we have you our debtors. Thus we rest, referring that which is here omitted to the report of the bringer: and so God have you in his keeping. Also we would that you should send us in our shippes 200 things before written wee horse-clothes more. The would that you should let our servants see and reade, to the intent they may perceive our mindes. Another letter to the foresaid parties. 1560. THis letter before written is the copie of one sent you by Thomas Alcock, trusting that hee was with you long since. The 26 day of the last moneth we received a letter from him, dated in Stockholme in Sweden the Stockholme. 14 day of January, and we perceive by his letter that hee had talked with a Dutch man that came lately from the Mosco, who informed him that our friend Master Antony Jenkinson was returned to the Mosco in September last past, but how farre he had beene, or what he had done, he could not tell. Also he wrote that one John Lucke a Joyner was taken by the Liefelanders, John Luck and put in prison. As yet wee have not heard from t^n prisoner the sayd John Lucke, nor know not whether he be m Lteflandereleased out of prison or not. We suppose that by him you wrote some letter which as yet is not come to our hands: so that we thinke hee is yet in prison, or