THE ENGLISH VOYAGES resident A Letter of Master Anthonie Jenkinson upon his returne from Boghar to the worshipful Master Henrie Lane Agent for the Moscovie companie in the in Vologda, written Mosco the 18. of September, 1559. rOrshipfull Sir, after my heartie commendations premised with most desire to God of your welfare and prosperous successe in all your affaires. It may please you to bee advertised that the fourth of this present I arrived with Richard Johnson and Robert wc Master Jen- Johnson all in health, thankes bee to God. Wee have kensons voyage b e ne as farre as Boghar, and had proceeded farther on intended Cathay. i • i & • i for voyage toward the lande of Cathay, had it not bene i r « n for the uncessant and continuall warres, which are in all these brutall and wilde countreys, that it is at this present impossible to passe, neither went there any Caravan of people from Boghar that way these three yeeres. And although our journey hath bene so miserable, dangerous, and chargeable with losses, charges and expenses, as my penne is not able to expresse the same : yet shall wee bee able to satisfie the woorshipThe discovery full Companies mindes, as touching the discoverie of The of the Caspian Caspian Sea, with the trade of merchandise to bee had in such landes and countreyes as bee thereabout adjacent, and have brought of the wares and commodities of those Countries able to answere the principall with profite : wishing that there were utterance for as great a quantitie of kersies and other wares as there is profite to bee had in the sales of a small quantitie, (all such evill fortunes beeing escaped as to us have chaunced this present voyage,) for then it woulde be a trade woorthie to bee followed. Sir, for that I trust you will be here shortly (which I much desire) I will deferre the discourse with you at large untill your comming, as well touching my travel, as of other things. Sir, John Lucke departed from hence toward England the seventh of this present, and intendeth to passe by the Passage to and way of Sweden, by whom I sent a letter to the worshipfull ^M^j%T* Companie, and have written that I intend to come downe unto Colmogro to be readie there at the next shipping to imbarke my selfe for England, declaring that my service shal not be needfull here, for that you are a man able to serve their worships in greater affaires they have heere to doe, so farre as I perceive. As touching the Companies affaires heere, I referre you to Christopher that I am but newly arrived. Hudsons Having here but litle businesse to doe, I send you Richard Johnson to helpe you there in your affaires. Thus giving you most heartie thanks for my wench This was a Aura Soltana, I commend you to the tuition of God, letters, for ymjTZT then , 1 1 1 who send you health with hearts desire. • 1 1 ^ 1 • i wh &rk ° e t0 Queene afterYour assured to command, Anthonie Jenkinson. to you. twelfth day of AFter our heartie commendations A Letter of the Moscovie companie to their Agents in Russia, Master Henrie Lane, Christopher Hudson, and Thomas Glover sent in their seventh voyage to Saint Nicholas with three ships, the Swallowe, the Philip and Marie, and the Jesus the fifth of May, 1560. The the last moneth here arrived in safety, thanks be to God, our two ships, & by them we received your letters & invoices very well perceiving [I. 306.] what you have laden in them. The tallowe came evill Tallowe, conditioned and broken, by reason it came in Corrobias, wee lose and spoyle more then the Caske will cost, and much of this tallowe is verie evill, blacke, soft and putrified. Touching the Waxe, as yet wee knowe not Waxe, howe the weight will rise, by reason that some of it was lost in the barkes. The weight of the last yeeres waxe did not rise so well as the other yeeres before it did. There had neede good heede to bee taken in the 401 2 c