Vologda. Also if you shall so thinke meet, your waxe and tallowe shall bee laden in two Dosnickes, for they bee meete to goe aboord the shippes: I doe intend to set up an house at Boroseva over against the place whereas the shippes shall ride, your advise therein I expect, it shall not cost above three robles, and yet if we will, there shall be two warme roomes in it. As for other matter at this present I have not to trouble you withall, and if it would please you I would be glad to heare some good newes of Master Jenkinson. Thus Jesus be with you and be his guide. Postscriptum. As for these our Hawkes they bee not white, but white and mayled, but indeede are Jarfawkons. These dayes past our Olen died. So this yeere our Masters of the companie are like to have none, nor any white beares. Neither may any passe out of the realme without a special licence from the Emperour. I intend God willing to goe to Lampas, if I doe I will take foure or five kerseys with me, but as for money there is small store here to carie. Yours, Richard Gray. A letter of Thomas Alcocke to the worshipfull Richard Gray, and Henrie Lane Agents in Moscovia from Tirwill in Polonia, written in Tirwill the 26. of Aprill 1558. mendations &c. MY duety premised unto your worships, with comIt may please you to be adver- tised, yt my last I sent from Smolensco, which I trust you have received wt other letters to divers of our English men, wherein I certified you of my long retayning there, as also of my departure from thence, and howe that I had hired a Totar to bring mee to Danske. We came to a certaine village on Satterday the sixe and twentieth of Februarie, and there remained that night and Sunday to refresh our horses, intending to have gone away on 396 White hawks £ff white be ares prohibited with- out licence. Master Grayes journey toLampas. 1558. Munday earely. But on Saterday at night one of his neighbours departed to Tirwill, and there declared to the Captaine howe that at such a place there was a Dutch man that was come from the Mosco, and woulde ride to Danske, saying, for the one, I cannot tell what he is. The Captaine incontinent ridde to the King to shewe him thereof, so that without any delay there was sent out for mee one of the Gentlemen of the Kings house, and one of the Mesnickes of the Towne with sixe Officers to take mee. They came thither in the night about midnight, and there apprehended mee and tooke all that I had from me: they left mee nothing but my clothes to put on my backe, and so brought mee to Tirwill to the Captaines house, where before I dyned, I had a payre of fetters clapped on my legges, wherewithall I sate untill it was Munday in the Easterweeke. On which day, after long and earnest calling to the Captaine as hee ridde by the windowe, hee commaunded the Marshall that mine yrons shoulde be taken off, but no worde I could heare when I should be delivered out of captivitie till it was Saint George his day: on which day I was had before the Marshall, who declared unto me that the Kings Majestie had shewed his mercie and goodnesse towardes mee: for his pleasure was that I should be delivered out of prison to depart into England, but no way else. So after I had given thankes for the Kings Majesties goodnesse shewed unto me, I desired him that he woulde be a meane that I might have the remaynder of such thinges as were taken from me restored unto me againe. Hee made me answere, that I might thanke God that I escaped with my head, and that if ever there came any more of us through the land, they should not so doe. The weeke before Easter they delivered mee my Corobia againe with all thinges that were therein. They tooke from mee in money nine Hungers gylderns in golde, five shillings foure pence in Lettoes money, fourtie Altines in Russe money, whereof twentie and more were for tokens, halfe i^theEmperan angell and a quarter of Master Doctour Standishes, ours PMsition. with his golde ring. Your two pieces of money (Master Gray) that you sent to your wife and daughter, with my two pieces of Boghary money. Of all this I had eight Hungers gilderns delivered mee the thirde weeke of mine imprisonment to paye for my charges, which stoode mee in a Doller a weeke. So that at the day of my deliverie 1 had but three gyldernes left me. For the rest I made a supplication to the Captaine and had the like answere given mee as the Marshall gave me. So that all the rest of the thinges before written are lost, and no recoverie to bee had, which grieveth me more for the tokens sakes then doeth mine eight weeks imprisonment. They have also my sword, my bootes, my bowe and arrowes that I bought at Smolensco, which cost me foure marks, my sled, my felt, the comhold, a booke of the Flowres of godly prayers, and my booke wherein my charges were written. Of all these I can get nothing againe, not so much as my two bookes. After I had remayned there five and thirtie dayes, I was had before the Captaine up into a great chamber to bee examined for letters and of the cause of my comming through the Countrey. In the Captaines companie was one of the Lordes of Danske. They demaunded of mee where my letters were, I declared unto them that I had none: your Officers (sayd I) tooke me when I was in my bedde, they searched mee and tooke all that I had from mee, if there be any they shall finde them among my stuffe which they have. They asked mee then, for what cause I went home over lande ? I declared unto them, that the Winter beeing a warme season, and having intelligence that The frozen Sea was not much frozen, and supposing this Sommer it would be navigable, I was onely sent to provide a Shippe to bee sent to passe the sayde Seas to discover Cataia: which if God graunted wee might doe, it woulde not onely bee a commoditie to the Realme of Englande, but unto all Christian landes, by the riches that might bee brought from thence, if the histories bee true that are written thereof. Much other communication I had with them concerning the same voyage. Then he demaunded of mee what wares wee brought into Russia, and what wee carried from thence. I declared the same unto them. Then they burdened mee, that wee brought thither thousandes of ordinance, as also of harneis, swordes, with other munitions of warre, artificers, copper, with many other things: I made them answere, that wee had brought thither about one hundred shirtes of mayle, such olde thinges newe scowred as no man in Englande woulde weare. Other talke they had with mee concerning the trade of Moscovia too long to commit to writing. At my comming hither heere were Ambassadours from the townes of Danske, Lubeck, and Hamburgh, as also [I. 305.] out of Liefland to desire this king to bee their Captaine and head in their intended voyage, which was to stoppe An attempt to all such shippes as shoulde goe out of England for Mos- htndfr our TT71 ^1 TT' s. J J • J- ^1 trade to Moscovia. Whereunto the King graunted, and immediatly cwia h the they departed to prepare their shippes. So that I am Hans townes afraide that either these our enemies, or the great warres y Easterthat we have with France and Scotland will be an occasion ^ that you shall have no shippes at Colmogro this yeere. To conclude, although I have no tokens to deliver them, that the tokens taken from me were sent unto, yet I will declare unto them that I had tokens for them, with the mischance. And thus I commit you to Almightie God with the rest of the companie, who keepe you in health to his holy will and pleasure. By yours to commaund THOMAS ALCOCKE. 399