*O, urgeme. From Serachick to a towne named * Urgenshe, 15. Certaine notes gathered by Richard Johnson (which was at Boghar with M. Anthony Jenkinson) of the reports of Russes and other strangers, of the wayes of Russia to Cathaya, and of divers and strange people. The first note given by one named Sarnichoke a Tartarian subject to the Prince of Boghar, which are also Tartars bordering upon Kizilbash or Persia, declaring the way from Astracan, being the furthest part of Russia, to Cathaya as foloweth. jjlrst from Astracan to Serachick by land, travailing by leysure as Merchants use with wares, is 10. dayes journey. dayes. From Urgenshe to Boghar, 15. dayes. From Boghar to Cascar, 30. dayes. From Cascar to Cathaya, 30. dayes journey. F By the same partie a note of another way more sure to traveile, as he reporteth. Astracan to Turkemen by the Caspian sea, 10. dayes with barkes. From Turkemen by lande specially with Camels, bearing the weight of 15. poodes for their common burthens, is 10. dayes to Urgenshe. From Urgenshe to Boghar, 15. dayes. Note. At this Citie of Boghar is the marte or meeting place betweene the Turkes and nations of those parts and the Cathayans. Also the toll there is the 40. part to be payed of Merchandizes or goods. From thence to Cascar is one moneths journey, and from Cascar (being the great Can, having many townes and fortes by the way) is also a moneths travel for merchants by land to Cathay. the frontier of 480 Further, as he hath heard (not having bene in those parts himselfe) ships may saile from the dominions of Cathaia unto India. But of other waies, or how the seas lie by any coast hee knoweth not. The instruction of another Tartarian merchant dwelling in the citie of Boghar, as he hath learned by other his countreymen which have bene there. First from Astracan by sea to Serachick is 15 daies : affirming also that a man may travell the other way before written by Turkemen. From Serachick to Urgence is 15 dayes. From Urgence to Boghar also 15 dayes. last 30 daies journey Note. These is without habitation of houses : therefore travellers lodge in their owne tents, cariyng with them to eate, their severall provisions : and for drinesse there bee many wels of faire water at equall baiting places not farre distant dayly to be had. From Boghar to Taskent easie travelling with goods, is 14 dayes by land. From Taskent to Occient 7 dayes. From Occient to Cascar 20 daies. This Cascar is the head towne or citie of another prince, lying betweene Boghar and Cathaia, called Reshit can. From Cascar to Sowchick 30 daies journey, which Sowchick is the first border of Cathay. From Sowchick to Camchick 5 daies journey, and from Camchick to Cathay is 2 moneths journey, all the way being inhabited, temperate, & wel replenished with innumerable fruits, & the chiefe citie in that whole land is called Cambalu, which is yet 10 daies journey from Cathay. Beyond this land of Cathay, which they praise to be civill & unspeakeably rich, is the countrey named in the Tartarian tongue Cara-calmack inhabited with blacke people : but in Cathay, the most part therof stretching to the sunne rising, are people white and of faire 4&1 2 H complexion. Their religion also, as the Tartars report, is Christian, or after the maner of Christians, and their language peculiar, differing from the Tartarian tongue. There are no great and furious Beares in travelling the waies aforesaid, but wolves white and through that woods are not of such blacke. And because quantitie there, as in these parts of Russia, but in maner rather scant then plentiful, as is reported, the Beares breed not that way, but some other beasts (as namely one in Russe called Barse) are in those coasts. This Barse appeareth by a skinne of one seene here to sell, to be nere so great as a big lion spotted very faire and therefore we here take it to be a Leopard or Tiger. Note that 20 daies journey from Cathay is a countrey named Angrim, where liveth the beast that beareth the best Muske, & the principall therof is cut out of the knee of the male. The people are taunie, & for that the men are not bearded nor differ in complexion from women, they have certaine tokens of iron, that is to say: like a bosse upon their shoulders, and women on their privie parts. Their feeding is raw flesh in the same land, and in another called * Titay : the Duke there is called Can. They worship the fire, and it is 34 dayes journey from great Cathay, and in the way lyeth the beautifull people, eating with knives of golde, and are called Comorom, and the men weare the sunne round Angrim. Mandeville speaketh hereof. Or Kitay. Small people, the land of small people is neerer the Mosko then Cathay. The instructions of one of Permia, who reporteth he had bene at Cathay the way before written, and also another way neere the sea coast, as foloweth, which note was sent out of Russia from Giles Holmes. First from the province of Dwina is knowen the way Pechora but six dayes to Pechora, and from Pechora travelling with Olens journey by land or water or harts, is sixe dayes journey by land, and in the Sommer from Ob. as much by water to the river of Ob. «-> . The Ob is a river full of flats, the mouth of it is 70. Russe miles over. And from thence three dayes journey on the right hand is a place called Chorno-lese, to say in English, blacke woods, and from thence neere hand is a people called Pechey-cony, wearing their haire by his description after the Irish fashion. From Pechey-cony to Joult Calmachey three dayes journey, & from thence to Chorno Callachay three dayes tending to the Southeast. These two people are of the Tartarian faith, and tributaries to the great Can. Here follow certaine countreys of the Samoeds [I. 337-] which dwell upon the river Ob, and upon the sea coasts beyond the same, taken out of the Russe tongue word by word, and travailed by a Russe borne in Colmogro, whose name was Pheodor Towtigin, who by report, was slaine in his second voyage in one of the said countreys. Pon the East part beyond the countrey of Ugori, the river Ob is the most Westermost part thereof. Upon the sea coast dwell Samoeds, and their countrey is called Molgomsey, whose meate is flesh of Olens, or Harts, and Fish, and doe eate one another sometimes among themselves. And if any Marchants come unto them, then they kill one of their children for their sakes to feast them withall. And if a Marchant chance to die with them, they burie him not, but eate him, and so doe they eate them of their owne countrey likewise. They be evill of sight, and have small noses, but they be swift and shoote very well, and they travaile on Harts and on Travelling on dogges, and their apparell is Sables and Harts skinnes. do& y hartsThey have no Merchandise but Sables onely. 2 Item, on the same coast or quarter beyond those people, and by the sea side also doth dwell another kinde of Samoeds in like maner, having another language. One moneth in the yeere they live in the sea, and doe not come or dwell on the dry land for that moneth. 3 Item beyond these people, on the sea coast, there is another kinde of Samoeds, their meate is flesh and fish, and their merchandise are Sables, white and blacke Foxes (which the Russes call Pselts) and Harts skinnes, and Fawnes skinnes. The relation of Chaggi Memet a Persian Marchant, to Baptista Ramusius, and other notable citizens of Venice, touching the way the chiefe citie of Persia, to from Tauris Campion a citie of Cathay over land: in which voyage he himselfe had passed before with the Caravans. FRom Tauris to Soltania. From Soltania to Casbin. From Casbin to Veremi. From Veremi to Eri. From Eri to Boghara. From Boghara to Samarchand. From Samarchand to Cascar. From Cascar to Acsu. From Acsu to Cuchi. From Cuchi to Chialis. From Chialis to Turfon. From Turfon to Camul. From Camul to Succuir. From Succuir to Gauta. From Gauta to Campion. 4 6 15 20 5 25 20 20 10 10 13 15 5 6 dayes journey. Which Campion is a citie of the Empire of Cathay in the province of Tangut, from whence the greatest quantitie of Rubarbe commeth.