put out of their said offices, with our further displeasure, and the saide English merchants to have restored all such money & wares as our customers have taken of them for our said custome. And whensoever the saide English merchants or their factors shall bring any maner of wares meete for our treasurie, then our treasurer shall take the said wares into our treasurie, and shall give unto the said English merchants, either ready money or raw silkes, to the value of their saide wares. And wheresoever this our letter of priviledges shall bee seene and read within our dominion, we straightly wil and command that it take effect, and be obeyed in al points. Dated at our place of Javat, the day and yere above written, and sealed with our princely seale, and firmed by our Secretarie in the 12. yeere of our raigne. The second voiage into Persia made by Tho. Alcock, who was slaine there, and by George Wrenne, & Ric. Cheinie servants to the worshipfull compaine of Moscovie merchants in Anno 1563. written by said Richard Cheinie. the |T may please your worships to understand, that in the yere 1563. I was appointed by M. Antho. Jenkinson, and M. Thomas Glover your Agent in Russia, to goe for Persia in your worships affaires, one Thomas Alcock having the charge of the voyage committed to him, and I one of your worships servants being joyned with him in your [I. 353-J A rubble h a busines, having with us, as they said 1500. rubbles. And marke Eng- [f j t g ]^ pi e a se yOu I cannot tell certainly what summe lish. of money we had then of the Emperors : for I received none, nor disbursed any of it in wares for the voyage. Also, God I take to record, I could not tell what stocke your worships had there, for the bookes were kept so privily that a man could never see them. The 10. of May anno 1563. we departed from a towne called Yeraslave upon our voyage toward Persia. The 24. of July we arrived at Astracan : and the second of August wee departed from Astracan, and the 4. of the same moneth we came to the Caspian sea, and the 11. day of the said moneth we arrived at our port in Media: and the 21. of the said August wee arrived at Shammaki, whereas the king Obdolocan lay in the fielde. We were wel entertained of heathen people, for the thirde day after our arrivall at Shammaki wee were called before the king : we gave him a present, and he entertained us very well. At our comming to the Court wee were commaunded to come before the king, who sate in his tent upon the ground with his legs a crosse, and all his dukes round about his tent, the ground being covered with carpets : wee were commaunded to sit downe, the King appointing every man his place to sit. And the king commaunded the Emperour of Russelands Merchants to rise up, and to give us the upper hande. The 20. of October Thomas Alcock departed from Shammaki towards Casbin, Casbin. leaving mee at Shammaki to recover such debts as the dukes of Shammaki ought for wares which they tooke of him at his going to Casbin. In the time I lay there I could recover but little. And at Thomas Alcocks comming from Casbin, who arrived at a towne called Leuvacta, Leuvacta. whereas the king Obdolocan lay, a day and a halfes journey from the towne whereas I lay, I hearing of his arriving there, departed from Shammaki, finding him there in safetie with all such goods as he had with him. During his abode there for seven dayes he made suite to the king for such money as the dukes ought him. But the king was displeased for that the Emperour of Russelands merchant had slaine a Boserman at his going to ABosermanis Casbin. Thomas Alcocke seeing the king would shewe us no favour, and also hearing from Shammaki, that the Russes sent their goods to the sea side, for that they feared that the king of Persia should have knowledge of 41 cocke shine in the way betweene Leu- vacta and Shammaki. Keselbash, or JeselbasL THE ENGLISH VOYAGES the death of the Boserman, willed mee to depart to Shammaki with all such goods as he had brought with him from Casbin, I leaving him at the Court. The thirde day after mine arrivall at Shammaki, I had newes that Thomas Alcocke was slaine comming on his way towards me. Then the king Obdolocan understanding of his death, demaunded whether he had ever a brother. Some said I was, some saide I was not his brother. When this fell out, your worships had no other servant there but mee among those heathen people. Who having such a summe of goods lying under my handes, and seeing howe the Russes sent their goods with as much hast as they might to the sea side, and having but foure men to sende our wares to the sea side, I used such diligence, that within two dayes after Thomas Alcocke was slaine, I sent in company with the Russes goods, all your worships goods with a Mariner, William August, and a Swethen, for that they might the safer arrive at the seaside, being safely layd in. All which goods afterwards arrived in Russeland in good condition, Master Glover having the receipt of all things which I sent then out of those parties into Russeland. Concerning my selfe, I remained after 1 had sent the goods into Russeland sixe weekes in Shammaki, for the recovery of such debts as were owing, and at last with much trouble recovered to the summe of fiftene hundreth rubbles or there about, which M. Glover received of me at my comming to Mosco, and all such goods as I brought with me out of Keselbash, as by a note of my hand that hee hath shall appeare. Also he having the receipt of all such goods as I sent into Russeland by these two above named, he then had that voyage in venter of his owne better then an hundreth rubbles, one Richard Johnson twentie rubles, one Thomas Pette fiftie rubles, one Evan Chermisin a Tartar seventie rubles. All these had their returne: M. Glover allowed himselfe God knoweth howe, I then being in Persia in your worships affaires. And whereas he saith, the Emperour had but for his part a dobble, as farre as I can see, knowing what the wares cost in those partes, hee had treble. If they gave him so much wares, all charges turned to your worships, as well of the Emperours as of their owne returnes. I have sowen the seede, and other men have gathered the [I. 354.] harvest : I have travailed both by lande and by water full many a time with a sorrowfull heart, aswell for the safegarde of their goods as yours, how to frame all things to the best, and they have reaped the fruites of my travaile. But ever my prayer was to God, to deliver mee out of those miseries which I suffered for your service among those heathen people. Therefore knowing my duetie which I have done, as a true servant ought to do, I beseech your worships (although I have but small recompence for my service,) yet let me have no wrong, and God will prosper you the better. Also, to informe your worships of your Persian voyage Gillan in Per what I judge : it is a voyage to bee followed. The king na% of Gillan, whereas yet you have had no traffique, liveth al by marchandise: and it is neere Casbin, and not past six weekes travaile from Ormus, whither all the spices be brought: and here, (I meane at Gillan) a trade may be established: But your worships must send such men as are no riotous livers, nor drunkards. For if such men goe, it wil be to your dishonour and great hinderance, as appeared by experience the yeere 1565. when as Richard Johnson went to Persia, whose journey had bene better stayed then set forward. For whereas before wee had the name among those heathen people to be such marchants as they thought none like in all respects, his vicious living there hath made us to be compted worse then the Russes. Againe, if such men travaile in your affaires in such a voyage, you shall never know what gaine is to be gotten. For how can such men imploy themselves to seeke the trade, that are inclined to such vices ? or howe can God prosper them in your affaires? But when a trade is established by wise and discreet men, then wil it be for your worships there, and for a voiage or market made evil at not before: the first, that your worships shal the occasion is never understand what gaine is to be gotten thereby hereafter. traffique to 1565. The thirde voyage into Persia, begun in the yeere 1565. by Richard Johnson, Alexander Kitchin, and Arthur Edwards. A letter of Arthur Edwards to M. Thomas Nicols, Secretarie to the worshipful company trading into Russia and other the North parts, concerning their voyage the preparation of into Persia. Jeraslave, appointed Aster Nicols, my bounden duetie remembred, with desire of God for the preser- vation of you and yours: you shall understand that the second of March I was sent by M. Thomas Glover (your Agent) unto to receive such goods as should come from Vologhda, as also such kinde of wares as should be bought and sent from Mosco by your Agent, and M. Edward Clarke, thought meete for your voyage of Persia. And further, I was to provide for biscuit, beere, and beefe, and other victuals, and things otherwayes needful according to advise. Thus I remained here until the comming of your Agent, which was the 12. of May, who taried here three dayes, to see us set forwards on our voyage, and then he departed towards Colmogro, having appointed (as chiefe for your voyage of Persia) Richard Johnson. For my part I am willing, as also have bene & shalbe content to submit my selfe under him, whom the Agent shall appoint, although he were 44 Jeraslave a towne upon the river of Volga. Richard Johnson chiefe of the third voyage into