The way from Colmogro to Mizemske Sloboda, where the Samoeds keep their Mart. ^Al is 230. versts To Ust Pinnego To Palango To Levnona To Vescom To Soyava To Covla To Nendega To Lampas To Sloboda To Lampas ToPogorel ToZapolle 10 Uromo The way to Uromo from Mezemske Sloboda, where the Losh hides are gotten. 1 Al is 115. versts I ^ The way and distances from Saint Nicholas, to the Caspian Sea. IF you goe straight from Saint Nicholas to the Caspian Sea, you must goe to Vologhda by water, as by the easiest passage, and that is accomplished, passing day and night, in foureteene dayes and foureteene nights, in boates cut out of a tree : (the boates are called Stroogs) 1100. versts it is. By horse and sleds in 8. dayes you may passe it in Winter. In Summer the way is dangerous by meanes of marishes and bogs, and not safely then to be passed. Then from Vologhda to Yeraslave, 180. versts over land. This Yeraslave standeth upon the river of Volga, 180. versts I say distant from Vologhda. To the Caspian sea are 2700. versts from Yeraslave. So from S. Nicholas to the Caspian sea, are [3800.80. versts. The journey from S. Nicholas to Yeraslave is accomplished in foureteene dayes by water, and two dayes by land. }i6. dayes. From thence to Astracan men travell by water in 30. dayes and 30. nights. dayes journey. So between S. Nicholas and the Caspian sea, are [46. There passe downe Volga every Summer, 500. boats great & smal, from all the upper parts of the river, whereof some be of 500. tunne. They go for Mineral! salt and for Sturgeon. The salt lieth in rocks (and is whitish red, and in fine sand) as it were 30. miles from Astracan toward the Caspian sea. They dig it themselves and pay nothing for it, but to the prince a peny a pood, viz. 40. pound waight. The Sturgeon which they call Ocetera is taken fiftie Fishing for miles on this side Astracan. Along the river the space s*ur&<>nfor3' of 20. miles, they make their booties in plaine grounds, & fish for the space of three moneths, viz. from the end of May till the end of August, and having salt they use to salt them. The river is there 5. or 6. miles broad, but with some Islands. The river below Yeraslave, where it is most narow, is a mile broad from side to side. The river runneth upon red clay, all woods of birch and oke on the river sides, save about the townes of the fishing places. Dwina from S. Nicholas to Ustiug runneth all on chalke and sand: the fish are sweete & fat. The Mene a fish with a great head a foot long breedeth about Vologda, and is fat and delicate. Between Vobsko and Novogrod, the space of an 180. miles, groweth flaxe: the whole soile in length is so imploied, and as much in breadth: this is upon a flat soile. The hempe groweth about Smolensko upon the Polish border, 300. miles in compasse: much of the soile is so imploied. men in making of cables, set on workeai 00 men in Russia. Sosnova tree, excellent for the cure of the wolfe. [i. 365.] The description of Rose Island. T HE E N G L I SH V O Y A G ES Of this hempe they bring in Winter to Vologda and Colmogro, and we set in worke in making of cables above 100. men. The Russians do spin and hacfrell it, and the English tarre it in threed and lay the cable. And one cable of those is woorth two of Danzick, because the Danzickers put in old cable and rotten stuffe, which in fowle weather is found of no strength. Sosnova, a tree that cureth the wolfe with the shavings of the wood, groweth in these parts, and of the barks they make ropes as big as a mans arme for their boats. The Samoeds lacking linnen make handkerchiefs and towels of the very wood of this tree. The wood of this tree is as heavie as hollie, and the shavings tough. Rose Island in S. Nicholas Baie is full of Roses damaske and red, of violets and wild Rosemarie: This Island is neere 7. or 8. miles about, and good pasture, and hath the name of the roses. The snow here about the midst of May is cleared, having bin two moneths in melting, then the ground is made dry within 14. dayes after, and then the grasse is knee high within a moneth. Then after September the frost commeth in, the snow is a yard deepe upon plaine ground. The Island hath Firre and Birch, and a faire fresh spring neere the house built there by the English,