In this voyage went Thomas Bannister, & Geofrey Ducket, for their voyage into Persia. The abbey of S. Nicholas of 20 Monks. THE ENGLISH VOYAGES The Ambassage of the right worshipfull Master Thomas Randolfe, Esquire, to the Emperour of Russia, in the yeere 1568, briefly written by himselfe. I He 22 day of June, in the yere of our Lord 1568, I went aboord the Harry, lying in the road at Harwich with my company, being to the number of fortie persons or thereabout : of which the one halfe were gentlemen, desirous to see the world. Within one dayes sailing, we were out of the sight of land, and following our course directly North, till we came to the North Cape, we sailed for the space of twelve dayes with a prosperous winde, without tempest or outrage of sea : having compassed the North Cape we directed our course flat Southeast, having upon our right hand Norway, Wardhouse, Lapland, all out of sight till we came to Cape Gallant : and so sailing betweene two bayes, the two and thirtieth day after our departure from Harwich, we cast ancre at Saint Nicholas road. In all the time of our voyage, more then the great number of Whales ingendering together, which we might plainly beholde, and the Sperma Cetae, which we might see swimming upon the sea, there was no great thing to be woondered at. Sometimes we had calmes, wherein our Mariners fished, and tooke good store of divers sorts. At S. Nicholas we landed the 23 of July, where there standeth an abbey of Monks (to the number of twentie) built all of wood : the apparell of the Monks is superstitious, in blacke hoods, as ours have bene. Their Church is faire, but full of painted images, tapers, and candles. Their owne houses are low, and small roomes. They lie apart, to drunkenthey eat together, and are much given they doe nesse, unlearned, write they can, preach never, ceremonious in their Church, and long in their prayers. At my first arrivall I was presented from their Prior with two great rie loaves, fish both salt and fresh of divers sorts, both sea fish and fresh water, one sheepe alive, blacke, with a white face, to be the more gratefull unto me, and so with many solemne words inviting me to see their house, they tooke their leave. Towne or habitation at S. Nicholas there is none The English more then about foure houses neere the abbey, and hou/eat8another built by the English Company for their owne Ntcho s' use. This part of the countrey is most part wood, saving here and there pasture & arable ground, many rivers and divers Islands unhabited, as the most part of the countrey is, for the coldnesse in Winter. S. Nicholas standeth Northeast: the elevation of the The river of pole 64 degrees. The river that runneth there into the Dmnasea is called Dwina, very large, but shallow. This river taketh his beginning about 700 miles within the countrey, & upon this river standeth Colmogro, and many prety villages, well situated for pasture, arable land, wood, and water. The river pleasant betweene hie hils of either side inwardly inhabited, and in a maner a wildernesse of hie firre trees, and other wood. At Colmogro being 100 versts, which we account for Colmogro. three quarters of a mile every verst, we taried three weeks, not being suffered to depart before the Emperour had word of our comming, who sent to meet us a gentleman of his house, to convey us, and to see us furnished of victuals, and all things needfull, upon his owne charge. The allowance of meat and drinke was for every day two rubbles, besides the charge of boats by water, and foure score post horses by land, with above 100 carts to cary my wines, and other cariage. Colmogro is a great towne builded all of wood, not walled, but scattered house from house. The people are rude in maners, and in apparell homely, saving upon their festivall, and marriage dayes. The people of this town finding commodity by the English mens traffike with them are much at their commandement, given much to drunkennesse, and all other kinde of abominable vices. An English tllZT I n this towne the English men have lands of their owne> g i v en them by the Emperour, and faire houses, ~ Wlt^ offices for their commodity, very many. Of other townes untill I come to Vologda, I write not, because they are much like to this, and the inhabitants not differing from them. I was five whole weeks upon the river of Dwina till I came to Vologda, being drawen with men against the streame, for other passage there is none. Vologda standeth upon the river of Vologda, which commeth into Dwina. The towne is great and long, built all of wood, as all their townes are. In this towne the Emperour hath built a castle invironed with a wall of stone, and bricke, the walles faire and hie, round about. Here (as in all other their townes) are many Churches, some built of bricke, the rest of wood, many Monks and Nunnes in it: a towne also of great traffike, and many rich merchants there dwelling. From hence we passed by land towards Mosco in poste, being 500 versts great, which are equall with our miles. In their townes we baited or lay, being post townes. [I. 377.J The desaip- The countrey is very faire, plaine & pleasant, well *7 °^th inhabited, corne, pasture, medowes enough, rivers, and woods, faire and goodly. At Yeraslave we passed the river of Volga, more then a mile over. This river taketh his beginning at Beal Ozera, & descendeth into Mare Caspium, portable thorow of very great vessels with flat bottomes, which farre passe any that our countrey useth. To saile by this river into Mare Caspium the English company caused a barke to be built of 27 tunns, which there was never seene before: This barke built, and ready rigged to the sea with her whole furniture cost not the company above one hundreth marks there. To Mosco we came about the end of September, His arrwall received by no man, not so much as our owne countrey- at Moscomen suffered to meet us, which bred suspition in me of some other course intended, then we had hitherto found. We were brought to a house built of purpose by the A sPec'tal Emperour for Ambassadours, faire and large, after the \m«atMosco, built for Amr r A x. basuuburs. fashion of that countrey. i_- *. Two gentlemen were appointed to attend upon me, the one to see us furnished of victuals, and that we lacked nothing of the Emperors allowance : the other to see that we should not goe out of the house, nor suffer any man to come unto us, in which they left nothing undone that belonged to their charge. But specially he that looked to our persons so straightly handled us, that we had no small cause to doubt that some evill had bene intended unto us. No supplication, sute, or request could take place for our liberty, nor yet to come to his presence. Having passed over 17 weeks in this sort, the Emperour sendeth word that we should be ready against Tuesday the 20 of Februarie, at eight a clocke in the morning. The houre being come that I should goe to the Court, Two the two gentlemen Pristaves (as they call them) came Pristaves. unto me apparelled more princely then before I had ever seene them. They presse us to depart, and mounted upon their owne horses, and the Ambassador upon such a one as he had borrowed, his men marching on foot, to their great griefe. The Ambassadour (being my selfe) was conveyed into an office where one of the chancellors doeth use to sit, being there accompanied with the two foresayd gentlemen : I taried two long houres before I was sent for to the Emperor. In the end message being brought that the Emperour was set, I was conveyed by my gentlemen my estimation 300 persons, all in rich attire, taken out of the Emperors wardrobe for that day, upon three ranks of benches, set round about the place, rather to present a majestie, then that they were either of quality or honor. At the first entry into the chamber I with my cap gave them the reverence, such as I judged their stately sitting, grave countenances, and sumptuous apparell required, and seeing that it was not answered againe of any of them I covered my head, and so passing to a chamber where the Emperor was, there received me at the doore from my two gentlemen or governors, two of the Emperors counsellors, and shewed me to the Emperor, and brought me to the middle of the chamber, where I was willed to stand still, and to say that which I had to say. I by my Interpretor opened my message as I received it from the Queene my Mistresse, from whom I came, at whose name the Emperor stood up, and demanded divers questions of her health and state: whereunto answere being made, he gave me his hand in token of my welcome, and caused me to sit downe, and further asked me divers questions. This done, I delivered her Majesties present, which was a notable great Cup of silver curiously wrought, with verses graven in it, expressing the histories workmanly set out in the same. All being sayd and done (as appeared) to his contentment, he licenced me and my whole company to depart, who were all in his presence, and were saluted by him with a nod of his head, and sayd unto me : I dine not this day openly for great affaires I have, but I will send thee my dinner, and give leave to thee and thine to go at liberty, and augment our allowance to thee, in token of our love and favor to our sister the Queene of England. I with reverence tooke my leave, being conveyed by two other of greater calling then those that brought me to the Emperors sight, who delivered me to the two 106 His admission to the Emperors presence. The Queenes present. The Emperors speech to the first gentlemen, who conducted me to the office where I first was, where came unto me one called the Long duke, with whom I conferred a while, and so returned to my lodging. Within one houre after in comes to my lodging a duke richly apparelled, accompanied with fiftie persons, [I. 378.] ech of them carying a silver dish with meat, and covered with silver. The duke first delivered twenty loaves of bread of the Emperors owne eating, having tasted the same, and delivered every dish into my hands, and tasted of every kinde of drinke that he brought. This being done, the duke and his company sate downe with me, and tooke part of the Emperors meat, and filled themselves well of all sorts, and went not away from me unrewarded. Within few nights after the Emperor had will to speake secretly with me, and sent for me in the night by the Long duke: The place was farre off, and the night colde, and I having changed my apparell into such as the Russes do weare, found great incommoditie thereby. Having talked with him above three houres, towards A second conthe morning I was dismissed, and so came home to my fi™nce wlth lodging, where I remained above six weeks after, before te m?et01' I heard againe from the Emperour, who went the next day to Slovoda, the house of his solace. After the end of which sixe weeks, which was about the beginning of April, the Emperour returned from Slovoda aforesayd, and sent for me againe to make repaire unto him. And being come, I dealt effectually with him in the behalfe of our English merchants, and found him so graciously inclined towards them, that I obtained at his hands my whole demands for large privileges in generall, together with all the rest my particular requests. And then he commended to my conduct into England, a noble man of his, called Andrew Savin, as his Ambassadour, for the Andrew Savin better confirmation of his privileges granted, and other negotiations with her Majesty. And thus being dispatched with full contentment, the sayd Ambassadour 107 and my selfe departed, and imbarked at S. Nicholas about the end of July, and arrived safely at London in the moneth of September following. A copie of the priviledges granted by the right high and mightie Prince, the Emperour of Russia, &c. unto the right worshipfull fellowship of English merchants, for the discoverie of new trades : and hither sent by Thomas Randolfe esquire, her Majesties Ambassadour to the sayd Emperour, and by Andrew Savin his Ambassadour in the yere of our Lord God 1569. Ne God everlasting, and without and before the beginning, the Father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghost, the blessed Trinitie, our onely God, maker, and preserver of all things, and replenisher of all things every where, who by thy goodnesse doest cause all men to love the giver of wisedome our onely Mediatour, and leader of us all unto blessed knowledge by the onely Sonne his word, our Lord Jesus Christ, holy and everlasting Spirit, and now in these our dayes teachest us to keepe Christknitie, and sufferest us to enjoy our kingdome to the happy commodity of our land, and wealth of our people, in despight of our enemies, and to our fame with our friends. We John Vasiliwich by the grace of God, great lord, Emperour, and great duke of all Russia, Volodemer, Moscovia, Novogrod, Emperour of Cazan, Tversky, Vgorsky, Permisky, Vadsky, Bulgaria, and many others, lord and great duke of the Low countreys of Novogrod, Chernigosky, Resansky, Polotsky, Rastow, Yeraslave, Bealosera, Owdorsky, Condinsky, and all Siberland, great commander of all the North parts, lord of Leifland, and many other Northward, Southward and Westward.