Vaigats, being forcibly driven from thence with an Easterly winde and yce, and so she came into the river Dwina, and arrived at Colmogro the 11 of September, 56. If the yce had not bene so much that yere as it was in the Streights, on both sides of the Island Vaigats, they in the said pinnesse would that yeere have discovered the parts that you are now sent to seeke: which thing (if it had pleased God) might have bene done then : but God hath reserved it for some other. Which discoverie, if it may be made by you, it shall not only prove profitable unto you, but it will also purchase perpetuall fame and renowme both to you and our countrey. And thus not doubting of your willing desires, and forwardnesse towards the same, we pray God to blesse you with a lucky beginning, fortunate successe, and happily to end the same. Amen. Necessarie notes to be observed, and followed in your discoverie, as hereafter followeth. jlHen your barke with all furniture and necessaries shall be in readinesse for you to depart to the sea (if it be that you take your barke at S. Nicholas, or any part of Dwina Reca) you shall from thence, even as timely in the spring as the yce will permit you, saile, [I. 384.] & make all expedition that may be, unto the mouth of the river Pechora (as your commission doth leade you) and as you passe by the coast all alongst (notwithstanding the plat that sheweth you the description of the said coast, from Dwina unto Vaigats) yet you shall seeke by all the meanes that you can, to amend the same plat, using as many observations, as you possibly can do: and these notes following are to be observed by you principally. 1 First, that you do observe the latitude as often, and in as many places as you may possibly do it, noting diligently the place where you do so observe the same. 2 Also that you doe diligently set with your compasse, how the land doth lie from point to point, all alongst as you goe, and to use your judgements how farre there may be betweene ech of them. 3 Item, that you do alwayes use to draw the proportion and biting of the land, aswell the lying out of the points, and headlands, unto the which you shall give some apt names (at your discretion) as also the forme of the Bayes, and to make some marke in drawing the forme, and border of the same, where the high cliffes are, and where low land is, whether sandy hilles, or whatsoever: omit not to note any thing that may be sensible and apparant to you, which may serve to any purpose. 4 In passing along by any coast, that you keepe your lead going often times, and sound at the least once every glasse, and oftener if you thinke good as occasion doth serve, and note diligently the depth with the maner of the ground, and at every time, how farre the same sounding may be from the next shore to it: and how the next point or headland doth beare from you. And in the sea after you set off from your port, you shall orderly at the end of every foure glasses sound, and if you finde ground, note the depth and what ground, but if you can finde no ground, you shall also note in what depth you could find no ground. 5 Also that you do diligently observe the flowing, & ebbing in every place, and how the tides do set, which way the flood doth come, and how much water it doth high in every place, and what force the same tide hath to drive a ship in an houre, as neere as you can judge it. 6 Also that you doe seeke to observe with the instrument which I deliver you herewith, according as I taught you at Rose Island, the true platformes, and distances, in as many places as conveniently you may, for it serveth very aptly your purpose. 7 Also that you take with you paper and ynke, and keepe a continuall jour nail or rememberance day by day, of all such things as shall fall out worth the knowledge, not forgetting or omitting to write it, and note it, that it may be shewed and read at your returne. 8 These orders if you shall diligently observe, it will be easie for you to make a plat and perfect description of your discovery, and so shall your notes be sufficient to answere that which is looked for at your hands. But withall you may not forget to note as many things as you can learne and understand by the report of any people whatsoever they be, so that it appertaine any way to our desires. And thus the Lord God prosper your voyage. Amen. Certaine letters in verse, written by Master George Turbervile out of Moscovia, which went as Secretarie thither with Master T h o. Randolph, her Majesties Ambassadour to the Emperour in London, 1568, to certeine friends of his describing the maners of the Countrey and people. To his especiall friend Master Edward Dancie. MY Dancie deare, when I recount within my brest, My London friends, and wonted mates, and thee above the rest: I feele a thousand fits of deepe and deadly woe, To thinke that I from land to sea, from blisse to bale I left my native soile, full like a retchlesse man, And unacquainted of the coast, among the Russes A people passing rude, to vices vile inclinde, Folke fit to be of Bacchus traine, so quaffing is their Drinke is their whole desire, the pot is all their pride, The sobrest head doth once a day stand needfull of a If he to banket bid his friends, he will not shrinke On them at dinner to bestow a douzen kindes of drinke: 124 did go. ran: kinde.