8 These orders if you shall diligently observe, it will be easie for you to make a plat and perfect description of your discovery, and so shall your notes be sufficient to answere that which is looked for at your hands. But withall you may not forget to note as many things as you can learne and understand by the report of any people whatsoever they be, so that it appertaine any way to our desires. And thus the Lord God prosper your voyage. Amen. Certaine letters in verse, written by Master George Turbervile out of Moscovia, which went as Secretarie thither with Master T h o. Randolph, her Majesties Ambassadour to the Emperour in London, 1568, to certeine friends of his describing the maners of the Countrey and people. To his especiall friend Master Edward Dancie. MY Dancie deare, when I recount within my brest, My London friends, and wonted mates, and thee above the rest: I feele a thousand fits of deepe and deadly woe, To thinke that I from land to sea, from blisse to bale I left my native soile, full like a retchlesse man, And unacquainted of the coast, among the Russes A people passing rude, to vices vile inclinde, Folke fit to be of Bacchus traine, so quaffing is their Drinke is their whole desire, the pot is all their pride, The sobrest head doth once a day stand needfull of a If he to banket bid his friends, he will not shrinke On them at dinner to bestow a douzen kindes of drinke: 124 did go. ran: kinde. GEORGE TURBERVILE'S LETTERS Such licour as they have, and as the countrey gives, But chiefly two, one called Kvas, whereby the Mousike Small ware and waterlike, but somewhat tart in taste, The rest is Mead of honie made, wherewith their lips And if he goe unto his neighbour as a guest, He cares for litle meate, if so his drinke be of the best. No wonder though they use such vile and beastly trade, Sith with the hatchet and the hand, their chiefest gods Their Idoles have their hearts, on God they never call, Unlesse it be (Nichola Bough) that hangs against the lives. they baste. be made. wall. The house that hath no god, or painted Saint within, Is not to be resorted to, that roofe is full of sinne. Besides their private gods, in open places stand Their crosses unto which they crooche, and blesse themselves with hand. Devoutly downe ground, they ducke, with forehead to the Was never more deceit in ragges, and greasie garments Almost the meanest man in all the countrey rides, The woman eke, against our use, her trotting horse In sundry colours they both men and women goe, In buskins all, that money have on buskins to bestoe. Ech woman hanging hath a ring within her eare, Which all of ancient use, and some of very pride doe Their gate is very brave, their countenance wise and And yet they follow fleshly lustes, their trade of living It is no shame at all accompted to defile Anothers bedde, concile, they make no care their follies to 125 found. bestrides. weare. sadde, skinne, see dies. ceede. aray. side. Is not the meanest man in all the land but hee, To buy her painted colours doeth allow his wife a fee, Wherewith she deckes her selfe, and dies her tawnie She pranks and paints her smoakie face, both brow, lip, cheeke, & chinne. Yea those that honest are, if any such there bee Within the land, doe use the like: a man may plainely Upon some womens cheekes the painting how it lies, In plaister sort, for that too thicke her face the harlot But such as skilfull are, and cunning Dames indeede, By dayly practise doe it well, yea sure they doe exThey lay their colours so, as he that is full wise, May easly be deceiv'd therein, if he doe trust his eyes. I not a little muse, what madnesse makes them paint Their faces, waying how they keepe the stoove by meere constraint. For seldome when, unlesse on Church or marriage day A man shall see the Dames abroade, that are of best The Russie meanes to reape the profit of her pride, And so he mewes her to be sure, she lye by no mans Thus much, friend Dancie, I did meane to write to To thee, let thee weete in Russia land, what men and women bee. Hereafter I perhaps of other things will write To thee, and other of my friends, which I shall see And other stuffe besides, which true report shall tell, Meane while I ende my loving lines, and bid thee now with sight : farewell. To Spencer. IF I should now forget, or not remember thee, Thou Spencer might'st a foule rebuke, and shame impute to mee. For I to open shew did love thee passing well, And thou wert he at parture, whome I loathde to bid And as I went thy friend, so I continue still, No better proofe thou canst then this desire of true I doe remember well when needes I should away, And that the Poste would licence us, no longer time Thou wrongst me by the fist, and holding fast my farewell. good will. to stay : hand, Didst crave of me to send thee newes, and how I liked the land. It is a sandie soile, no very fruitfull vaine, More waste and wooddie grounds there are, then [I. 386.] closes fit for graine. Yet graine there growing is, which they untimely take, And cut or eare the corne be ripe, they mowe it on a And laying sheafe by sheafe, their harvest so they dry, They make the greater haste, for feare the frost the stacke. corne destroy. For in the winter time, so glarie is the ground, As neither grasse, nor other graine, in pastures may be found. In corns the cattell then, the sheepe, the colt, the Fast by his bed the Mowsike then a lodging doth Whom he with fodder feeds, and holds as deere as And thus they weare the winter with the Mowsike and cowe, allowe, life : his wife. wheate. men, land, stand. reason, stone, Spring. Seven months the Winter dures, the glare it is so great, As it is May before "he turne, his ground to sowe his The bodies eke that die unburied lie they then, Laid up in coffins made of firre, as well the poorest As those of greater state : the cause is lightly found, For that in Winter time, they cannot come to breake the ground. And wood so plenteous is, quite throughout all the As rich, and poore, at time of death assurd of coffins Perhaps thou musest much, how this may stand with That bodies dead can uncorrupt abide so long a season. Take this for certaine trothe, as soone as heate is gone, The force of colde the body binds as hard as any Without offence at all to any living thing: And so they lye in perfect state, till next returne of Their beasts be like to ours, as farre as I can see For shape, and shewe, but somewhat lesse of bulke, and bone they be. Of watrish taste, the flesh not firme, like English beefe, And yet releefe : long, it serv's them very well, and is a good Their sheepe are very small, sharpe singled, handfull Great store of fowle on sea and land, the moorish reedes among. The greatnes of the store doeth make the prices lesse, they know not how good Besides in all the land meate to dresse. They use neither broach nor spit, but when the stove they heate, They put their victuals in a pan, and so they bake No pewter to be had, no dishes but of wood, No use of trenchers, cups cut out of birche are very They use but wooden spoones, which hanging in a case ties, and thinkes it no Eache Mowsike at his girdle their meate. good. disgrace. With whitles two or three, the better man the moe, The chiefest Russies in the land, with spoone and knives doe goe. Their houses are not huge of building, but they say, They plant them in the loftiest ground, to shift the Which in the Winter time, eache where full thicke Which makes them have the more desire, to set their No stone worke is in use, their roofes of rafters bee, One linked in another fast, their wals are all of tree. Of masts both long, and large, with mosse put in To keepe the force of weather out, I never earst have snow away, doth lie: houses hie. betweene, seene A grosse devise so good, and on the roofe they lay The burthen barke, to showres away. the raine, and sudden rid In every roome a stove, to serve the Winter turne, Of wood they have sufficient store, as much as they can burne. They have no English glasse, of slices of a rocke Hight Sluda they their windowes make, that English glasse doth mocke. They cut it very thinne, and sow it with a thred In pretie order like to panes, to serve their present need. No other glasse, good faith doth give a better light: And sure the rocke is nothing rich, the cost is very [I. 387.J slight, in 129 esteeme. head. but bad. of crie: mard, The chiefest place is that, where hangs the god by it, The owner of the house himselfe doth never sit, Unlesse his better come, to whom he yealds the seat: The stranger bending to the god, the ground with brow must beat. And in that very place which they most sacred deeme, that his guest he doth The stranger lies: a token Where he is wont to have a beares skinne for his bed, And must, in stead of pillow, clap his saddle to his In Russia other shift there is not to be had, For where the bedding is not good, the boalsters are I mused very much, what made them so to lie, Sith in their countrey Downe is rife, and feathers out Unlesse it be because the countrey is so hard, They feare by nicenesse of a bed their bodies would be I wisht thee oft with us, save that I stood in feare Thou wouldst have loathed to have layd thy limmes As I and Stafford did, that was my mate in bed: And yet (we thanke the God of heaven) we both right Loe thus I make an ende: none other newes to thee, But that the countrey is too colde, the people beastly I write not all I know, 1 touch but here and there, For if I should, my penne would pinch, and eke upon a beare, well have sped. bee. offend I feare. Who so shall read this verse, conjecture of the rest, And thinke by reason of our trade, that I do thinke But if no traffique were, then could I boldly pen The hardnesse of the soile, and eke the maners of the the best. men. the Lions paw gives judgement of the And so may you deeme of the great, by reading ot They say beast: the least. To Parker. write, MY Parker, paper, pen, and inke were made to And idle heads, that little do, have leisure to indite: Wherefore, respecting these, and thine assured love, If I would write no newes to thee, thou might'st my And sithence fortune thus hath shov'd my shippe on And made me seeke another Realme unseene of me The maners of the men I purpose to declare, And other private points besides, which strange and The Russie men are round of bodies, fully fac'd, The greatest part with bellies bigge that overhang the Flat headed for the most, with faces nothing faire, But browne, by reason of the stove, and closenesse of It is their common use to shave or els to sheare Their heads, for none in all the land long lolling locks Unlesse perhaps he have his sovereigne prince disFor then he never cuts his haire, untill he be appeas'd. A certaine signe to know who in displeasure be, For every man that viewes his head, will say, Loe And during all the time he lets his locks to grow, Dares no man for his life to him a face of friendship pen reprove. shore: before: geazon are. waste, the aire: doth weare, pleas'd, this is he. show. A cap aloft their heads they have, that standeth very hie, Which Colpack they do terme. They weare no ruffes The best have collers set with pearle, which they Their shirts in Russie long, they worke them downe And on the sleeves with coloured Silks, two inches at all: Rubasca call. before, good and more. Aloft their shirts they weare a garment jacket wise Hight Onoriadka, and about his burlie waste he tyes [I. 388.J His portkies, which in stead of better breeches be : Of linnen cloth that garment is, no codpiece is to see. A paire of yarnen stocks to keepe the colde away, Within his boots the Russie weares, the heeles they underlay rate With clouting clamps of steele, sharpe pointed at the toes, And over all a Shuba furd, and thus the Russie goes. Well butned is the Shube, according to his state, Some Silke, of Silver other some: but those of poorest Do weare no Shubs at all, but grosser gownes to sight, that That reacheth downe beneath the calfe, and Armacha hight: These are the Russies robes. The richest use to ride From place to place, his servant runnes, and followes The Cassacke beares his felt, to force away the raine: Their bridles are not very brave, their saddles are but by his side. plaine. No bits but snaffles all, of birch their saddles be, Much fashioned like the Scottish seates, broad flakes to keepe the knee From sweating of the horse, the pannels larger farre And broader be then ours, they use short stirrups for the warre: For when the Russie is pursued by cruel foe, He rides away, and suddenly betakes him to his boe, right, dight. will flee. not slide, a day, skippe, whippe see. And bends me but about in saddle as he sits, And therewithall amids his race his following foe he hits. Their bowes are very short, like Turkie bowes outOf sinowes made with birchen barke, in cunning maner Small arrowes, cruel heads, that fell and forked bee, Which being shot from out those bowes, a cruel way They seldome use to shoo their horse, unlesse they ride In post upon the frozen flouds, then cause they shall He sets a slender calke, and so he rides his way. The horses of the countrey go good fourescore versts And all without the spurre, once pricke them and they But goe not forward on their way, the Russie hath his To rappe him on the ribbes, for though all booted bee, Yet shall you not a paire of spurres in all the countrey The common game is chesse, almost the simplest will Both give a checke and eke a mate, by practise comes Againe they dice as fast, the poorest rogues of all Will sit them downe in open field, and there to gaming Their dice are very small, in fashion like to those Which we doe use, he takes them up, and over thumbe Not shaking them a whit, they cast suspiciously, And yet I deeme them voyd of art that dicing most At play when Silver lacks, goes saddle, horse and all, And eche thing els worth Silver walkes, although the price be small. Because thou lovest to play friend Parker other while, their skill. fall. he throwes I wish thee there the weary day with dicing to beguile. But thou weart better farre at home, I wist it well, And wouldest be loath among such lowts so long a Then judge of us thy friends, what kinde of life we had, That neere the frozen pole to waste our weary dayes time to dwell. were glad. In such a savage soile, where lawes do beare no sway, But all is at the king his will, to save or els to slay. And that sans cause, God wot, if so his minde be such. But what meane I with Kings to deale ? we ought no Saints to touch. they lead, Conceive the rest your selfe, and deeme what lives Where lust is Lawe, and Subjects live continually in And where the best estates have none assurance good Of lands, of lives, nor nothing falles unto the next of But all of custome doeth unto the prince redowne, [I. 389.] And all the whole revenue comes unto "the King his dread. blood. crowne. Good faith I see thee muse at what I tell thee now, But true it is, no choice, but all at princes pleasure bow. So Tarquine ruled Rome as thou remembrest well, And what his fortune was at last, I know thy selfe Where will in Common weale doth beare the onely And lust is Lawe, the prince and Realme must needs The strangenesse of the place is such for sundry things As if I woulde I cannot write ech private point to thee. The colde is rare, the people rude, the prince so full The Realme so stored with Monks and nunnes, and priests on every side : canst tell. sway, in time decay. 1 see, The maners are so Turkie like, the men so full of guile, The women wanton, Temples stuft with idols that defile The Seats that sacred ought to be, the customes are so As if I would describe the whole, I feare my pen would In summe, I say 1 never saw a prince that so did Nor people so beset with Saints, yet all but vile and quaint, faint. raigne, vaine. Wilde Irish are as civill as the Russies in their kinde, Hard choice which is the best of both, ech bloody, rude and blinde. If thou bee wise, as wise thou art, and wilt be ruld by me, those barbarous Live still at home, and covet not No good befalles a man that seeks, and findes no No civill customes to be learnd, where God bestowes And truely ill they do deserve to be belov'd of God, That neither love nor stand in awe of his assured rod : Which though be long, yet plagues at last the vile and coasts to see. better place, no grace. beastly sort Of sinfiill wights, that all in vice do place their chiefest A dieu friend Parker, if thou list, to know the Russes To Sigismundus booke repaire, who all the trueth can For he long earst in message went unto that savage Sent by the Pole, and true report in ech respect did To him I recommend my selfe, to ease my penne of And now at last do wish thee well, and bid farewell sport. well, tell: King, bring, paine,