Hollander, 1575. THE ENGLISH VOYAGES barrels Corels, & Lappes, 1183 barrels, besides 27 barrels have seen wise men poore in my time, & foolish men rich, and some men have more knowledge then they can utter by speech, which fault was once objected against me by a great learned man of this realme: but surely how weak soever my utterance is, my meaning is faithful and true, and I wish in my heart to your laudable company al the gaine that may be, or els I pray the Lord God to confound me as a false dissembler. It greeveth me to see how of late they have bin brought to great charges, beating the bush, as the old terme is, & other men taking the birds: this last yere having in Lappia 2 ships, as I am partly informed, they both brought not much above 300 barrels of traine oile, yet am I sure there was bought besides them of the Russes, s o ld to J a c ob t he Hollander, at two barrels for C o lt o ne Northerne dozen. And yet there is a greater inconvenience springing, which if it take a litle deeper roote it will be (I feare) too hard to be pulled up, which for love & good will (God is my witnes) I write of, wishing as to my deare friends that they should looke to it in time, if they meane to keepe the trade of Russia or Lappia. And thus love hath compelled me to write this advertisement, which I wish to be accepted in as good part, as I with good will have written it. The request of an honest merchant to a friend in the followeth. of his, to be advised and directed course of killing the Whale, as An. 1575. I pray you pleasure me in getting me perfect information of the matter hereunder specified. FOr the provision and furniture for a shippe of 200 tunnes, to catch the Whale fish in Russia, passing from England. How many men to furnish the ship. How many fishermen skilful to catch the Whale, & how many other officers and Coopers, What quantitie of victuals, and what kinde of victuals [I. 414.J How many boats, and what fashion, and how many men in each boate. What wages of such skilfull men and other officers, as we shall neede out of Biskay. How many harping irons, speares, cordes, axes, hatchets, knives, and other implements for the fishing, and what sort and greatnes of them. How many kettles, the greatnesse and maner of them, and what mettall, and whether they bee set on trivets or on furnaces for boiling of the traine oyle, and others. What quantitie of caske, and what sort of caske, and what number of hoopes and twigges, and how much thereof to be staved for the traine. for the men in all the ship for 4 moneths time. For the common mariners and officers to governe the ship, we shall not neede any out of Biskaie, but onely men skilful in the catching of the Whale, and ordering of the oile, and one Cooper skilfull to set up the staved caske. Also what other matters are requisite to be knowen, and done for the said voyage to catch the Whale, not here noted nor remembred. These requests were thus answered, which may serve as directions for all such as shall intend the same voyage, or the like for the Whale. A proportion for the setting forth of a ship of 200. tunne, for the killing of the Whale. THere must be 55 men who departing for Wardhouse in the moneth of April, must bee furnished with 4 kintals and a halfe of bread for every man. 250 hogsheds to put the bread in. 150 hogsheds of Cidar. 6 kintals of oile. 6 hogsheds of beefe. 10 quarters of salt. 150 pound of candles. 8 quarters of beanes and pease. Saltfish & herring, a quantitie convenient. 4 tunnes of wines. Half a quarter of mustard seed, and a querne. A grindstone. 800 empty shaken hogsheds. 350 bundles of hoopes, and 6 quintalines. 800 paire of heds for the hogsheds. 10 Estachas called roxes for harping irons. 10 pieces of Arporieras. 3 pieces of Baibens for the Javelines small. 2 tackles to turne the Whales. A halser of 27 fadom long to turne ye whales. 15 great Javelines. 18 small Javelins. 50 harping irons. 6 machicos to cut the Whale withall. 2 doozen of machetos to minch the Whale. 2 great hookes to turne the Whale. 3 paire of Can hookes. 6 hookes for staves. 3 dozen of staves for the harping irons. 6 pullies to turne the Whale with. 10 great baskets. 10 lampes of iron to carie light. 5 kettles of 150 li. the piece, and 6 ladles. 1000 of nailes for the pinnases. 500 of nailes of Carabelie for the houses, and the wharfe. 18 axes and hatchets to cleave wood. 12 pieces of lines, and 6 dozen of hookes. 2 beetles of Rosemarie. 4 dozen of oares for the pinnases. 6 lanternes. 500 of Tesia. Item, gunpouder & matches for harquebushes as shalbe needfull. Item, there must be caried from hence 5 pinnases, five men to strike with harping irons, two cutters of Whale, 5 coopers, & a purser or two. A note of certaine other necessarie things belongthe Whalefishing, received of master to ing W. Burrough. A sufficient number of pullies for tackle for the Whale. A dozen of great baskets. 4 furnaces to melt the Whale in. 6 ladles of copper. A thousand of nailes to mend the pinnases. 500 great nails of spikes to make their house 3 paire of bootes great and strong, for them that shall cut the Whale. 8 calve skins to make aprons or barbecans. T he deposition of M. William Burrough to certaine Interrogatories ministred unto him concerning the Narve, Kegor, &c. to what king or prince they doe appertaine and are subject, made the 23 of June, 1576. These articles seeme to have bene ministred upon the quarel between Alderman Bond the elder, and the Moscovie company, for his trade to the Narve without their consent. First, whether the villages or townes vulgarely called The first Inthe Narve, Kegor, Pechingo and Cola, and the portes terrogatorie. of the same townes, as well at the time of the grant of the letters of privilege by the Emperour to our mer- [I. 415.J chants, as also in the yeeres of our Lord, 1566, 1567, 1568, 1569, 1570, 1571, 1572, 1573, 1574, and 1575. respectively were (as presently they be) of the jurisdiction, and subject to the mightie prince the Emperour of