A letter of James Alday to the Worshipfull M. Michael Lock, Agent the Moscovie company, touching a trade to be established in Lappia, written 1575. in London for , - J , . Have in remembrance (worshipful Sir) Hemarvelleth the talke we had when I was with you, thec™P™yd° . \ not conferre as touching the trade in JLappia: And w^ ^m 0* certeinly I have something marveiled that Lappia. in all this time the right wor. your societie have not given order that some little conference (by you, or with some other) might have bin had with me touching those parts, considering they know (as I thinke) that I remained there one whole yere & more, by which meanes reason would that I should have learned something. But the cause why they have not desired to conferre with me (as I judge) resteth only in one of these 4 cases, that is to say, either they thinke themselves so throughly certified of that trade, as more neede not be spoken therof, or that they have no lust more to deale that waies, or that they hold mee so untrusty to them that they dare not open their minds, for feare or doubt, I should beare more affection to others then to them, & so discover their secrets: or els they think me of so simple understanding, that I am not worthy to be spoken with in these matters. To 1574. which 4 cases I answere as folioweth: First, if they think themselves so throughly certified as more need not to be spoken : certeinly I something marvel by whom it should be : for in ye winter past there lay but 5 English persons 5 English men there, viz. Christopher Colt, Roger Leche, Adam Tunstal ™"ter*a cooper, one lad, and I : for Henry Cocknedge was the *&** whole winter at Mosco. And of these persons, as touching Colt, I think him (if I may without offence speake my conscience) the most simple person that was there, Christopher (as touching the understanding of a marchant) although indeed he tooke upon him very much to his owne harme 197 C^ll^pk & others I doubt, for he used himselfe not like a marchant, neither shewed diligence like a worthy servant or factor, but lay stil in a den al ye whole winter, having wares lying upon his hand, which he would not imploy to any use : although sundry waies there were that he might have put his wares in ready money with gaine, & no great adventure, which money would have bin more acceptable to the poore Lappes & fishermen at the Good trade in spring, then any kind of wares : but his fond head did as he that had the talent in the GosPel> & y et he had ?*£'* counsel to the contrary which he disdained, so that men perceiving his captious head, left not only to counsell him, but also some, in as much as they might, kept him from knowledge of the trade that might be in that countrey, the winter time, which is better peradventure then most men think of. Wherfore if Colt have written or said any thing touching those countries, it is doubtful whether it toucheth the effect or not, considering he lay Henry Cock- still all the winter without trial of any matter. And for nedge honest, Henry Cocknedge assuredly speaking so much as I do but ignorant. & 1 1 1 1 r 1 T J perfectly know, I must needs say, that he is a very honest yong man, & right carefull of his busines, and in that respect worthy to be praised. But yet he being absent in the winter other then by hearesay he could not learne, so that his instructions may be something doubtful. And like as of the lad nothing can be learned, so am I sure that Tunstal the Cooper hath not yet bene spoken with, so that of those parts certaine knowledge [I. 413.] Roger Leche cannot as yet be learned, except by Roger Leche, of whom I confesse knowledge may be had, for indeed there expert of affMm is no English man living that hath like knowledge in those countries as he hath, nor that is able to do so much with the people as he may : he in the winter travailed one waies & other nere 300 miles : he of a litle made somthing, and learned not only the maners, conditions & customs of the people, but also he learned of al kind of commodities in those regions how they may be bought at the most advantage, that gaine may & i i r J t T - ii -r T e com' be made of them : So that I confesse, if he hath given intelligence to the right Wor. company, then have they no neede to speake with me or any other for to learne of those countries (except it be to heare mine opinion) which in truth I wil alwaies open unto them. But the effect of ye beneficial secrets of that countrey is to be inquired of him, & in mine opinion worthy to be learned, except, as in the second case, they list no more to deale that waies. To which I answere, that if they deale not that waies, & that with speede they seeke not to prevent others yt mean to deale there, although not English men, let them then not thinke long to have any profitable trade in Russia: for the lfth greater part of that benefit wil be wiped from them, or *a™e. \n0* 5 yeere to an end, as 1 will shew good reason, it 1 be tra^e of demanded the question. Therefore if they will maintaine Lappia, others the Russia trade with advantage, then ought they to ml prevent looke to this in time, and so may they keepe the Russia them' trade as it is, and likewise make a trade in Lappia more profitable then that, and therfore this is to bee considered, rather then to prohibite Englishmen from The trade of the trade of Vedagoba. For if they looke not to this, Vedagpba. and that in time, they may be likened (if it might be without offence spoken) to two dogs that strive for the bone whiles the third run away with it: and yet meane I not otherwise, but in such order, as not Englishmen only, but also Hollanders, Brabanders, & others may be justly and utterly put from the trade in Lappia, and the company to keepe the whole trades to themselves without interruption of any, to their great benefit, which I wish to them from the bottome of my heart, as ever I wished wealth to mine own person: And thereby hold me excused in the third case I write of. And for the fourth as touching my judgement, as I He can say s^ezv^at confesse it is not very deepe, so I thanke God I am entennto the i i • i i • not utterly without understanding (although I be poore) muc^ therfore peradventure holden out of reputation, yet 6 I God doth distribute his gifts as it pleaseth him. / 1 i I TI i N tnOUFfl not Hollander, 1575. THE ENGLISH VOYAGES barrels Corels, & Lappes, 1183 barrels, besides 27 barrels have seen wise men poore in my time, & foolish men rich, and some men have more knowledge then they can utter by speech, which fault was once objected against me by a great learned man of this realme: but surely how weak soever my utterance is, my meaning is faithful and true, and I wish in my heart to your laudable company al the gaine that may be, or els I pray the Lord God to confound me as a false dissembler. It greeveth me to see how of late they have bin brought to great charges, beating the bush, as the old terme is, & other men taking the birds: this last yere having in Lappia 2 ships, as I am partly informed, they both brought not much above 300 barrels of traine oile, yet am I sure there was bought besides them of the Russes, s o ld to J a c ob t he Hollander, at two barrels for C o lt o ne Northerne dozen. And yet there is a greater inconvenience springing, which if it take a litle deeper roote it will be (I feare) too hard to be pulled up, which for love & good will (God is my witnes) I write of, wishing as to my deare friends that they should looke to it in time, if they meane to keepe the trade of Russia or Lappia. And thus love hath compelled me to write this advertisement, which I wish to be accepted in as good part, as I with good will have written it. The request of an honest merchant to a friend in the followeth. of his, to be advised and directed course of killing the Whale, as An. 1575. I pray you pleasure me in getting me perfect information of the matter hereunder specified. FOr the provision and furniture for a shippe of 200 tunnes, to catch the Whale fish in Russia, passing from England. How many men to furnish the ship. How many fishermen skilful to catch the Whale, & how many other officers and Coopers,