performe it ? The danger that may grow in our trade to Russia by way of S. Nicholas, through the displeasure that the Emperour may conceive by our trade with the Sweden to Narve is also to be considered. A remembrance of advise given to the merchants, 1578. touching a voyage for Cola abovesaid. WHereas you require my counsell after what order the voyage for Cola is to be set forth, I answere that I know no better way then hath bene heretofore used, which is after this maner. First of all we have hired the ship by the great, giving so much for the wearing of the tackle and the hull of the shippe, as the ship may be in bignesse : as if shee bee about the burden of an hundred tunnes, we pay fourescore pound, and so after that rate : and thereunto we doe victual the ship our selves, and doe ship all our men our selves, shipping no more men, nor giving them more wages then we should doe if they went of a merchants voyage, for it hath bene a great helpe to our voiage hitherto, to have our men to fish with one boate, & costing us no more charges then it should do, if our men should lie & doe nothing saving the charges of salt, & of lines, which is treble paid for againe. For this last yere past our men killed with one boat betwixt 9. or 10. thousand fish, which yeelded to us in money with the oile that came of it, about 15. or 16. score pounds, which is a great helpe to a voyage. And besides al this, our ship did take in so much oile and other commodities as we bestowed 100. whole clothes in. But because, as I doe suppose, it is not the use of London to take ships to fraight after that order before prescribed, neither I think that the mariners wil take such paines as our men will : Therefore my counsell is, if you thinke good, to freight some ship of Hul or Newcastle, for I am sure that you may have them there better cheap to freight, then here at London. Besides al this, one may have such their merchants. And men as wil take paines for furthermore when it shal please God that the ship shal returne to come to discharge at Hull, which will be the most for your profit for the sales of all such like commoditie as comes from that place, as for fish, oyle, and Salmon chiefly, hee that will seeke a better market for the sales then at Hull, he must seeke it out of England, for the like is not in England. This is the best way that I can devise, and most for your profite, [I. 417.] and if you will, I will also set you downe all the commodities that are necessarie for such a voyage, and which way also that the Hollanders may within two or three yeeres be forced to leave off the trade of Cola which may easily be done. For if my abilitie were to my will, I would use the matter so that they should either leave off the trade, or els cary light ships with them home againe. Sak Offish. A dedicatorie Epistle unto the Queenes most excellent Majestie, written by Master William Burrough late Comptroller of her Highnesse navie, and annexed unto his exact and notable mappe of Russia, briefly containing travailes, (amongst other matters) his great observations, and experiments both by sea and land, especially in those Northeastern parts. To the most high and renowmed Princesse ELIZABETH by the grace of God Queene of England, France and Ireland, &c. Y minde earnestly bent to the knowledge of navigation and Hydrographie from my youth (most excellent my dread Soveraigne) hath eftsoones beene moved by diligent studie to search out the chiefest points to them belonging : and not therewith sufficed hath also sought by experience in divers discoveries and other voyages I was in the first and travailes to practise the same. in 209 