The 24 day we came thwart of the Nase, about 8 in the morning. The 25 day being the Nativity of Christ, we came to an anker betweene Oldhaven, and Tilberie hope. The same day we turned as high as Porshet. The 26 day we turned as high as Ratcliffe, and praised God for our safe returne. And thus I ende, 1580. The William with Charles Jackman arrived at a port in Norway betweene Tronden and Rostock in October 1580. and there did winter: And from thence departed againe in Februarie following, and went in company of a ship of the King of Denmarke toward Island: and since that time he was never heard of. Instructions made by the company of English merchants for discovery of new trades, unto Richard Gibs, William Biggat, John Backhouse, William Freeman, John Haly, and James Woodcock, &c. masters of the 9 ships, and one barke that we had freighted for a voiage with them to be made (by the grace of God) from hence to S. Nicholas in Russia, and backe againe : which ships being now in the river of Thames are presently ready to depart upon the said voyage, with the next apt winds that may serve thereunto: and with this Fleet afterwards was joined M. Christopher Carlisle with the Tyger. The 1 of June 1582. Orasmuch as the number of shippes which we purpose in this Fleete to send together for Saint Nicholas in Russia is greater then at any time heretofore wee have sent thither, as also for that some speeches are given out that you shall be met withall by such as with force & violence will assault you as enemies, to the end that good [I. 454.J order may be established among you for keeping together in company, and uniting your forces, as well for the better direction to be had in your navigation, as also for your more safety and strength against the enemie, we have thought good to appoint among you an Admirall and Viceadmirall, and that all of you and every one particularly shall be bound in the summe of one hundred pounds to keepe company together. 2 Because the Salomon the biggest ship, best appointed, and of greatest force to defend or offend the enemie, we doe therefore appoint that ship Admirall, which shall weare the flag in the maine top. is 3 The Thomas Allen being a good ship and well appointed, and for that the master of her is the ancientest master of the Fleete that hath taken charge that way, we doe appoint the same ship to be Viceadmirall, and to weare the flag in the foretop. 4 And for that the master of the Prudence is of great experience, and knowledge in that voyage, we doe appoint that he with the master of the Admirall and Viceadmirall shall conferre, consult and agree upon the courses and directions that shall be used in this voyage, and it shall be lawfull unto the master of the Admiral, with the consent of M. Gibs, and M. Biggat, or one of them to make his courses and directions from time to time during the whole voyage, and all the fleete are to follow and observe the same without straying or breaking of company at any time upon the penalty before specified. 5 The appointing of the ships for Admiral and Viceadmiral, and those men to consult and agree upon the courses and directions of the voyage, as aforesaid, hath bene done by the consents and with the liking of you all, and therefore we doubt not but that you will all carefully and willingly observe the premisses. 6 Item, we have thought good to put you in mind, that at such times as you may conveniently from time to time, you do assemble and meete together, to consider, consult, and determine upon such articles as you shall think necessary to be propounded touching your best safety and defence against all forces that may be offered you in this voyage, as well outwards bound, and while you shall remaine in the roade and bay of S. Nicholas, as also homewardes bound, and that which you shall agree upon, or that which most of you shal consent unto, cause it to be set down in writing for record, which may serve for an acte amongst your selves to binde you all to observe the same. 7 We have appointed James Woodcock in the smal barke to attend upon you, & to receive his directions from you. You are therfore to remember well what conference and talke hath bene had with you here before your going touching ye sayd barke, to what purposes she may best serve, and the maner how to imploy her, and thereupon to give your order and direction unto him, as the time and place shall require. 8 Item, if you shall understand as you are outwards bound, that the enemie is gone before you to S. Nicholas, remember what advise hath bene given you for your stay at Berozova Ustia, till you have by espials viewed and Berozova understood the forces, and the maner of their abode at U t that place. 9 And if in the sea either outwards or homewards, or in the time of your abode at anker at Saint Nicholas, you shall be assaulted by force of any, as enemie whatsoever, you are to defend your selves with such forces as you may or can : trust not too farre, neither give place to inconvenience. 10 You will not forget what conference we had touching your passing outwards bound by Wardhouse, to view and understand what you can at that place, and to shew your selves, to see if there be any there that have a mind to speake with you, for that we thinke it better then, & thereabout, then afterwards or els where. 11 While you shall remaine in the road at S. Nicholas, be circumspect and carefull to have your ships in readinesse, and in good order alwaies, and upon all suddens. 3°5 in [I. 455.] The greatest danger unto you in that place will be while you shall shift your ships : therefore you are to consider of it, but the fittest time for you to doe the same, will bee when the winde is Southerly off the shore, or calme, and at such time you may the better doe it without danger. You must take such order among you, that your companies may be alwaies willing and ready to helpe one the other, and appoint among your selves such ships to shift first, and such after, in such sort and forme as you shall thinke best and most convenient. And while they shall be in discharging, shifting, and lading, let the rest of your companies which have not then to doe in lading or discharging, helpe those ships that shall have labour to doe, as well for carying the barkes from ships to the shoare, or from shore to the shippe with your boates, as also for any other helpe that they shall have neede of. 12 Remember what hath bene said unto you touching the moring of your ships, &c. for using advantage against the enemie, if you shall be assaulted in that place. 13 See that you serve God, abolish swearing and gaming, be carefull of fire and candles, &c. 14 You are to consult and agree among your selves upon signes, tokens, and good orders for the better keeping of company together, and also the maner how and by what meanes, rescue, ayde, or helpe may be given by one to the other in fight, if you happen to come to it. Thus we pray God to send you a prosperous voyage and safe returne. The opinion of Master William Burrough sent to a friend, requiring his judgement for the fittest time of the departure of our ships towards S. Nicholas in Russia. WHereas you request me to perswade the company not to send their shippes from hence before the fine of May, I do not thinke the same so good a course for them to observe : for you know that the sooner wee