to be observed in the purposed voyage for discovery of Cathay Eastwards, by Arthur Pet, and Charles Jackman : given by M. William Burrough. 1580. WEIen you come to Orfordnesse, if the winde doe serve you to goe a seabord the sands, doe you set off from thence, and note the time diligently of your being against the saide Nesse, turning then your glasse, whereby you intende to keepe your continuall watch, and apoint such course as you shal thinke good, according as the wind serveth you : and from that time forwards continually (if your ship be lose, under saile, a hull or trie) do you at the end of every 4. glasses at the least (except calme) sound with your dipsin lead, and note diligently what depth you finde, and also the ground. But if it happen by swiftnes of the shippes way, or otherwise, that you cannot get ground, yet note what depth you did prove, and could finde no ground (this note is to be observed all your voyage, as well outwards as homewards.) But when you come upon any coast, or doe finde any sholde banke in the sea, you are then to use your leade oftener, as you shal thinke it requisite, noting diligently the order of your depth, and the [I. 436-J deeping and sholding. And so likewise doe you note the depthes into harboroughs, rivers, &c. And in keeping your dead reckoning, it is very How to not{ necessary that you doe note at the ende of every foure d^wnef^ m 1 J 1 1 i i- 1 1 /1 1 JornaU of the glasses, what way the shippe hath made (by your best voyage, Ms proofes to be used) and howe her way hath bene through dead reckonthe water, considering withall for the sagge of the sea, ™g> and othet % to leewards, accordingly as you shall finde it growen : obse™ationsand also to note the depth, and what things worth the noting happened in that time, with also the winde upon what point you finde it then, and of what force or strength it is, and what sailes you beare. But if you should omit to note those things at the end of every foure glasses, I would not have you to let it slip any longer time, then to note it diligently at the end of every watch, or eight glasses at the farthest. Doe you diligently observe the latitude as often, and in as many places as you may possible, and also the variation of the Compasse (especially when you may bee at shoare upon any land) noting the same observations truely, and the place and places where, and the time and times when you do the same. When you come to have sight of any coast or land whatsoever, doe you presently set the same with your sailing Compasse, howe it beares off you, noting your judgement how farre you thinke it from you, drawing also the forme of it in your booke, howe it appeares unto you, noting diligently how the highest or notablest part thereof beareth off you, and the extreames also in \ -i J l e ft y ou have A ^ g Q & c> A f t e r w a r ds w h en / ^ ^1 For noting the sight of the same land at both ends, distinguishing them shapeandview 1 of the land at 1 first discovery, s a i l ed i. 2. 3. or 4. glasses (at t he most) noting diligently what way your barke hath made, and upon what point Z$c of the Compasse, do you againe set that first land seene, or the parts thereof, that you first observed, if you can well perceive or discerne them, and likewise such other notable points or signes, upon the land that you may then see, and could not perceive at the first time, distinguishing it also by letters from the other, and drawing in your booke the shape of the same land, as it appeareth unto you, and so the third time, &c. j -r And also in passing alongst by any and every coast, doe you drawe the maner of biting in of every Bay, and entrance of every harborow or rivers mouth, with the lying out of every point, or headland, (unto the which you may give apt names at your pleasure) and make some marke in drawing the forme and border of the same, where the high cliffs are, and where lowe lande is, whether sande, hils, or woods, or whatsoever, not omitting to note any thing that may be sensible If you carefully with great heede and dilipurpose. gence, note the observations in your booke, as aforesaid, and afterwards make demonstration thereof in your plat, you shall thereby perceive howe farre the land you first sawe, or the parts thereof observed, was then from you, and consequently of all the rest : and also how farre the one part was from the other, and upon what course or point of the Compasse the one lieth from the other. And when you come upon any coast where you find floods and ebs, doe you diligently note the time of the highest and lowest water in every place, and the slake or still water of full sea, and lowe water, and also which way the flood doeth runne, how the tides doe set, how For observing much water it hieth, and what force the tide hath to drive a ship in one houre, or in the whole tide, as neere as you can judge it, and what difference in time you finde betwene the running of the flood, and the ebbe. And if you finde upon any coast the currant to runne alwayes one way, doe you also note the same duely, how it setteth in every place, and observe what force it hath to drive a ship in one houre, &c. °{Jf^nd - 1 1 . N Item, as often and when as you may conveniently come upon any land, to make observation for the latitude and variation, &c. doe you also (if you may) with your instrument, for trying of distances, observe the To take the platforme of the place, and of as many things (worth Plfform5°f f, places within me noting; as you may then conveniently see from compasse of time to time. These orders if you diligently observe, view upon you may thereby perfectly set downe in the plats, that landI have given you your whole travell, and description of your discovery, which is a thing that will be chiefly expected at your hands. But withall you may not forget to note as much as you can learne, understand or perceive of the maner of the soile, or fruitfulnesse of every place and countrey you shall come in, and of the maner, shape, attire and disposition of the people, and of the commodities they have, and what they most 261 covet and desire of the commodities you cary with you. It behoveth you to give trifling things unto such people as you shall happen to see, and to offer them all courtesie and friendship you may or can, to winne their love and favour towardes you, not doing or offering them any wrong or hurt. And though you should be offered wrong at their handes, yet not to revenge the same lightly, but by all meanes possible seeke to winne them, yet alwayes dealing wisely and with such circumspection that you keepe your selves out of their dangers. [I. 437.] Thus I beseech God Almightie to blesse you, and prosper your voyage with good and happie successe, and send you safely to returne home againe, to the great joy and rejoycing of the adventurers with you, and all your friends, and our whole countrey, Amen. Certaine briefe advises given by Master Dee, to Arthur Pet, and Charles Jackman, to bee their Northeasterne discoverie, observed Ann o 1580. in IF we recken from Wardhouse to Colgoieve Island 400. miles for almost 20. degrees difference onely of longitude very neere East and West, and about the latitude of 70. degrees and two thirde parts : From Colgoieve to Vaigats 200. miles for 10. degrees difference onely in longitude, at 70. degrees of latitude also : From Vaigats to the promontorie Tabin 60. degrees difference of longitude (the whole course, or shortest distance being East and West) in the latitude likewise of 70. degrees, maketh 1200. miles : then is summa totalis from Wardhouse to Tabin 600. leagues, or 1800. English miles. Therefore allowing in a discovery voiage for one day with another but 50. English miles, it is evident that from Wardhouse to Tabin, the course may bee sailed easily in sixe and thirtie dayes: but by Gods helpe it may be finished in much shorter time, both by helpe