To try the sale, for that it is a naturall commoditie A pot of cast iron. of this Realme. All maner of edge tooles. To be sold there or to the lesse civil people by the way where you shall touch. What I would have you there to remember. To note specially what excellent dying they use in these regions, and therefore to note their garments and ornaments of houses : and to see their Die houses and the Materials & Simples that they use about the same, and to bring musters and shewes of the colours and of the materials, for that it may serve this clothing realme to great purpose. To take with you for your owne use. All maner of engines to take fish and foule. To take with you those things that be in perfection of goodnesse. For as the goodnesse now at the first may make your commodities in credite in time to come : so false and Sophisticate commodities shall drawe you and all your commodities into contempt and ill opinion. A letter of Gerardus Mercator, written the Richard Hakluyt of Oxford, intended discoverie of the Northeast passage, An. 1580. touching to M. p. 443-J Iterae tuae (vir humanissime) 19. Junii demhm mihi redditae fuerunt : vehementer dolui visis illis tantam, non modo temporis, sed mult6 magis tempestivae instructionis jacturam factam esse. Optassem Arthurum Pet de quibusdam non levibus ante suum discessum praemonitum fuisse. Expeditissima san& per Orientem in Cathaium est navigatio : & saepe miratus sum, earn fceliciter inchoatam, post Insulam Faigats & Novam Zemblam. Tabinpromonterium ingens. Quo propius ad polum acceditur, eb directorium Nauticum magis a Septentrione deviat. desertam fuisse, velis in Occidentem translatis, postquam plus quam dimidium itineris vestri jam notum haberent. Nam post Insulam Vaigats, & Nova Zembla continuo ingens sequitur Sinus, quern ab ortu Tabin immane promontorium complectitur. In hunc medium maxima illabuntur flumina, quae universam Regionem Sericam perluentia, utque existimo, in intima continentis usque magnis navigiis pervia, facillimam rationem exhibent quaslibet merces ex Cataio, Mangi, Mien, caeterisque circum- fusis regnis contrahendi, atque in Angliam deportandi. Caeterum cum non temere earn navigationem intermissam crederem, opinabar ab Imperatore Russorum & Moscoviae obstaculum aliquod interjectum fuisse. Quod si vero cum illius gratia ulterior iliac navigatio detur, suaderem profecto non primum Tabin promontorium quaerere, atque explorare, sed Sinum hunc atque flumina, in iisque portum aliquem commodissimum, stationemque Anglicis Mercatoribus deligere, ex quo deinceps majore opportunitate, minoribusque periculis Tabin promontorium, & totius Cathai circumnavigatio indagari posset. Esse autem ingens in Septentrionem excurrens promontorium Tabin, non ex Plinio tantum, verum & aliis scriptoribus, & tabulis aliquot (licet rudius depictis) certum habeo. Polum etiam Magnetis haud longe ultra Tabin situm esse, certis Magnetis observationibus didici : circa quern & Tabin plurimos esse scopulos, difficilemque & pericutamen ad losam navigationem existimo : difficiliorem Cathaium accessum fore opinor, ea qua nunc via in Occidentem tentatur. Propinquior enim fiet haec navigatio polo Magnetis, quam altera, ad quern propius accedere non puto tutum esse. Quia vero Magnes alium quam Mundi polum habet, quo ex omni parte respicit : quo propius ad eum acceditur, eo directorium illud Nauticum magnetis virtute imbutum, magis a Septentrione deviat, nunc in Occidentem, nunc in Orientem, prout quis vel orientalior, vel occidentalior est illo Meridiano, qui per utrumque polum Magnetis, & Mundi ducitur. Mirabilis est haec varietas, & quae navigantem plurimum fallere potest, nisi hanc Magnetis inconstantiam norit, & ad poli elevationem per instrumenta subinde respiciat. In hac re si non sit instructus D. Arthurus, aut ea sit dexteritate, ut deprehenso errore eum invenire & castigare possit, timeo ne devias faciat ambages, tempus ilium fallat, & semiperacto negotio, a gelu praeoccupetur : Aiunt enim Sinum ilium fortius quotannis congelari. Quod si contingat : hoc quod consultius mihi visum fuit, proximum illi erit refugium, ut in eo sinu, iisque fluminibus quae dixi, portum quaerat, & per Legatum aliquem, cum magno Cham, nomine Serenissimae Reginae notitiam, amicitiamque contrahat: quam opinor Maximo orbis Imperatori gratam, imo gratissimam fore propter remotissima commercia. Opinor ab ostiis Bautisi & Oechardi Bautisus & fluminum maximorum, usque ad Cambalu Remam ^ec^ar^us . ^ /_ -,, maxima summam Chami, non ultra 300. milliaria Germanica esse, £umina -in & iter sumendum per Ezinam urbem regni Tangut, quae hum Sinum 100. tantum milliariis Germanicis ab ostiis distare videtur, illabuntur. Sc paret Magno Cham. - r> . ir • • • ^ 1 j_ o- 11 ° J_- T • quibus certior Valde optarem cognoscere, quam alte communiter Postulata exurgat aestus maris in eo Moscoviae portu, quern vestri Mercatons,de pro statione habent, & in alns versus onentem locis %ri cup-u usque ad Tabin. Item, an mare in hoc districtu semper in unam partem, videlicet Orientem, aut Occidentem fluat, an vero pro ratione aestuum fluat, & refluat, in medio inquam canali, hoc est, an ibi sex horis in occasum, & iterum sex in ortum fluat, an vero semper in eandem partem : alias enim speculationes non parum utiles hinc dependent. Idem optarem a D. Frobiscero in occidentem observari. Quod ad Sinum Merosro, & Canadam, ac Novam Franciam attinet, ea in meis tabulis desumpta sunt ex quadam Tabula marina, quae a quodam sacerdote ex earum ditionum Naucleri peritissimi Galli descriptione excerpta fuit, & illustrissimo Principi Georgio ab Austria episcopo Leodiensi oblata. Non dubito, quin quantum ad littorum situm attinet & poli elevationem, ad veritatem ea quam proxime accedant. Habebat enim ea tabula latitudinis per medium sui praeter scalam graduum THE ENGLISH VOYAGES extensam, aliam praeterea particularem Novae Franciae littoribus adjunctam, qua depravatae latitudines, occasione erroris Magnetis ibi commissae, castigarentur. Jacobi Cnoyen Buscoducensis itinerarium per omnem Asiam, Affiricam, & Septentrionem, olim mihi Amicus Antverpiae ab alio mutuo acceptum communicavit, eo usus sum, & reddidi : post multos annos eundem ab amico repetii, & reminisci ille non potuit a quo accepisset. Gulielmi Tripolitani & Joannis de piano Carpini scripta non vidi, tantum excerpta ex illis quaedam in aliis scriptis libris inveni. Abilfadae Epitome gaudeo verti, utinam cito habeamus. Haec (mi Domine) tuis respondenda putavi: si quid est aliud quod a me desideres, libentissime tibi communicabo : hoc vicissim amanter a tua humanitate petens, ut quae ex utriusque navigationis cursu observata nancisci poteris, mihi communices, penes me pro tuo arbitrio manebunt omnia, & quaecunque inde collegero, fideliter ad te perscribam, si forte ad pulcherrimum, utilissimumque orbi Christiano hoc navigationis institutum aliquid opis & consilii adferre possint. Bene vale, vir doctissime. Duisburgi in Clivia, 28. Julii 1580. Redeunte Arthuro, quaeso discas ab illo quae optavi, & Dulce mare inter Novam _ 77 CJ num alicubi in suo itinere, dulce mare, aut parum salsum o • 7,emblam 15 Tabin suspi- i n v e n e r i t: suspicor enim mare inter Nova Zembla, & catur. Tabin dulce esse. XT t_i rz •. • • • T. H. paratissimus quantus quantus sum, Gerardus Mercator. The same in English. Sir, I received your letters the 19. of June : it grieved me much that upon the sight of them the time being spent, I could not give any convenient instructions : I wish Arthur Pet had bene informed before his departure of some speciall points. The voyage to Cathaio by the East, is doutlesse very easie and short, and I have oftentimes marveiled, that being so happily begun, it hath bene left of, and the course changed into the West, after that - i j • 1 • 1 • 1 TI 1 • wnereinto T Into the mighty rivers more then halfe of your voiage was discovered- For J great gulfe beyond the Island of Vaigats and Nova Zembla, there is b^ond foloweth presently a great Baie, which on the left side is ?&a?\ • inclosed with the mightie promontone Tabin. mids hereof there fall great rivers, which passing through descend. the whole countrey of Serica, and being as I thinke navigable with great vessels into ye heart of the continent, may be an easie means whereby to traffique for all maner of merchandize, and transport them out of Cathaio, thereabouts into Mangi, Mien, and other kingdoms England. But considering with my selfe that that navigation was not intermitted, but upon great occasion, I thought that the Emperor of Russia and Moscovie had If so be that with his hindered the proceeding thereof. grace and favour a further navigation may be made, I would counsell them certainly not first to seeke out the promontorie Tabin, but to search this baie and rivers The best aforesayd, and in them to picke and chuse out some c°u[se *° convenient port and narborough merchants, from whence afterward with more opportunitie and lesse perill, the promontorie Tabin and all the coast of Cathaio may bee discovered. And that there is such a huge promontorie called Tabin, I am certainly perswaded not onely out of Plinie, but also other writers, and some Maps (though somewhat rudely drawen :) and that the pole of the Loadstone is not farre beyond Tabin, I have learned by the certaine observations of the Loadstone: about which pole and Tabin I thinke there are very many rockes, and very hard and dangerous sailing : and yet a more hard and difficile passage I thinke it to bee this way which is now attempted by the West, for it is neerer to the pole of the Loadstone, to the which I thinke it not safe to approch. And because the Loadstone hath another pole then that of the world, to the which from all parts it hath a respect, the neerer you come unto it, the more the needle of the Compasse doeth varie from the North, sometimes to the West, and sometimes to the East, according as a man is to the Eastward or to the 279 the JtLnghsn discoveries. tor taken ir in ll -I T ^ I I Westward of that Meridian, that passeth by both the poles of the Magnes and the World. This is a strange alteration and very apt to deceive the Sailer, unlesse hee know the unconstancie and variation of the Compasse, and take the elevation of the pole If master Arthur be somtimes with his instruments. not well provided in this behalfe, or of such dexteritie, that perceiving the errour he be not able to correct the same, I feare least in wandering up and downe he lose his time, and be overtaken with the ice in the midst of the enterprise. For that gulfe, as they say, is frozen every yere very hard. Which if it be so, the best counsel I could give for their best safetie, were to seeke some harborough in that baie, and those rivers whereof I have spoken, and by some Ambassador to make friendship and acquaintance with the great Can, in name of the Queenes majestie, which I beleeve will be gratefull to the mightiest Emperour in the world, yea most excellent for the length of the traffique, and great distance of , r the places. I thinke from the mouthes of the mighty . The mouthes ofBautisus r i v e rs Bautisus and Oechardus to Cambalu the chiefest . andOechardus 300. leagues s e at °* " ie P n n ce the Can, there are not past 300. from Cam- Germane miles, and to passe by Ezina a citie of the kingdom of Tangut, which seemeth to be but 100. bah. Germane miles from the mouthes of the sayd rivers, and is subject to the great Can. ~ . I would gladly know how high the sea doeth flowe commonly in the port of Moscovia where your men do harborow, and in other Easterly places unto Tabin. And also whether the sea in this streight do flow alwaies one way to the East or to the West, or whether it do ebbe and flow according to the maner of the tides in the 445-J of t he chanel, that is to say, whether it flow there ^bsZvations of ^^ the tides depend great the East, for hereupon depend other speculations of speculations, s^ xe houres into the West, and as may backe againe to I would wish M. Frobisher importance. to observe the same Westwards. Concerning the gulfe of Merosro and Canada, and new France which are in my mappes, they were taken out of a certaine sea card drawn by a certaine priest out of the description of a Frenchman, a Pilot very skilfull in those partes, and presented to the worthy prince George of Austria, bishop of Liege: for the trending of the coast, and the elevation of the pole, I doubt not but they are very neere the trueth: For the Charte had, beside a scale of degrees of latitude passing through the middest of it, another particularly annexed to the coast of New France, wherewith the errour of the latitudes committed by reason of the variation of the compasse might be corrected. The historie of the voyage of Jacobus Cnoyen Buschoducensis throughout al Asia, Affirica, and the North, was lent me in time past by a friend of mine at Antwerpe. After I had used it, I restored it againe: after many yeeres I required it againe of my friend, but hee had forgotten of whom hee had borrowed it. The writings of Gulielmus Tripolitanus, and Joannes de Piano Carpini I never saw: onely I found certaine pieces of them in other written hand bookes. I am glad the Epitomie of Abilfada is translated, I would we might have it shortly. Thus much Sir I thought good to answere your letters : if there bee any thing els that you would require of me, I will most willingly communicate it with you, craving this likewise of your curtesie, that whatsoever observations of both these voyages shall come to your hands, you would impart them to me, they shall all remaine with mee according to your discretion and pleasure, and whatsoever I gather of them, I will faithfully signifie unto you by letters, if happily they may yeeld any helpe or light unto this most excellent enterprise of navigation, and most profitable to our Christian common wealth. Fare you well most learned friend. At Duisburg in Cliveland, 28. of Julie, the yeere, 1580. At Arthur his returne I pray you learne of him the things I have requested, and whether any where in his voiage, he found the sea fresh, or not very salt: for I suppose the Sea betweene Nova Zembla and Tabin to be fresh. Yours wholly to my power to be commanded, Gerardus Mercator. May. June. Kene an Island of Norway. The discoverie made by M. Arthur Pet, and M. Charles Jackman, of the Northeast parts, beyond the Island of Vaigatz, with two Barkes : the George, the other the one called the the yeere 1580. Written by in William, Hugh Smith. in Pon Munday the 30. of May, we departed the afternoone, the from Harwich winde being at South, and to the Eastward. The ebbe being spent we could not double the pole, and therefore were constrained to put in againe untill the next day in the morning, being the last of May: which day wee wayed our ankers about 3. a clocke in the morning, the wind being West southwest. The same day we passed Orfordnesse at an East Sunne, and Stamford at a West Sunne, and Yarmouth at a West northwest sunne, and so to Winterton, where we did anker al night: it was then calme, and the flood was come. The next day being the first of June, we set saile at 3. a clocke in the morning, and set our course North, the wind at the Southwest, and at Southsouthwest. The 10. day about one of the clocke in the afternoone, wee put into Norway to a place where one of the headlands of the sound is called Bottel: the other headland is called Moile. There is also an Island called Kene. Heere I did find the pole to be elevated 62. deg. it doeth flowe there South, and it hieth 7. or 8. foote, not above. The 11. day in the morning the winde came to the South and to the Southeast: the same day at sixe in