matters of controversie, either concerning merchandize or injuries, then they are to be judged by our treasurers and Secretarie of the Ambassadors office to do justice between both parties, & to seek out the trueth of matters in al things, and whatsoever cannot be found out by the Law, shalbe tried by othe and lots : whose lot soever is taken foorth, him to have right. that injuries or otherwise, And in what place of all our kingdom, in what citie soever they or their people shall bee, and that there happen any matter of controversie, either concerning merchandise, they have occasion to set upon any man by lawe, or that any seeke upon them, concerning what matter soever in all our kingdom and cities, then our lieutenants, captains, and our officers shall give them Justice, and shall minister [I. 473.] all true justice betweene them, seeking out the trueth : and what cannot be truly sought by law, shalbe sought out by othe and lot : whose lot soever is taken out, him to have right accordingly as before, and the Judges or Justices shall take of them no kind of dutie, for matters of law no where throughout all our realmes. This letter is given in our princely palace within the citie of Mosco, in the yeere from the foundation of the world, seven thousand fourescore and fifteene in the moneth of February. The Ambassage of M. Giles Fletcher, Doctor of the Civil Law, sent from her Majestie to Theodor the Emperor of Russia, Anno 1588. N the yeere 1588. was sent Ambassador from her highnesse into the countrey of Russia, Giles Fletcher Doctor of the Civil Lawe, as well to treat with the new Emperor Pheodor Ivanowich, about league and amitie, in like maner as was before with his father Ivan Vasilowich, as also for the reestablishing and reducing into order 353 in the decaied trade of our Englishmen there. Who notwithstanding at his first arrivall at the Mosco, found some parts of hard entertainment, by meanes of certaine rumors concerning the late navall victory which was there reported to have fallen on the Spanish side, as also for some dislike conceived against the privileged trade of our English merchants. Yet in the end he obtained of the Emperour many good & equall conditions, and was curteously and honourably dismissed by him. The principall points which he entreated of, and were granted unto him by the said Emperor, were these : 1 A continuation of league and amitie betweene her Highnesse and the sayd Emperour Pheodor Ivanowich, in like maner as was before with his father Ivan Vasilowich. 2 A confirmation and reestablishment of the former privileges of the Companie of our English merchants, which were infringed and annulled in the principal points, with divers necessary additions to the same, for the better ordering of their trade in those countreys hereafter, viz. That the state of the privilege granted before in the names of some private and particular men, be altered in that point, and the same granted by the name and stile of their incorporation, viz. To the felowship of English merchants for the discoverie of new trades. 3 That upon every surmise and light quarel, the said privilege be not revoked and annulled, as before time it hath bene. 4 That justice shall be administred to the said Companie and their Agent without delay, upon such as shal offer them any despite or injurie, or shal exact or impose upon them any paiment, taxation or imposition whatsoever, contrary to the freedome of the said grant. 5 That the goods & commodities of the said Companie, be not forcibly taken as before time they had bene by the Emperors officers or people of authoritie, either for the use of the said Emperor or of his officers. But in case they have need of the said commodities, the same to be taken at reasonable prices, and for ready money. 6 That the said Companie be not charged hereafter with the answering of such debts as are made by any Englishman not being of the societie. 7 That the Emperors authorized people shall not hereafter repute any Englishman resiant in that countrey, to be any factor, servant, or dealer in the said Companies affaires, but such as the Agent shall inregister by name, within the offices where custome is entered in all such places of the sayd Companie have residences to traffike. land where the 8 That the names of such as shall so be inregistred be no longer continued in record, nor themselves reputed as factors or dealers for the said Companie, then the Agent shall thinke good. But in case the said Agent in his discretion shall thinke meet to strike out of the Register any name of such as have bene imploied in the Companies service, the said person to be held as private, & whose acte in bargaining or otherwise, shall not charge the said Companie. 9 That if any English man within the countrey of Russia be suspected for any notorious crime, as felony, treason, &c. the same be not straightwaies set upon the*Pudkey, nor otherwise tormented, till such time * It is rosting as he shall be convicted by plaine and evident proofes : t0 death' which being done, the whole proceeding to be sent over to the Queene of England. 10 That the said privilege with the additions, shall be published in all townes and partes of the Emperors dominions, where the said Companie have traffike. 11 That the said Companie shall be permitted to use a sole trade through the Emperours countries, by the river Volga into Media, Persia, Bogharia, and the other the East countries. 12 Whereas there was claimed of the said Companie T HE ENGLISH VOYAGES their factors the summe of 23553. markes of debt, made by certaine for the said company, for paiment of whereof, their whole stocke was in danger of arrest, by publike authoritie : Further also 2140. rubbles for custome and houserent, he obtained a rebatement of eighteene thousand, one hundred fiftie and three marks of the sayd debt. The said Ambassador M. Giles Fletcher, as I understand, hath drawen a booke intituled, Of the Russe Common wealth, containing : First, a Cosmographicall description of the countrey, which hath these chapters. length and bredth of Russia, with the names of the shires. 1 Of the countrey of the 2 Of the soile and climate. 3 Of the native commodities of the countrey. Secondly, a description of their policie contained in these Chapters, viz. 1 Of the constitution or state of the Russe Common wealth. shires. therein. 2 Of their Parliaments, and maner of holding them. 3 Of the Russe Nobilitie and meanes whereby it is kept in an under, proportion agreeable to that state. their provinces or the maner of governing 4 Of 5 Of the Emperours privie counsell. 6 Of the Emperors customs & their revenues, with the practises for the increase of them. 7 Of the Russe communaltie and their condition. 8 Of their publike justice and maner of proceeding 9 Of the Emperors forces for his warres, with the chiefe officers, and their salarie or pay. 10 Of their maner of mustering, armour, and provision for victuall. martiall discipline. 11 Of their ordering, marching, charging, and their 12 Of their colonies and policie in maintaining their purchases by conquest. doe in warre and peace. 13 Of their borderers with whom they have most to 14 Of their church offices and degrees. 15 Of their liturgie or forme of Church service. 16 Of their maner of administring the Sacraments. 17 Of the doctrine of the Russe church. 18 Of the maner of solemnizing their manages. 19 Of the other ceremonies of the Russe church. Thirdly, the Oeconomie or private behaviour of the Russe containing these chapters. 1 Of the Emperors houshold officers, and order of 2 Of the private behaviour and maner of the Russe his house. people. T he description of the countrey of Russia, with the bredth, length, and names of the Shires. He countrey of Russia was somtimes called Sarmatia. It changed the name (as some do suppose) for that it was parted into divers smal, and yet absolute governments, not depending, nor being subject the one to the other. For Russe in that tongue doeth signifie as much as to part, or devide. The Russe reporteth that foure brethren, Trubor, Rurico, Sinees, and Varivus devided among them the North parts of the country. Likewise that the South parts were possessed by 4. other, Kio, Scieko, Choranus, and their sister Libeda: each calling his territorie after his own name. Of this partition it was called Russia, about the yere from Christ 860. As for the conjecture which I find in some Cosmographers, that the Russe nation borowed the name of the people called Roxellani, & were the very same nation with them, it is without all good probabilitie, both in respect of the