is ever paide before any thing can bee bought or solde. When their fishing is done, their manner is to drawe their carbasses or boates on shore, and there to leave them with the keele turned upwardes, till the next spring tide. Their travaile to and fro is upon sleddes Skds drawen drawen by the Olen Deere : which they use to turne wtth Deerea grasing all the Sommer time in an Island called Kildyn, (of a verie good soyle compared with other partes of that Countrey) and towards the Winter time, when the snowe beginneth to fall they fetch them home againe for the use of their sledde. The description of the regions, people, and rivers, lying North and East from Moscovia : as the way from Moscovia to the river Petzora, and the Province Jugaria or Juhra, and from thence to the river Obi. Likewise the description of other countreys and regions, even unto the Empire of the great Can of Cathay, taken out of Sigismundus ab Herberstein. He dominion of the Prince of Moscovia, The dominion reacheth farre toward the East and North, ofjh Duke of Moscovia, ^ 11 i -i -n 1 unto the places which we will now describe. As concerning which thing, I translated a book y* was presented unto me in the Moscovites tongue, and have here made a briefe rehearsall of the same. I will first therefore describe the journey from Moscovia to Petzora, and so to Jugaria and Obi. From Moscovia to the citie of Vologda, are numbred five hundred versts, Vologda. one verst conteyning almost the space of an Italian myle. ^eiV' From Vologda to Ustiug toward the right hand, descend- s ms° ing with the course of the river of Vologda and Suchana with whom it joyneth, are counted five hundred verstes, where within two versts of the towne called Strelze, and hard by the citie of Ustiug, Suchana joyneth unto lug lug. So called of his swift and pleasant streame. Pienega. Nickolai. Kulvio. [I- 493-] The regions by the North sea. Pieza. Piescoia. Rubicho. Czircho. Czilma. Petzora. THE ENGLISH VOYAGES which runneth from the South : from whose mouth unto the springs of the same, are numbred five hundred versts. But Suchana and lug, after they joyne together, lose their first names, and make but one river named Dwina, by the which the passage to the citie of Colmogro conteineth five hundred versts, from whence, in the space of sixe dayes journey, Dwina entreth into the North Ocean at sixe mouthes. And the greatest part of this journey consisteth by Navigation. For by lande from Vologda unto Colmogro, passing over the river Uvaga, are a thousand verstes. Not farre from Colmogro, the river Pienega running from the East on the right hand for the space of seven hundred versts, falleth into Dwina. From Dwina by the river Pienega, by the space of two hundred versts, they come to a place called Nicholai, from whence within halfe a verst ships have passage into the river Kulvio, which hath his originall from a lake of the same name towarde the North, from whose springs is eight daies viage to the mouth of the same, where it entreth the Ocean. Sayling by the coasts of the right hand of the sea, they passe by the regions of Stanuwische, Calunczscho, the promontorie or and Apnu : And sayling about cape of Chorogoski Nosz, Stanuwische, Camenckh, and Tolstickh, they come at length into the river Mezen, and from thence in the space of sixe dayes, to a village of the same name, standing in the mouth of the river Pieza, by the which againe ascending toward the left hand & sommer East, they come to the river Piescoia : from whence sayling for the space of five versts, they come into two lakes, in the which are seene two wayes : whereof one on the right side, goeth the river Rubicho, by the which they passe to the river Czircho. Other, by an other and shorter way, bring their ships from the lake directly into Czircho : from whence, except they be hindered by tempest, they come in the space of three weekes to the river and mouth of Czilma, that flowing into the great river Petzora, which in to place is two versts in breadth. Sayling from thence, they come in the space of sixe dayes to the Towne and castle of Pustosero, neare unto the which, Petzora Pustosero. entreth into the North Ocean at sixe mouthes. The inhabitants of this place, are men of simple wit : they received the faith of Christ, and were baptised in the yeare M.D.xviii. From the mouth of Czilma unto the mouth of the n^ river Ussa, going by Petzora, is one moneths viage. Ussa, Ussa hath his springs in the mountaine * Poyas Semnoi, *Cingulus being on the left hand toward the sommer East, and springeth out of a great stone of the same mountaine, called Camen Bolschoi. From the springs of Ussa to the mouthes of the same, are numbered more then a thousand versts. Furthermore, Petzora runneth from this south winter part, from whence ascending from the mouthes of Ussa, unto the mouthes of the river Stzuchogora, is three weekes viage. They that described this vyage sayd that they rested betweene the mouthes of the rivers of Stzuchogora and Potzscheriema, and left their victuals there which they brought with them Pot*sche™ma from Russia. Beyond Stzuchogora the sea with the Hands thereabout, and the Castle of Pustosero, are divers and innumerable nations, which by one common name are called Samoged (that is) Samoged. such as eate themselves. They have great increase of Joules and foules, birdes, and divers kindes of beastes : as Sables, easts' Marternes, Bevers, Otters, Hermelines, Squirrels : and in the Ocean the beast called a Mors : Also Vesse, white Beares, Wolves, Hares, Equiwodvani, great Whales, and a fish called Semfi, with divers other. The people of these nations come not to Moscovia : For they are wilde, and flee the company and society Wilde people. of other men. the mountaine Camenipoias, and Camenipoias. the rivers of Petzora and toward g From the mouthes of Stzuchogora, sayling up the river unto Poiassa, Artawische, Cameni, and Poiassa Poiassa. the greater, is three weekes vyage. Furthermore, the Artawischa. Sibut. Lepin. Sossa, Obi. Kitaisko. Uvogoiici. Irtische. Jerom. Tumen. Grustina. Kltai. Blacke men without speech. Serponozv. Lucomoria. Men that ye?me/y die and revive. A strange trade of marchandise. THE ENGLISH VOYAGES they come to the which descending ascending to the mount Camen, is three dayes journey : the river from Artawischa, and from thence to the river Sibut, from whence they passe to the Castle of Lepin, and from Lepin to the river Sossa. The people that inhabite the region by this river, are called Uvogoiici. Leaving Sossa on the right hande, they come to the great river Obi, that springeth out of the lake Kitaisko, the which, with all the haste they could make, they could scarcely passe over in one day, the river being of such breadth that it reacheth fourescore versts. The people also that dwell about the river, are called Uvogoiici and Ugritzschi. From the Castle of Obea, ascending by the river of Oby, unto the the river Irtische, into In which Sossa entereth, is three moneths journey. these places are two Castles named Jerom and Tumen, kept by certaine Lords called Knesi Juhorski, being tributaries to the great Duke of Moscovia, as they say. Here are divers kinds of beasts and furres. this From the mouth of the river Irtische to the Castle of Grustina, is two moneths journey : from whence to the lake Kitai, by the river Oby (which I said to have his springs in this lake) is more then three moneths journey. From lake come many blacke men, lacking the use of common speech. They bring with them divers wares, and especially pearles and precious stones, which they sell to the people called Grustintzi and Serponowtzi. These have their name of the Castle Serponow, situate the mountaines of Lucomoria, beyond the river Obi. They say that to the men of Lucomoria chaunceth a marveilous thing and incredible: For they affirme, that they die yeerely at the xxvii. day of November, being the feast of S. George among the Moscovites : and that at the next spring about the xxiii. day of Aprill, they revive againe as doe Frogges. in With these also, the people of Grustintzi and Serponowtzi exercise a new and strange kinde of trade : For when the accustomed time of their dying, or rather of sleeping, approcheth, they leave their wares in certaine places appointed, which the Grustintzi and Serponowtzi carry away, leaving other wares of equall value in their places : which if the dead men at the time of their reviving perceive to be of unequall price, they require their owne againe : by reason whereof, much strife and fighting is betweene them. From the river of Obi descending toward the left [I. 494-J hand, are the people called Calami, which came thither ^ '- . from Obiowa and Pogosa. Beneath Obi, about Aurea Anus (that is, the golden old wife) are the rivers Sossa, Rivers, Berezvua, and Danadim, all which spring out of the mountaines Camen, Bolschega, Poiassa, and the rockes joyning to the same. All the nations that inhabite from these rivers to Aurea Anus, are subject to the prince of Moscovia. Aurea Anus, called in the Moscovites tongue, Slata Aurea Anus. Baba, is an idol, at the mouthe of Obi in the province of Obdora, standing on the furthest banke toward the Obdora. sea. Along by the bankes of Obi, & the rivers neare there about, are here and there many castles and fortresses : all the lordes whereof are subject to the prince of Moscovia, as they say. They say also, or rather fable, that the idol called Aurea Anus, is an image like unto an old wife, having a child in her lap, and that there is now seene another infant, which they say to be her nephew : Also, that there are certaine instruments that make a continuall sound like the noyse of Trumpets, the which, if it so be, I thinke it to be by reason of the winde, blowing continually into the holow places of those instruments. The river Cossin falleth out of the mountaines of Cossin. the springs of Lucomoria : In the mouth of this is a castle, whither from the great river Cossin, is two monethes viage. Furthermore, from the springs of the same river, the river Cassima hath his originall, which Cassima. running through Lucomoria, falleth into the great river n, , . Tachnin, beyond the which (as is said) dwell men of g-eat river. strous shape. A fish like a man. Plinie writeth of the like fish. The end of the journall. Mountaines. The great Can of Cathay. Moria is the sea. Lucomoria. Tumen. THE ENGLISH VOYAGES prodigious shape, of whom, some are overgrowen with haire like wilde beastes, other have heads like dogges, and their faces in their breasts, without neckes, and with long hands also, and without feete. There is likewise in the river Tachnin a certaine fish, with head, eyes, nose, mouth, hands, feete, and other members utterly of humane shape, and yet without any voyce, and pleasant to be eaten, as are other fishes. All that I have hitherto rehearsed, I have translated out of the saide journey which was delivered^ me in the Moscovites tongue : In the which, perhaps some things may seeme fabulous, and in maner incredible, as of the dombe men, and the dead reviving, the Aurea Anus also, and the monstrous shapes of men, with the fish of humane fourme : whereof, although I have made diligent inquisition, yet could I knowe nothing certaine of any that had seene the same with their eyes : neverthelesse, to give further occasion to other to search the trueth of these things, I have thought good to make mention hereof. Noss in the Moscovites tongue signifieth a nose, and therefore they call all capes or points, that reach into the sea, by the same,name. The mountaines about the river of Petzora are called Semnoi Poyas, or Cingulus mundi, that is, the girdle of the world, or of the earth. Kithai is a lake, of which the great Can of Cathay, whom the Moscovians cal Czar Kithaiski, hath his name : For Can in language signifieth, the Tartars A King. The places of Lucomoria, neare unto the sea, are salvage, full of woods, and inhabited without any houses. And albeit, that the author of this journey, said, that many nations of Lucomoria are subject to the prince of Moscovia, yet for as much as the kingdome of Tumen is neare thereunto, whose prince is a Tartar, and named in their tongue, Tumenski Czar, that is, a king in Tumen, and hath of late done great domage to the prince of Moscovia : it is most like that these nations should rather be subject unto him. Neare unto the river Petzora (whereof mention is Petzora. & • r • 3 1 11 from moun' the bankes, whose ^SVT~ posed to be made in this journey) is the citie and castle of Papin, Papin. or Papinowgorod, whose inhabitants are named Papini, the language, differing and have a private Moscovites. Beyond this river are exceeding high mountaines, reaching even unto .j , • ridges or tops, by reason or continuall windes, are in Hyperborei, maner utterly barren without grasse or fruits. And andRMphei. although in divers places they have divers names, yet are they commonly called Cingulus mundi, that is, the girdle of the world. In these mountaines doe Jerfalcons breede, whereof I have spoken before. There growe also Cedar trees, among the which are found the best and blackest kinde of Sables : and onely these mountaines are seene in all the dominions of the prince of Moscovia, which perhaps are the same that the old writers call Rhipheos, or Hyperboreos, so named of the Greeke word, Hyper, that is, Above, and Boreas, that is, the North : for by reason they are covered with continuall snow and frost, they can not without great difficultie be travayled, and reach so farre into the North, that they make the unknowen land of Engronland. The Duke of Moscovia, Basilius the sonne of John, sent on a time two of his Captaines, named Simeon Pheodorowich Kurbski, & Knes Peter Uschatoi, to search the places beyond these mountaines, and to subdue the nations thereabout. Kurbski was yet alive at my being in Moscovia, & declared unto me that he spent xvii. daies in ascending the mountaine, & yet could not come to the top therof, which in their tongue is called Stolp, that is, a piller. This mountaine is extended into the Ocean unto the mouthes of the rivers of Dwina and Petzora. But now having spoken thus much of the said journey, [I. 495.] I will returne the dominions of Moscovia, with other regions lying Eastward & South from the same, 411 The fruitfull province of Rezan. Jaroslave. Hony. THE ENGLISH VOYAGES toward the mighty Empire of Cathay. But I will first speake somewhat briefly of the province of Rezan, and the famous river of Tanais. The province of Rezan, situate betweene the rivers of Occa and Tanais, hath a citie builded of wood, not far from the bank of Occa : there was in it a Castle named Jaroslave, whereof there now remaineth nothing but tokens of the old ruine. Not farre from that citie the river Occa maketh an Hand named Strub, which was sometime a great Dukedome, whose prince was subject to none other. This province of Rezan is more fruitful then any other of the provinces of Moscovia : Insomuch that in this (as they say) every graine of wheat bringeth forth two, and sometimes more eares : whose stalkes or strawes grow so thicke that horses can scarsely go through them, or Quayles flie out of them. There is great plenty of hony, fishes, foules, birdes, and wilde beasts. The fruits also doe farre exceede the fruits of Moscovia. The people are bolde and warlike men. A speciall note gathered by the excellent Venetian Cosmographer M. John Baptista Ramusius out of the Arabian Geographie of Abilfada Ismael, concerning the trending of the Ocean sea from China Northward, along the coast of Tartarie and other unknowen lands, and then running Westwards upon the Northerne coasts of Russia, and so farther to the Northwest. DEscrivendo poi il predetto Abilfada Ismael i luoghi della terra habitabile, che circuendo il mar Oceano tocca, dice cosi. La regione delle Cine. Confini delli ultimi Tartart. Rivoltasi l'Oceano da levante verso la regione delle Cine, & vk alia volta di Tramontana, et passata finalmente la detta regione, se ne giunge a Gogi & Magogi, cio b alii confini de gli Ultimi Tartari, & di quivi ad