The fruitfull province of Rezan. Jaroslave. Hony. THE ENGLISH VOYAGES toward the mighty Empire of Cathay. But I will first speake somewhat briefly of the province of Rezan, and the famous river of Tanais. The province of Rezan, situate betweene the rivers of Occa and Tanais, hath a citie builded of wood, not far from the bank of Occa : there was in it a Castle named Jaroslave, whereof there now remaineth nothing but tokens of the old ruine. Not farre from that citie the river Occa maketh an Hand named Strub, which was sometime a great Dukedome, whose prince was subject to none other. This province of Rezan is more fruitful then any other of the provinces of Moscovia : Insomuch that in this (as they say) every graine of wheat bringeth forth two, and sometimes more eares : whose stalkes or strawes grow so thicke that horses can scarsely go through them, or Quayles flie out of them. There is great plenty of hony, fishes, foules, birdes, and wilde beasts. The fruits also doe farre exceede the fruits of Moscovia. The people are bolde and warlike men. A speciall note gathered by the excellent Venetian Cosmographer M. John Baptista Ramusius out of the Arabian Geographie of Abilfada Ismael, concerning the trending of the Ocean sea from China Northward, along the coast of Tartarie and other unknowen lands, and then running Westwards upon the Northerne coasts of Russia, and so farther to the Northwest. DEscrivendo poi il predetto Abilfada Ismael i luoghi della terra habitabile, che circuendo il mar Oceano tocca, dice cosi. La regione delle Cine. Confini delli ultimi Tartart. Rivoltasi l'Oceano da levante verso la regione delle Cine, & vk alia volta di Tramontana, et passata finalmente la detta regione, se ne giunge a Gogi & Magogi, cio b alii confini de gli Ultimi Tartari, & di quivi ad per Ponente, passa sopra li confini Settentrionali della J-nc0&ltteRossia, et va alia volta di Maestro. S K 3T The same in English. ^TPVHe aforesaid Abilfada Ismael describing afterward A the habitable places of the earth, which the Ocean sea in his circuit toucheth, sayth in this manner following. The Ocean sea turneth from the East toward the The Countrey toward the °fChinaCountrey of the Chinaes, and stretcheth North, and at length having passed the sayd Countrey, it reacheth unto the Gogi and Magogi, that is, to the thence, The coasts °f confines of The uttermost Tartars, and from unto certaine unknowen Countreys : and running still fr uttermost TTT Westward it passeth upon the JNortherne coasts or Russia, Certaine unand (which it doth indeede upon the coast of Lappia.) By this treVmost notable testimony it appeareth, that the Ocean The Northern toward the Northwest, knowne Counthence it runneth i TWT i from Tartars. r T? J • 1 1 i • 111 IT-* T W TI coasts of sea compasseth and environeth all the East, Northeast, Russ-ta, and North parts of Asia and Europe. The Northwest. T he Emperors private or houshold Officers. THe chiefe Officers of the Emperors houshold are these which follow. The first is the office of the Boiaren Conesheva, or master of the Horse. Which conteineth Master of the no more then is expressed by the name, that is, to be Horseoverseer of the Horse, and not Magister equitum, or Master of the Horsemen. For he appointeth other for that service, as occasion doth require, as before was sayd. He that beareth that office at this time, is Boris Pheodorowich Godonoe, brother to the Empresse. Of Horse for service in his warres (besides other for his ordinary uses) he hath to the number of ten thousand which are kept about Mosco. The next is the Lord Steward of his houshold at this The L. Sumtime, one Gregory Vasilowich Godonoe. The third is Zf L T his Treasurer, that keepeth all his moneis, jewels, plate, J &c. now called Stephan Vasilowich Godonoe. The 413 Chamberlaine Tasters, Harbengers. Gentlemen of the chamber. The Gard. [I. 496.] Groomes. THE ENGLISH VOYAGES fourth his Controller, now Andreas Petrowich Clesinine. The fift his Chamberlaine. He that attendeth that office at this time, is called Estoma Bisabroza Pastelnischay. The sixt his Tasters, now Theodor Alexandrowich, and Ivan Vasilowich Godonoe. The seventh his Harbengers, which are three Noble men, and divers other Gentlemen that do the office under them. These are his ordinary officers, and offices of the chiefest account. them Of Gentlemen, beside that waite about his chamber, and person (called Shilsey Strapsey) there are two hundred, all Noblemens sonnes. His ordinary Garde is two thousand Hagbutters readie with their pieces charged, and their match lighted, with other necessarie furniture continually day and night : which come not within the house, but waite without in the court or yard, where the Emperour is abiding. In the night time there lodgeth next to his bedchamber the chiefe Chamberlaine, with one or two more of best trust about him. A second chamber off, there lodge sixe other of like account for their trust and faithfulnesse. In the thirde chamber lie certaine young Gentlemen, of these two hundred, called Shilsey Strapsey, that take their turnes by forties every night. There are groomes besides that watch in their course, and lie at every gate and doore of the Court, called Estopnick. The Hagbutters or Gunners, whereof there are two the Emthousand (as was said before) watch about perours lodging, or bedchamber by course 250. every night, and 250. more in the Court yarde, and about the Treasure house. His Court or house at the Mosco is made castle wise, walled about, with great store of faire ordinance planted upon the wall, and conteyneth a great breadth of ground within it, with many dwelling houses : Which are appointed for such as are knowen to be sure, and trustie to the Emperor. Of the private behaviour, or qualitie of the Russe people. THE private behaviour and qualitie of the Russe people, may partly be understood by that which hath beene sayd concerning the publique state and usage of the Countrey. As touching the naturall habite of Constitution of their bodies, they are for the most part of a large size, thetr bodm' and of very fleshly bodies : accounting it a grace to be somewhat grosse and burley, and therefore they nourish and spread their beards, to have them long and broad. But for the most part they are very unwieldy and unactive withall. Which may be thought to come partly of the climate, and the numbnesse which they get by the cold in winter, and partly of their diet that standeth most of rootes, onions, garlike, cabbage, and such like things that breede grosse humors, which they use to eate alone, and with their other meates. Their diet is rather much then curious. At their Their diet. meales they beginne commonly with a Charke or small cuppe of Aqua vitae, (which they call Russe wine) and then drinke not till towardes the end of their meales, taking it in largely, and all together, with kissing one another at every pledge. And therefore after dinner there is no talking with them, but every man goeth to his bench to take his afternoones sleepe, which is as ordinary with them as their nights rest. When they exceede, and have varietie of dishes, the first are their baked meates (for roste meates they use litle) and then their broathes or pottage. Their common drinke is Mead, the poorer sort use water, and a third drinke called Quasse, which is nothing else (as we say) but water turned out of his wits, with a litle branne meashed with it. This diet would breede in them many diseases, but that they use bathstoves, or hote houses in steade of all Phisicke, commonly twise or thrise every weeke. All the winter time, and almost the whole Sommer, they heat their Peaches, which are made like the Germane bathstoves, and their Poclads like ovens, that so warme the house that a stranger at the first shall hardly like of it. These two extremities, specially in the winter of heat within their houses, and of extreame colde without, together with their diet, make them of a darke, and sallow complexion, tanned and parched both with cold and with heate : specially the women, that for the greater part are of farre worse complexions, then the men. Whereof the cause I take to be their keeping within the hote houses, and busying themselves about the heating, and using of their bathstoves, and peaches. their skinnes being The Russe because that he is used to both these extremities of heat and of cold, can beare them both a great deale more patiently, then strangers can doe. You shall see them sometimes (to season their bodies) come out of their bathstoves all on a froth, and fuming as hoat almost as a pigge at a spit, and presently to leape into the river starke naked, or to powre cold water all over their bodies, and that in the coldest of all the winter time. The women to mende the bad hue of their skinnes, use to paint their faces with white and red colours, so visibly, that every man may perceive it. Which is made no matter, because it is common and liked well by their husbands : who make their wives and daughters an ordinarie allowance to buy them colours to paint their faces withall, and delight themselves much to see them of fowle women to become such faire images. This parcheth to deforme them when their painting is of. the skinne, and helpeth They apparell themselves after the Greeke manner. The Noblemans attire is on this fashion. First a Taffia, or little night cappe on his head, that covereth litle more then his crowne, commonly verie rich wrought of silke and golde threede, and set with pearle and precious stone. His head he keepeth shaven close to the very the skinne, except he be in some displeasure with 416 An admirable induring of extreme heat, and colde at one and the same time. The Noble Emperour. Then hee sufFereth his haire to growe and hang downe upon his shoulders, covering his face as [I. 497.] ugly and deformedly as he can. Over the Taffia hee weareth a wide cappe of blacke Foxe (which they account for the best furre) with a Tiara or long bonnet put within it, standing up like a Persian or Babilonian hatte. About his necke (which is seene all bare) is a coller set with pearle and precious stone, about three or foure fingers broad. Next over his shirt, (which is curiously wrought, because he strippeth himselfe into it in the Sommer time, while he is within the house) is a Shepon, or light garment of silke, made downe to the knees, buttoned before : and then a Caftan or a close coat buttoned, and girt to him with a Persian girdle, whereat he hangs his knives and spoone. This commonly is of cloth of gold, and hangeth downe as low as his ancles. Over that hee weareth a lose garment of some rich silke, furred and faced about with some golde lace, called a Ferris. Another over that of chamlet, or like stufFe called an Alkaben, sleeved and hanging lowe, and the cape commonly brooched, and set all with pearle. When hee goeth abroad, he casteth over all these (which are but sleight, though they seeme to be many) an other garment called an Honoratkey, like to the Alkaben, save that it is made without a coller for the necke. And this is commonly of fine cloth, or Camels in stead of haire. His buskins (which he weareth hose, with linnen folles under them in stead of boot hose) are made of a Persian leather called Saphian, embrodered with pearle. His upper stockes commonly are of cloth of golde. When he goeth abroad, hee mounteth on horsebacke, though to the next doore : which is the maner also of the Boiarskey, or Gentlemen. it be but The Boiarskey or Gentlemans attire is of the same The Gentkfashion, but differeth in stufFe : and yet he will have mans apparel. his Caftan or undercoat sometimes of cloth of golde, the rest of cloth, or silke. Ill 417 The Noble womans attire. Qn h er h e a d? first The Noble woman (called Chyna Boiarshena) weareth a c a u ll of s o me soft silke (which is commonly redde) and over it a fruntlet called Obrosa, of white colour. Over that her cappe (made after the coife fashion of cloth of gold) called Shapka Zempska, edged with some rich furre, and set with pearle and stone. Though they have of late begunne to disdaine embrodering with pearle above their cappes, because the Diacks, and some Marchants wives have taken up the In their eares they weare earerings (which they fashion. call Sargee) of two inches or more compasse, the matter of gold set with Rubies, or Saphires, or some like precious stone. In Sommer they goe often with kerchieffes of fine white lawne, or cambricke, fastned under the chinne, with two long tassels pendent. The kerchiefe spotted and set thicke with rich pearle. When they ride or goe abroad in raynie weather, they weare white hattes with coloured bandes, called Stapa Zemskoy. About their neckes they weare collers of three or foure fingers broad, set with rich pearle and precious stone. Their upper garment is a loose gowne called Oposhen commonly of scarlet, with wide loose sleeves, hanging downe to the ground buttened before with great golde buttons, or at least silver and guilt nigh as bigge as a walnut. Which hath hanging over it fastned under the cappe, a large broad cape of some rich furre, that hangeth downe almost to the middes of their backes. Next under the Oposken or upper garment, they weare another called a Leitnick that is made close before with great wide sleeves, the cuffe or halfe sleeve up to the elbowes, commonly of cloth of golde : and under that a Ferris Zemskoy, which hangeth loose buttoned throughout to the very foote. On the hande wrests they weare very faire braselets, about two fingers broad of pearle and precious stone. They goe all in buskins of white, yellow, blew, or some other coloured leather, embrodered with pearle. This is the attire of the Noblewoman of Russia, when she maketh the best shewe of her selfe. is all one for the making or fashion. As for the poore Mousick and his wife they goe The Mouskks , J 1 11 11 /* 1 mans attire. poorely cladde. The man with his Honoratkey, or °r comm™ V loose gowne to the small of the legge, tyed together with a lace before, of course white or blew cloth, with some Shube or long wastcoate of furre, or of sheepeskinne under it, and his furred cappe, and buskins. The poorer sort of them have their Honoratkey, or upper garment, made of Kowes haire. This is their winter habite. In the sommer time, commonly they weare nothing but their shirts on their backes, and buskins on their legges. The woman goeth in a red or blewe gowne, when she maketh the best shewe, and with some warme Shube of furre under it in the winter time. But in the sommer, nothing but her two shirts (for so they call them) one over the other, whether they be within doores, or without. On their heads, they weare caps of some coloured stuffe, many of velvet, or of cloth of gold : but for the most part kerchiefs. Without earings of silver or some other mettall, and her crosse about her necke, you shall see no Russe woman, be she wife, or maide. The Lord Boris Pheodorowich his letter to the [I. 498.] Right Honorable William Burghley Lord high Treasurer of England, &c. Y the grace of God the great Lord Emperor, and great Duke Theodore Ivano- wich, great Lord, King, and great Duke of all Russia, of Volodemer, Mosco, and Novogorod, king of Cazan, and Astracan, Lord of Vobsko, and great Duke of Smolensco, Tver, Ughori, Permi, Viatsko, Bolgorie, and other places, Lorde and great Duke of Novogrod in the Lowe Countrey, of Chernigo, Rezan, The Emperors Polotsky, Rostove, Yeroslave, Bealozera, and Liefland, stile increased.