the Swethen, Pole, coronation no enemie of his hath prevailed attempts. the Dane, &c. And since his in his It fell out not long after, that the Emperor was The new Emdesirous to send a message to the most excellent Queene PerorPhf°^orf of England, for which service he thought no man fitter £ ~W then M. Jerome Horsey, supposing that one of the requests to the Queenes owne men and subjects would be the more Queene. acceptable to her. The summe of which message was, that the Emperor desired a continuance of that league, friendship, amitie and intercourse of traffique which was betweene his father and the Queens majestie and her subjects, with other private affaires besides, which are not to be made common. fJZ Master Horsey having received the letters and requests M. Horseis of the Emperour, provided for his journey over land, voiagefrom .and departed from Mosco the fift day of September, thence unto Otver, to Torshook, to great Novogrod, to [i. Vobsky, and thence to Nyhouse in Livonia, to Wenden, and so to Riga : (where he was beset, and brought foorthwith before a Cardinall called Ragevil, but yet sufired to passe in the end :) From thence to Mito, to Golden, and Libou in Curland, to Memel, to Koningsburgh in Prussia, to Elbing, to Dantzike, to Stetine in Pomerland, to Rostock, to Lubeck, to Hamborough, to Breme, to Emden, and by sea to London. Being arrived at her majesties roiall court, and having delivered the Emperors letters with good favour, and gracious acceptance, he was foorthwith againe commaunded to repasse into Russia, with other letters from her majestie to the Emperor, and prince Boris Pheodorowich, answering the Emperors letters, and withall requesting the favour and friendship, which his father had yeelded to the English merchants : and hereunto was he earnestly also solicited by the merchants of London themselves of that company, to deale in their behalfe. Being thus dispatched from London by sea, he arrived in Mosco, the 20. of April 1586. and was very honorably welcommed. And 1586. for ye merchants behoofe, obtained all his requests, being therein specially favoured by ye noble prince Boris Pheodorowich, who alwayes affected M. Horsey with speciall liking. And having obtained priviledges for the merchants, he was recommended from the Emperor againe, to the Queene of England his mistresse, by whom the prince Boris, in token of his honorable and good opinion of the Queens majestie, sent her highnesse a roiall present of Sables, Luzarns, cloth of gold and other rich things. So that the Companie of English merchants, next to their thankfulnes to her majestie, are to account M. Horseis paines their speciall benefit, who obtained for them those privileges, which in twentie yeeres before would not be granted. The maner of M. Horseis last dispatch from the Emperor, because it was very honorable, I thought good to record. He was freely allowed post horses for him and his servants, victuals and all other necessaries for his long journey ; at every towne that he came unto from Mosco to Vologda, which is by land five hundred miles, he received the like free and bountifull allowances, at the Emperors charge. New victuall and provision were given him upon the river Dwina at every towne by the kings officers, being one thousand miles in length. When he came to the new castle called Archangel, he was received of the Duke Knez Vasili Andrewich Isvenogorodsky by the Emperors commission into the Castle,, gunners being set in rankes after their use, where he was sumptuously feasted : from thence hee was dispatched with bountifull provision and allowance in the Dukes boat, with one hundred men to rowe him, and one hundred Gunners in other boats to conduct him, with a gentleman captaine of the Gunners. Comming to the road where the English, Dutch, and French ships rode, the gunners discharged, and the ships shot in like maner 46. pieces of their ordinance, & so he was brought ta his lodging at the English house upon Rose Island. And that which was the full and complete conclusion of the favour of the Emperor and Boris Pheodorowich toward M. Horsey, there were the next day sent him for his further provision upon the sea by a gentleman and a captaine the things folowing. 16. live oxen. 70. sheepe. 600. hens. 25. flitches of Bacon. 80. bushels of meale. 600. loaves of bread. 2000. egs. 10. geese. 2. cranes. 2. swans. 65. gallons of mead. 40. gallons of Aquavitse. 60. gallons of beere. 3. yong beares. 4. hawkes. Store of onions and garlike. 10. fresh salmons. A wild bore. All these things were brought him downe by a Gentleman of the Emperors, and another of prince Boris Pheo- dorowich, & were received in order by John Frese servant to M. Horsey, together with an honorable present and reward from the prince Boris, sent him by M. Francis Cherry an Englishman : which present was a whole very rich piece of cloth of gold, & a faire paire of Sables. This Gentleman hath observed many other rare things concerning those partes, which hereafter (God willing) at more convenient time and laisure shall come to light. Pheodor Ivanowich the new Emperors gracious letter of privilege to the English Merchants word for word, obtained by M. Jerome Horsey. 1586. Hrough the wil of the almightie, and without beginning God, which was before this world, whom we glorifie in ye Trinitie, one only God the father, the sonne, and the holy ghost, maker of all things, worker of all in all every where, fulfiller of all things, by which will and working, he both loveth and giveth life to man, That