her Majesties presence drew a sled and a man upon it, after the maner of the Samoeds, a people that inhabite in the Northeast from Russia, and were that yeere come over the sea in the winter season upon the yce, in their sleds, drawen with these deere into Russia, where the ambassadour bought of them seventeene, whereof he brought nine alive into Kent. The maner of the preferring of sutes in Russia, by the example of our English merchants bill, exhibited to the Emperour. J Ohn Basiliwich, Lord, King, and great Duke of all Russia, the English merchants, William, sonne of Thomas, with his company sue unto. Lord, in the 7082. yeere of the worlds creation, thy Majesties treasurer, named Gregorie Mekitowich Borozden, tooke of us for thy use 12. poods of loafe sugar, prised at 8. robles the pood, which sugar was sent to the II Sloboda. More, the sayd Gregorie treasurer, tooke of us II The Empefor thy Majestie 200. reames of paper, prised at 20. rours house of altines the reame, for all which the money hath not bene payd which amounteth to 216. robles. In the 85. yeere thy Majesties treasurer Peter [I. 464.] And in the 84. yeere thy diake Stephan Lighachdo tooke of us for thy Majesty copper plates, for the summe of 1032. robles and one fourth part unpayd for. Also in the said 84. yeere thy Majesties diakes called Ivan Blasghoy, and Ivan Sobakin tooke of us for thy use, sundry commodities, and have not payd 630. robles, the rest of the money due for the said goods. Gholoven tooke of us for thy Majestie, cloth of sundry sorts, and hath not payd of the money due therefore 538. robles. In the 88. yeere, thy diakes Andrea Shalkan, and Istomay Yevskoy tooke of us lead for thy Majestie, to the value of 267. robles and a halfe not payd. And in the same yeere thy Majesties diak Boris Gregoriwich had for thy use 15. broad cloths of diverse sorts, prised at 210. robles, whereof 90. robles are unpayd. Also in the said 88. yere thy diak Andrea Shalkan tooke from us 1000. robles for thee (Lord) in ready money, yet we know not whether by thy Majesties appointment. And also in the 89. yeere (Lord) thy diak Andrea Shalkan tooke from us for thy Majesty 500. robles, we know not whether by thy Majesties order or no, because that thy authorized people do yeerely take away from us, neither do they give us right in any cause. All the mony (Lord) which is not payd us out of thy Majesties treasury for our commodities or wares, with the money taken from us by Andrea Shalkan, is 4273. robles 25. altines. Right noble king and Lord, shew thy mercy, and cause the money to be payd us which is owing for our goods, as also that which hath beene taken from us : extend thy favor, King and Lord. A letter of M. Henrie Lane to the worshipfull M. William Sanderson, conteining a briefe discourse of that which passed in the Northeast discovery for three and thirtie yeres. the space of Aster Sanderson, as you lately requested mee, so have I sought, and though I cannot finde things that heretofore I kept in writing, and lent out to others, yet perusing at London copies of mine old letters to content one that meaneth to pleasure many, I have briefly and as truly as I may, drawen out as followeth : The rough hewing may be planed at your leasure, or as pleaseth him that shall take the paines. First the honourable attempt to discover by sea Northeast and Northwest named for Cathay, being chiefly 