Bo£mia : to which place this M. Edward Garland came to M. Dee with two Moscovites to serve him, &c. He had sixe more, which by M. Dees counsell were sent backe. Witnesse M. Edward Kelley, and M. Francis Garland, brother to the foresaid Edward, and divers others. IT seemeth that this princely offer of the Emperour Pheodor Ivanowich, and of the L. Boris Pheodorowich Protectour to his Majestie, was made unto the learned and famous Mathematitian M. John Dee, partly to use his counsell & direction about certaine discoveries to the Northeast; and partly for some other weighty occasions : but because their conquest to Siberia was not as then fully settled, & for divers other secret reasons, it was for y* time with al thankfulnes refused. [I. 509.] A branch of a letter from M. John Merick, Agent unto the Moscovie company in Russia, closed up in the Mosco the 14. of March, Anno 1597. touching the death of Pheodor Ivanowich late Emperour of all Russia, &c. Aving thus farre proceeded with this my answere unto the chiefest points of your worships letters received, my desire was to have sent one unto you long since, as you may perceive by || the first date : but by reason I could not get leave, I have deferred it of till this instant, for that there was none suffered to passe out of the land. The causes may be judged, for that it pleased God to call out of this world, the Emperour his Majestie, who departed about the 7. of January: and ever since hath bene a mourning time, & no suites for any matter could be heard. But it hath bene a very dead season. Yet (thankes be to God) through the wise government of Lord Boris Pheodorowich the Lord Protector the whole Cleargie, with JOHN MERICK'S LETTER unto the saide late Emperour, since his death all things have bene very quiet without any dissention ; as the like in such a great kingdome I have not heard of. And now through the providence of Almightie God, and by surrender of the late Empresse Irenia Feodoruna, the common consent of the Patriarch, Nobles, and Bishops, and the whole Commons besides, choise is made of none other but of the said Lord Protector, L. Boris Pheodorowich to Prince Boris be Emperour, and great duke of all Russia, who was most unwilling to receive the kingdome, but the people consent chosen would make no other choise, nor have any other. So Emperour of that with much adoe and entreatie, it hath pleased his Ri Majestie to take upon him the kingdome, and he is absolute Emperor to him and his heires. And certainly God hath done much for this Countrey, and hath made the people greatly happy, in that he hath provided and appointed so famous and worthy a Prince : whose excellent government and experience these foureteene yeeres hath bene manifest to all Russia. God graunt his highnesse a most prosperous and long raigne, with his Lady the Empresse, the Prince his sonne, and the Princesse his daughter. All men do rejoyce both Russe and strangers for this most famous Emperour. The Coronation is thought shalbe on the Assension day next, til which time I cannot depart from Mosco : which is a litle before the time that ordinarily I doe take my journey touching his Majesties favour towards me on your behalfe, especially for her Majesties sake, as in foretime it was extraordinary, and so specially shewed to mee, as to none the like : so hath his highnesse promised the continuance thereof, with further favour as shalbe desired. Whereof I have no doubt : for dayly I do finde the same. from hence. And in 449 [A learned