A learned Epistle written 1581. unto the famous Cosmographer M. Gerardus Mercator concerning the river Pechora, Naramsay, Cara reca, the mighty river of Ob, the place of river Yaks Olgush Ardoh, the borderers Paraha, the Countrey of Carrah Colmak, giving good light to the discovery of the Northeast passage to Cathay, China and the Malucaes. lake of Kittay called of in Siberia, the great the 1" Inclyto & celebri Gerardo Mercatori, domino & amico singulari in manus proprias Duisburgi in Clivia. Um meminissem, amice optime, quanta, cum una ageremus, delectatione afficerere in legendis Geographicis scriptis Homeri, Strabonis, Aristotelis, Plinii, Dionis & reliquorum, laetatus sum eo quod incidissem in hunc nuncium, qui tibi has literas tradit, quern tibi commendatum esse valde cupio, quique dudum Arusburgi hie ad Ossellam fluvium appulit. Hominis experientia, ut mihi quidem videtur, multum te adjuverit in re una, eaque summis a te votis expetita, & magnopere elaborata, de qua tarn varie inter se dissentiunt Cosmographi recentiores ; patefactione nimirum ingentis illius Promontorii Tabin, celebrisque illius & opulentae regionis sub Cathayorum rege per Oceanum ad Orientem brumalem. Alferius is est natione Belga, qui captivus aliquot annos vixit in Moscovitarum ditione, apud viros illic celeberrimos Yacovium & Unekium ; a quibus Antuerpiam missus est accersitum homines rei nauticae peritos, qui satis amplo proposito praemio ad illos viros se recipiant ; qui Suevo artifice duas ad earn patefacillic [I. 510.] fluvio. Ut ille rem Du& naves tamen, & ut <zd\ficat<z ™ tionem naves aedificarunt in Duina proponit, quamquam sine arte, apposite satis intelligas, quod quaeso diligenter perpendas, aditus aj patefac_ ad Cathayam per Orientem proculdubio brevissimus est tionem Orien& admodum expeditus. Adiit ipse fluvium Obam turn takm. terra per Samoedorum & Sibericorum regionem, turn littus Pechorae fluminis ad Orientem. Hac mari per experientia confirmatus certo apud se statuit navim mercibus onustam, cujus carinam non nimium profunde demissam esse vult, in Sinum S. Nicolai conducere in regione Moscovitarum, instructam illam quidem rebus omnibus ad earn patefactionem necessariis, atque redintegrato commeatu, Moscoviticae nationis notissimos linguam justa mercede asciscere : qui & Samoedicam pulchre teneant, & fluvium Ob exploratum habeant, ut qui quotannis ea loca ventitant. Unde Maio exeunte constituit pergere ad Orientem per continentem Ugoriae ad Orientales partes Pechoras, Insulamque cui nomen est Dolgoia. Hie cribere, bolidem demittere, locorumque ac punctorum distantias annotare, ubi & quoties licebit. Et quoniam Pechorae Sinus vel euntibus vel redeuntibus commodissimus est turn subsidii turn diversorii locus propter glaciem & tempestates, diem impendere decrevit cognoscendis vadis, facillimoque navium aditu inveniendo : loco antehac aquarum altitudinem duntaxat ad quo invenit, sed profundiores canales esse quinque pedes non dubitat : deinde per eos fines pergere ad tria quatuorve milliaria nautica, relicta Insula quam Vaigats Insula Vaivocant5 media fere via inter Ugoriam & Novam Zem- gatSm blam : atque Obam, qui per Meridiem vergens pertingit ad Q^ats terram Ugoriae, in quern confluunt exigui duo amnes perZuridiem. II Marmesia atque Carah, ad quos amnes gens alia || Vel NaramSamoedorum accolit immanis & efferata. Multa in eo sey & C tractu loca vadosa, multas cataractas invenit ; sed tamen reca' per quas possit Navigari. Ubi ad fluvium Obam perventum fuerit, qui quidem fluvius (ut referunt Samoedi) turn Sinum quendam praeterire inter Vaigats s^nifs inter terram des- Dolgoialnsula. Insulas, quas varn multas magnasque concludentem incolunt populi, vix quisquam animadvertat, ne temporis nimium impendat, constituit ad summum tria quatuorve tentare ora, ea prasserim quae ex consilio Incolarum, quos in itinere aliquot habiturus est, commodissima videbuntur, triaque quatuorve ejus regionis navigiola tentandis Ostiis adhibere, quam fieri potest ad littus proxime, (quod quidem sub itinere trium dierum incolitur) ut quo loco tutissime navigari possit, intelligat. (quod Quod si navim per fluvium Obam adverso amne possit impellere, prima si poterit cataracta, eaque, ut verisimile est, commodissima, ad eumque locum appellere, quern aliquando ipse cum suis aliquot per Sibericorum regionem terra adiit, qui duodecim juxta dierum itinere distat a Mari, qua influit in mare flumen Ob, qui locus est in continente, prope fluvium Ob cui nomen est Yaks Olgush, nomine mutuato ab illo magno Profluente flumini Ob illabente, turn certe speraret maximas se difficultates superasse. Referunt enim illic populares, trium duntaxat dierum navigatione ab eo loco qui abfuerunt illic rarum est, eo quod multi ad unum duntaxat diem cymbas pelliceas a littore propellentes oborta tempestate perierunt, cum neque a sole neque a syderibus rectionem scirent petere) per transversum fluminis Ob, unde spaciosum esse illius latitudinem constat, grandes se carinas praeciosis onustas mercibus magno fluvio delatas vidisse per Nigros, puta iEthiopes. Eum fluvium Ardoh illi vocant, qui influit in lacum Kittayum, quern Paraha illi nominant, cui contermina est gens ilia latissime fusa, quam Carrah Colmak appellant, non alia certe quam Cathaya. Illic, si necessitas postulabit, opportunum erit hybernare, se suosque reficere, resque omnes necessarias conquirere. Quod si acciderit, non dubitat interim plurimum se adjutum illic quaerentem atque ediscentem. Veruntamen sperat restate eadem ad Cathayorum fines se perventurum, nisi ingenti glaciei mole ad os fluvii 452 iri, plura Littus Oba? incolitur ab Ostiis trium dierumitinere. Taks Olgush locus super Obam ium duodecim dierum itinere fluvflumen Ardeh infiuens in lacum Kitthaym : de quo in itinere ad Boghariam scribit An* tonius Jenkinlocum ilium Yaks Olgush redire statuit, atque Obae impediatur, quae major inter dum, interdum minor illic est. Turn per Pechoram hybernare : vel si id non poterit, in flumen Duinae, quo mature satis pertinget, atque ita primo vere proximo in itinere progredi. Unum est quod suo loco oblitus incolunt, a sum. Qui majoribus suis olim praedicatum asserunt, se in lacu Kitthayo dulcissimam campanarum harmoniam audivisse, atque ampla aedificia conspexisse : Et cum gentis Carrah Carrot ColColmak mentionem raciunt (Cathaya ilia est) ab imo pectore suspiria repetunt, manibusque projectis suspiciunt in ccelum, velut insignem illius splendorem innuentes atque admirantes. Utinam Alferius hie Cosmographiam melius saperet, multum ad illius usum adjungeret, qui sane plurimus est. Multa praetereo, vir amicissime, ipsumque hominem te audire cupio, qui mihi spospondit se in itinere Duisburgi te visurum. Avet enim tecum conferre sermones, & procul dubio hominem multum adjuveris. Satis instructus videtur pecunia & gratia, in quibus aliisque officiis amicitiae feci illi, si vellet, mei copiam. Deus Optimus maximus hominis votis atque alacritati fortunet, exitum foelicissimum concedat. Vale amice ac Domine singularis. initia secundet, successus mak est aya. faveat, Arusburgi ad Ossellam fluvium 20. Februarii 1581. Tuus quantus quantus sum Joannes Balakus. To the famous and renowmed Gerardus Mer- [I. 511.] cator, his Reverend and singular friend at Duisburgh in Cliveland, these be delivered. CAiling to remembrance (most deare Friend) what exceeding delight you tooke at our being together, in reading the Geographicall writings of Homer, Strabo, Aristotle, Plinie, Dion, and the rest, I rejoyced not a little that I happened upon such a messenger as the bearer of these presents, (whom I do especially recommend unto you) who arrived lately here at Arusburg upon the river of Osella. This mans experience (as I am of opinion) will greatly availe you to the knowledge of a certaine matter which hath bene by you so vehemently desired, and so curiously for, and concerning the which the late Cosmographers do hold such varietie of opinions : namely, of the discoverie of the huge promontorie of Tabin, and of the famous and rich countreys subject unto the Emperor of Cathay, and that by the Northeast Ocean sea. The man is laboured * Or Oliver, called * Alferius being by birth a Netherlander, who for certaine yeeres lived captive in the dominions of Russia under two famous men Yacovius and Unekius, by whom he was sent to Antwerp to procure skilfull Pilots and Mariners, (by propounding liberall rewards) to go unto the two famous personages aforesayd, which two had set a Sweden Shipwright on worke to build two Two skips bmlt upon the ships for the same discoverie upon the river of Dwina. 1Dwina for ^ ^ e P a s s ag e unto Cathay by the Northeast (as he dethe Northeast clareth the matter, albeit without arte, yet very aptly, discoverie. as you may well perceive, which I request you diligently to consider) is without doubt very short and easie. This very man himselfe hath travelled to the river of Ob, both by land, through the countreys of the Samoeds, and of Sibier, and also by Sea, along the coast of the river Pechora Eastward. Being encouraged by this his experience he is fully resolved with himselfe to conduct a Barke laden with, merchandize (the keele whereof hee will not have to drawe over much water) to the Baie of Saint Nicholas in Russia, being furnished with all things expedient for such a discoverie, and with a new supply of victuals at his arrivall there, and also to hire into his companie certaine Russes best knowen unto himselfe, who can perfectly speake the Samoeds language, and are acquainted with the river of Ob, as having frequented those places yeere by yeere. Whereupon about the ende of May hee is determined to saile from the Baie of S. Nicholas Eastward, by the maine of Joughoria, and so to the Easterly parts of Pechora, & to the Island which is called Dolgoia. And The Island of here also hee is purposed to observe the latitudes, to DolSotasurvey and describe the countrey, to sound the depth of the Sea, and to note the distances of places, where, and so oft as occasion shall be offered. And forasmuch as the Baie of Pechora is a most convenient place both for harbour and victuall, as well in their going foorth as in their returne home in regard of Ice and tempest, he is determined to bestow a day in sounding the Flats, and in searching out the best enterance for ships: in which place heretofore he found the water to be but five foote deepe, howbeit he doubteth not but that there are deeper chanels: and then hee intendeth to proceed on along those coasts for the space of three or foure leagues, leaving the Island called Vaigats almost in the middle The Island of way betweene Ugoria and Nova Zembla: then also to atSatspasse by a certaine Baie betweene Vaigats and Ob, trend- ^ ^aie ^e' ing Southerly into the land of Ugoria, whereinto fall tmfne^at two small rivers called *Marmesia and Carah, upon the trending which rivers doe inhabite an other barbarous and savage Southerly^ nation of the Samoeds. He found many Flats in that *Or,Naramtract of land, and many cataracts or overfals of water, sf^™d Cara yet such as hee was able to saile by. When hee shall come to the river of Ob, which river (as the Samoeds report) hath seventie mouthes, which by reason of the huge breadth thereof containing many and great Islands, which are inhabited with sundry sortes of people, no man scarcely can well discover, because he will not spend too much time, he purposeth to search three or foure at the most of the mouthes thereof, those chiefly which shall be thought most commodious by the advise of the inhabitants, of whom hee meaneth to have certaine with him in his voyage, and meaneth to employ three or foure boates of that Countrey in search of these mouthes, as neere as possibly he can to the shore, which within three dayes journey of the Sea is inhabited, that If it he may learne where the river is best navigable. 1 A T V /T &aiS a1l<* xi O" 11 ^ • 1 1 I t he s t r e a m e> a nd mount up to that place which heretofore accompanied with certaine of his friends, he passed unto The place up- so fall out that he may sayle up the river Ob against °nhke Teih ™ J £ M2 dayes journey by land through the countrey of Siberia which is about from ye mouthes there- fa\\zt)i into the Sea, which place is in the Continent neere ValkdTaks twelve dayes journey from the Sea, where the river Ob t he r i v er Ob, and is called Yaks Olgush, borowing his name from that mightie river which falleth into the river Ob, then doubtlesse hee would conceive full hope that hee had passed the greatest difficulties: for the people dwelling thereabout report, which were three dayes sayling onely from that place beyond the river Ob, whereby the bredth thereof may be gathered (which is a rare matter there, because that many rowing with their boates the shore, of have bene cast away in tempest, having no skill to guide themselves neither by Sunne nor Starre) that they have seene great vessels laden with rich and precious merchandize brought downe that great river by blacke or leather one dayes journey onely from [L 512.] , . t he V . . . J t he k ke . . f K i t t ay w h i ch . s w a rt people. They call that river *Ardoh, which falleth c a ll pa r aha where, . , . M. Jenkinson tn his myage • t to Boghar speaketk of the uPon bordereth that mighty and large nation which they river Jrdok. call Carrah Colmak, which is none other then the nation of Cathay. There, if neede require, he may fitly Winter and refresh himselfe and his, and seeke all things which he shall stand in need of: which if it so fall out, he doubteth not but in the meane while he shall be much furthered in searching and learning out many things in that place. Howbeit, he hopeth that hee shall reach to Cathay a that very Sommer, unlesse he be hindered by great abundance of Ice at the mouth of the river of Ob, which is sometimes more, and sometimes lesse. If it so fall out, hee then purposeth to returne to Pechora, and there to W i n t e r: or if he cannot doe so neither, then hee meaneth to returne to the river of Dwina, whither he will reach in good time enough, and so the next Spring following to proceed on his voyage. One thing in due place I forgate before. The people which dwell at that place called Yaks Olgush, affirme that they have heard their forefathers say, that they have heard most sweete harmonie of bels in the lake of Kitthay, and that they have seene therein stately and large buildings: and when they make mention of the people named Carrah Colmak (this countrey is Cathay) they fetch deepe sighes, and holding up their hands, they looke up to heaven, signifying as it were, and declaring the notable glory and magnificence of that I would this Oliver were better seene in Cosnation. mographie, it would greatly further his experience, which doubtlesse is very great. Most deare friend, I omit many things, and I wish you should heare the man himselfe which promised mee faithfully that he would visite you in his way at Duisburg, for he desireth to conferre with you, and doubtlesse you shall very much further furnished the man. He seemeth sufficiently with money and friends, wherein and in other offices of curtesie 1 offered him my furtherance if it had pleased him to have used me. The Lord prosper the mans desires and forwardnesse, blesse his good beginnings, further his proceedings, and grant unto him most happy issue. Fare you well good sir and my singular friend. From Arusburg upon the river of Ossella, the 20. of February, 1581. Yours wholy at commandement, John Balak. MAster Anthonie Jenkinson in a disputation before her Majestie with sir Humfrey Gilbert for proofe of a passage by the Northeast to Cathaya, among other things alleageth this : videlicet, that there came a continuall streame or currant through Mare glaciale, of such swiftnesse as a Colmak told him, that if you cast any thing therein, it would presently be caried out of sight towards the West, &c. 457