the yere after the Incarnation, 390. Maximus being then King of Britaine. Certaine Englishmen sent to Constantinople by the French King to Justinian the Emperor, about the yeere of Christ, 500. out of the fourth booke of Procopius de Bello Gothico. Ritanniam tres numerosissimae insulam gentes incolunt: Quorum unicuique suus Rex imperat. Nominantur hae gentes Angili, Frisones, & qui ejusdem sunt cum insula cognominis Britones. Tanta vero hominum multitudo esse videtur, ut singulis annis inde magno numero cum uxoribus & liberis ad Francos emigrent. Illi autem in eorum terram, quae maxime deserta videtur, excipiunt. Unde insulam sibi vendicare ferunt. Utique non ita pridem, cum Francorum Rex quosdam e suis Constantinopolim ad Justinianum legaret, Anglos etiam misit, ambitiosius vendicans, quasi hasc insula suo subesset imperio. THe Isle of Britaine is inhabited by three most populous nations, every of which is governed by a severall king. The sayd nations are named Angili, Frisones, and Britones, which last are called after the In this Isle there are such swarmes name of the Island. of people, that every yeere they goe foorth in great numbers with their wives and children into France. And the Frenchmen right willingly receive them into their lande, which seemeth very desolate for want of inhabitants. Whereupon it is sayd that the French doe challenge the foresayd Island unto themselves. For not long since, when the king of the Frankes sent certaine of his subjects ambassadours to Constantinople unto Justinian the Emperour, he sent English men also, am278 [II. i. 5.] bitiously boasting, as though the sayd Isle had bene under his jurisdiction. A testimonie of the sending of Sighelmus Bishop of Shirburne, by King Alphred, unto Saint Thomas of India in the yeare of our Lord 883, recorded by William of Malmesburie, in his second booke and fourth Chapter de gestis regum Anglorum. Leemosynis intentus privilegia ecclesiarum, sicut pater statuerat, roboravit; & trans mare Romam, & ad sanctum Thomam in Indiam multa munera misit. Legatus in hoc missus Sighelmus Shirburnensis Episcopus cum magna prosperitate, quod quivis hoc seculo miretur, Indiam penetravit; inde rediens exoticos splendores gemmarum, & liquores aromatum, quorum ilia humus ferax est, reportavit. The same in English. King Alphred being addicted to giving of almes, confirmed the privileges of Churches as his father had determined; and sent also many giftes beyond the seas unto Rome, and unto S. Thomas of India. His messenger in this businesse was Sighelmus bishop of Schir- burne; who with great prosperitie (which is a matter to be wondered at in this our age) travailed thorough India, and returning home brought with him many strange and precious unions and costly spyces, such as that countrey plentifully yeeldeth. 279