which he did very exquisitely. At the last, being in the Abbie of Malmsburie, whither he went for his recreation, and there according to his manner disputing, and reading to the Students, some of them misliking and hating him, rose against him, and slue him in the yeere of Christ, 884. The travailes of Andrew Whiteman alias Leucander, Centur. 2. Ndraeas Leucander alias Whiteman (juxta Lelandum) Monachus, & Abbas Ramesiensis Caenobii tertius fuit. Hie bonis artibus studio quodam incredibili noctes atque dies invigilabat, & operae praecium ingens inde retulit. Accessit praeterea & ardens quoddam desiderium, ea propriis & apertis oculis videndi loca, in quibus Servator Christus consummavit, redemptionis nostrae mysteria omnia quorum prius sola nomina ex scripturarum lectione noverat : unde & sacram Hierosolymorum urbem, miraculorum, praedicationis, ac passionis ejus testem invisit, atque domum rediens factus est Abbas. Claruisse fertur anno nati Servatoris, 1020. sub Canuto Dano. The same in English. ANdrew Leucander otherwise called Whiteman (as Leland reporteth) was by profession a Monke, and the third Abbat of the Abbey of Ramsie : he was exceedingly given to the studie of good artes, taking paines therein day & night, and profited greatly thereby. And amongst all other things, he had an incredible desire to see those places with his eyes, wherein Christ our Saviour performed and wrought all the mysteries of our redemption, the names of which places he onely knew before by the reading of the Scriptures. Whereupon he began his journey, and went to Jerusalem a witnesse of the miracles, preaching, and passion of Christ, and being againe returned into his countrey, he was made the aforesayd Abbat. He flourished in the yere of Christ 1020. under Canutus the Dane. The voyage of Swanus one of the sonnes of Earle Godwin unto Jerusalem, Anno Dom. 1052, recorded by William of Malmsburie lib. 2. de gestis regum Anglorum, Capite 13. fWanus perversi ingenii & infidi in fegem, multoties a patre & fratre Haroldo descivit : & pirata factus, praedis maritimis virtutes majorum polluit. Postremi pro conscientia Brunonis cognati interempti, & (ut quidam dicunt) fratris Jerosolimam abiit : indeque rediens, a Saracenis circumventus, & ad mortem csesus est. T he same in English. [II. i. 7] lesse to the king, often SWanus being of a perverse disposition, and faithtimes disagreed with his father and his brother Harold : and afterwards prooving a pirate, he stained the vertues of his ancestours with his robberies upon the seas. Last of all, being guilty unto himselfe of the murther of his kinseman Bruno, and (as some do report) of his owne brother, he in his returne home, travailed unto Jerusalem : and being taken by the Saracens, was beaten, and wounded unto death. 283