unto the honour of S. Peter the chiefe Apostle : and afterward by the kings permission ordained Wolstan a Monke of Worcester of his owne choice, to be Abbate in the same place. And then having left his Bishopricke which was committed unto him over the Church of Wilton, and having resigned the same unto Hermannus above mentioned, passed over the seas, and travailed through Hungarie unto Jerusalem, &c. The voyage of Ingulphus Abbat of Croiland unto Jerusalem, performed (according to Florentius Wigorniensis) in the yeere of our Lord, 1064, and described by the said Ingulphus himselfe about the conclusion of his briefe Historic quippe urbis Go Ingulphus humilis minister Sancti Guthlaci Monasteriique sui Croilandensis, natus in Anglia, & a parentibus Anglicis, pulcherrimae Londoniarum, pro literis addiscendis in teneriori astate constitutus, primum Westmonasterio, postmodum Oxoniensi studio traditus eram. Cumque in Aristotele arripiendo supra multos coaetaneos meos profecissem, etiam Rhetoricam Tullii primam & secundam talo tenus induebam. Factus ergo adolescentior, fastidiens parentum meorum exiguitatem, paternos lares relinquere, & palatia regum aut principum affectans, mollibus vestiri, pomposisque laciniis amiciri indies ardentius appetebam. Et ecce, inclytus nunc rex noster Angliae, tune adhuc comes Normanniae Wilhelmus ad colloquium tune regis Angliae Edwardi cognati sui, cum grandi ministrantium comitatu Londonias adventabat. Quibus citius ingerens me ubique ad omnia emergentia negotia peragenda, cum prospere plurima perfecissem, in brevi agnitus illustrissimo comiti & astrictissim6 adamatus, cum ipso Normanniam enavigabam. Factus ibidem scriba ejus, pro libito totam comitis curiam, ad nonnullorum invidiam 288 insertus, A.D. 1064. [ii. i. 9.] A.D. 1051. A.D. 1064, According to Florentius in dictum regebam ; quosque volui humiliabam, & quos volui exaltabam. Cumque juvenili calore impulsus in tarn celso statu supra meos natales consistere taederem, quin semper ad altiora conscendere, instabili animo, ac nimium prurienti affectu, ad erubescentiam ambitiosus avidissime desiderarem : nuntiatur per universam Normanniam plurimos archiepiscopos imperii cum nonnullis aliis terras principibus velle pro merito animarum suarum more peregrinorum cum debita devotione Hierosolymam proficisci. De familia ergo comitis domini nostri plurimi tarn milites quam clerici, quorum primus & praecipuus ego eram, cum licentia, & domini nostri comitis benevolentia, iter nos omnes accinximus : & Alemanniam petentes, equites triginta numero & ampliiis domino Maguntino conjuncti sumus. Parati namque omnes ad viam, & cum dominis episcopis connumerati septem millia, pertranseuntes prospere multa terrarum spatia, tandem Constantinopolim pervenimus. Ubi ejus adorantes Agiosophiam Alexium vidimus, & infinita sanctuaria osculati sumus. Divertentes inde per Lyciam, in manus Arabicorum latronum incidimus; evisceratique de infinitis pecuniis, cum mortibus multorum, & maximo vitas nostrae periculo vix evadentes, tandem desideratissimam civitatem Hierosolymam tune patriarcha Sophronio nomine, viro veneranda canitie honestissimo ac sanctissimo, grandi cymbalorum tonitru, & immenso fulgore suscepti, ad divinissimam ecclesiam sanctissimi sepulchri, tarn Syrorum, quam Latinorum solenni processione deducti sumus. infleinoravimus, quot Ibi quot preces vimus, quot suspiria inspiravimus, solus ejus inhabitator novit D. noster Jesus Christus. Ab ipso itaque sanctuaria sepulchro Christi gloriosissimo summam circumducti, civitatis sanctarum ecclesiarum, & oratoriorum, quae Achim Soldanus dudum destruxerat, oculis lachrymosis viditarn mus. Et omnibus ruinis sanctissimae civitatis, ad alia infinitam tenebamus. Ab Imperatorem luminarium lachrymas invisenda introitu laeto ipso iv 289 exire in patriam & extra, quam intra ; numerosis lachrymis intimo affectu restaurationem datis non compassi, ad quorundam paucis pecuniis, sacratissimo Jordane intingi, universaque Christi vestigia osculari, desiderantissima devotione suspirabamus. Sed Arabum latrunculi qui omnem viam observabant, longius a civitate evagari, sua rabiosa multitudine innumera non sinebant. Vere igitur accedente, stolus navium Januensium in porta Joppensi applicuit. In quibus, cum sua mercimonia Christiani mercatores per civitates maritimas commutassent, & similit&r adorassent, ascendentes omnes mari nos commisimus. Et jactati fluctibus & procellis innumeris tandem Brundusium, & prospero itinere per Apuliam Romam petentes, sanctorum Apostolorum Petri & Pauli limina, & copiosissima sanctorum martyrum monumenta per omnes stationes osculati sumus. lndb archiepiscopi, caeterique principes imperii Alemanniam per dextram repetentes, nos versus Franciam ad sinistram declinantes, cum inenarrabilibus & gratiis & osculis ab invicem discessimus. Et tandem de triginta equitibus, qui de Normannia pingues exivimus, vix viginti pauperes peregrini, & omnes pedites, macie multa attenuati, reversi sumus. sancta loca The same in English. I lngulphus an humble servant of reverend Guthlac and of his monastery of Croiland, borne in England, and of English parents, at the beautifull citie of London, was in my youth, for the attaining of good letters, placed first at Westminster, and afterward sent to the Universitie of Oxford. And having excelled divers of mine equals in learning of Aristotle, I inured my selfe somewhat unto the first & second Rhethorique of Tullie. And as I grew in age, disdayning my parents meane estate, and forsaking mine owne native soyle, I affected the Courts of kings and princes, and was desirous to be clad in silke, and to weare brave and costly attire. And loe, at the same time William our sovereigne king now, but then Erie of Normandie, with a great troup of followers and attendants came unto London, to conferre with king Edward the Confessour his kinsman. A.D. 1051. Into whose company intruding my selfe, and proffering my service for the performance of any speedy or weightie affayres, in short time, after I had done many things with good successe, I was knowen and most entirely beloved by the victorious Erie himselfe, and with him I sayled into Normandie. And there being made his secretarie, I governed the Erles Court (albeit with the envie of some) as my selfe pleased, yea whom I would I abased, and preferred whom I thought good. When as therefore, being carried with a youthfull heat and lustie humour, I began to be wearie even of this place, wherein I was advanced so high above my parentage, and with an inconstant minde, and affection too too ambitious, most vehemently aspired at all occasions to climbe higher: [II. i. 10.] there went a report throughout all Normandie, that divers Archbishops of the Empire, and secular princes were desirous for their soules health, and for devotion sake, to goe on pilgrimage to Jerusalem. Wherefore out of the family of our lorde the Earle, sundry of us, both gentlemen and clerkes (principall of whom was my selfe) with the licence and good will of our sayd lord the earle, sped us on that voiage, and travailing thirtie horses of us into high Germanie, we joyned our selves unto the Archbishop of Mentz. And being with the companies of the Bishops seven thousand persons sufficiently provided for such an expedition, we passed prosperously through many provinces, and at length attained unto Constantinople. Where doing reverence unto the Emperour Alexius, we sawe the Church of Sancta Sophia, and kissed divers sacred reliques. Departing thence through Lycia, we fell into the hands of the Arabian infinite theeves: and after we had bene robbed of summes of money, and had lost many of our people, hardly escaping with extreame danger of our lives, at length wee joyfully entered into the most wished citie of Jerusalem. Where we were received by the most reverend, aged, and holy patriarke Sophronius, with great melodie of cymbals and with torch-light, and were accompanied unto the most divine Church of our Saviour his sepulchre with a solemne procession aswell of Syrians as of Latines. Here, how many prayers we uttered, what abundance of teares we shed, what deepe sighs we breathed foorth, our Lord Jesus Christ onely knoweth. Wherefore being conducted from the most glorious sepulchre of Christ to visite other sacred monuments of the citie, we saw with weeping eyes a great number of holy Churches and oratories, which Achim the Souldan of Egypt had lately destroyed. And so having bewailed with sadde teares, and most sorowful and bleeding affections, all the ruines of that most holy city both within and without, and having bestowed money for the reedifying of some, we desired with most ardent devotion to go forth into the countrey, to wash our selves in the most sacred river of Jordan, and to kisse all the steppes of Christ. Howbeit the theevish Arabians lurking upon every way, would not suffer us to travell farre from the city, by reason of their huge and furious multitudes. Wherefore about the spring there arrived at the port of Joppa a fleet of ships from Genoa. In which fleet (when the Christian merchants had exchanged all their wares at the coast townes, and had likewise visited the holy places) wee all of us embarked, committing our selves to the seas: and being tossed with many stormes and tempests, at length wee arrived at Brundusium: and so with a prosperous journey travelling thorow Apulia towards Rome, we there visited the habitations of the holy apostles Peter and Paul, and did reverence unto divers monuments of holy martyrs in all places thorowout the city. From thence the archbishops and other princes the empire travelling towards the right hand for of Alemain, and we declining towards the left hand for France, departed asunder, taking our leaves with unspeakable thankes and courtesies. And so at length, of thirty horsemen which went out of Normandie fat, lusty, and frolique, we returned thither skarse twenty poore pilgrims of us, being all footmen, and consumed with leannesse to the bare bones. Divers of the honourable family of the Beauchamps, with Robert Curtoys sonne of William the Conqueror, made a voyage to Jerusalem 1096. Hoi. pag. 22. vol. 2. Ope Urbane calling a councell at Clermont in Auvergne, exhorted the Christian princes so earnestly to make a journey into the Holy land, for the recovery thereof out of the Saracens hands, that the saide great and generall journey was concluded upon to be taken in hand, wherein many noble men of Christendome went under the leading of Godfrey of Bouillon & others, as in the Chronicles of France, of Germanie, and of the Holy land doeth more plainely appeare. There went also among other divers noble men foorth of this Realme of England, specially that worthily bare the surname of Beauchampe. The voyage of Gutwere an English Lady maried to Baldwine brother of Godfreide duke of Bouillon, toward Jerusalem about 1097. And the 11. yeere of William Rufus King of England. He Christian armie of Godfrie of Bouillon passing the citie of Iconium, alias Agogna in the countrey of Licaonia, and from thence by the city of Heraclia, came at length unto the citie of Marasia, where they encamped, and sojourned there three whole dayes, because of the wife of Baldwine brother germane of the duke of Loraigne.