A second testimony of the foresaid Sighelmus his voyage unto Saint Thomas of India &c. out of William of Malmesbury his second booke de gestis pontificum Anglorum, cap. de episcopis Schireburnensibus, Salisburiensibus, Wil- tunensibus. QIghelmus trans mare, causa eleemosynarum regis, & O etiam ad Sanctum Thomam in Indiam missus, mira prosperitate, quod quivis in hoc seculo miretur, Indiam penetravit; indeque rediens exotici generis gemmas, quarum ilia humus ferax est, reportavit. Nonnullae illarum adhuc in ecclesiae monumentis visuntur. The same in English. Olghelmus being for the performance of the kings almes O sent beyond the seas, and travailing unto S. Thomas of India, very prosperously (which a man would woonder at in this age) passed through the sayde countrey of India, and returning home brought with him divers strange and precious stones, such as that climate affourdeth. Many of which stones are as yet extant in the monuments of the Church. The life and travailes of John Erigena. Oannes Erigena Britannus natione, in Menevia urbe, seu ad fanum Davidis, & patricio genitore natus, dum Anglos Daci crudeles bellis ac rapinis molestarent, ac tumultibus plena, illic essent omnia ipse peregrinationem Athenas longam quamplures usque suscepit, annosque literis Graecis, Chaldaicis, 8c Arabicis insudavit: omnia illic invisit Philosophorum loca, ac studia, imo & ipsum Inoraculum Solis, quod Aesculapius sibi construxerat. [II. i. 6.] veniens tandem quod longo quaesierat labore, in Italiam & Galliam est reversus ubi ob insignem eruditionem, Carolo Calvo, & postea Ludovico Balbo acceptus, Dionysii Areopagitae libros de ccelesti Hierarchia, ex Constantinopoli tune missos Latinos fecit, Anno Dom. 858. Pro- fectus postea in Britanniam, Alphredi Anglorum Regis, & suorum liberorum factus est praeceptor, atque ipso mox adhortante, inter ocia literaria b Graeco transtulit in tres linguas, scilicet Chaldaicam, Arabicam, & Latinam, Aristotelis moralia, de secretis secretorum, seu recto regimine Principum, opus certe exquisitum. In Malmsburiensi caenobio tandem, quo recreationis gratia se con- tulerat, inter legendum a quibusdam discipulis malevolis interimebatur, Anno Christi, 884. The same in English. J Ohn Erigene a Britane, descended of honourable parents, and borne in the Towne of S. David in Wales, seeing the Englishmen to be oppressed with the warres and rapines of the cruell Danes, and all the land in a hurlie burlie, he in the meane time undertooke a long journey, even as farre as Athens, and there spent many yeres in the studie of the Greeke, Chaldie, and Arabian tongues : he there frequented all the places and schooles of the Philosophers, and the oracle also of the Sunne, which Aesculapius had built unto himselfe. And having found at length that which he had with long travell searched, he returned againe into Italie, and France, where for his singular learning, he was much favoured of the two Kings Charles and Lewes, and in his being into Latine the bookes of Dionysius Areopagita concerning the Heavenly Hierarchie, which were sent from Constantinople in the yeere 858. After this hee came backe againe into his owne Countrey, and was schoolemaster unto Alphred then King of England, and his sonnes : and upon his request, at his times of leasure, he translated Aristotles Morals, of the Secrets of Secrets, or of the right governement of Princes, out of Greeke into these three tongues, Chaldie, Arabian, and Latine, 281 which he did very exquisitely. At the last, being in the Abbie of Malmsburie, whither he went for his recreation, and there according to his manner disputing, and reading to the Students, some of them misliking and hating him, rose against him, and slue him in the yeere of Christ, 884. The travailes of Andrew Whiteman alias Leucander, Centur. 2. Ndraeas Leucander alias Whiteman (juxta Lelandum) Monachus, & Abbas Ramesiensis Caenobii tertius fuit. Hie bonis artibus studio quodam incredibili noctes atque dies invigilabat, & operae praecium ingens inde retulit. Accessit praeterea & ardens quoddam desiderium, ea propriis & apertis oculis videndi loca, in quibus Servator Christus consummavit, redemptionis nostrae mysteria omnia quorum prius sola nomina ex scripturarum lectione noverat : unde & sacram Hierosolymorum urbem, miraculorum, praedicationis, ac passionis ejus testem invisit, atque domum rediens factus est Abbas. Claruisse fertur anno nati Servatoris, 1020. sub Canuto Dano. The same in English. ANdrew Leucander otherwise called Whiteman (as Leland reporteth) was by profession a Monke, and the third Abbat of the Abbey of Ramsie : he was exceedingly given to the studie of good artes, taking paines therein day & night, and profited greatly thereby. And amongst all other things, he had an incredible desire to see those places with his eyes, wherein Christ our Saviour performed and wrought all the mysteries of our redemption, the names of which places he onely knew before by the reading of the Scriptures. Whereupon he began his journey, and went to Jeru-