thirty horsemen which went out of Normandie fat, lusty, and frolique, we returned thither skarse twenty poore pilgrims of us, being all footmen, and consumed with leannesse to the bare bones. Divers of the honourable family of the Beauchamps, with Robert Curtoys sonne of William the Conqueror, made a voyage to Jerusalem 1096. Hoi. pag. 22. vol. 2. Ope Urbane calling a councell at Clermont in Auvergne, exhorted the Christian princes so earnestly to make a journey into the Holy land, for the recovery thereof out of the Saracens hands, that the saide great and generall journey was concluded upon to be taken in hand, wherein many noble men of Christendome went under the leading of Godfrey of Bouillon & others, as in the Chronicles of France, of Germanie, and of the Holy land doeth more plainely appeare. There went also among other divers noble men foorth of this Realme of England, specially that worthily bare the surname of Beauchampe. The voyage of Gutwere an English Lady maried to Baldwine brother of Godfreide duke of Bouillon, toward Jerusalem about 1097. And the 11. yeere of William Rufus King of England. He Christian armie of Godfrie of Bouillon passing the citie of Iconium, alias Agogna in the countrey of Licaonia, and from thence by the city of Heraclia, came at length unto the citie of Marasia, where they encamped, and sojourned there three whole dayes, because of the wife of Baldwine brother germane of the duke of Loraigne. Which Lady being long time vexed with a grievous [Li. 11.] malady, was in extremitie, where at length paying the debt due to nature, she changed this transitorie life, for life eternall; Who, in her life time, was a very worthy and vertuous Lady, borne in England, and descended of most noble parentage named Gutwere; Which, according to her degree, was there most honourably enterred, to the great griefe of all the whole armie. As reporteth William Archbishop of Tyre, lib. 3. cap. 17. hist, belli sacri. The same author in the 10. booke & first chapter of the same historie concerning the same English Lady, writeth further as followeth, Baldwine having folowed the warres for a time, gave his minde to marriage, so that being in England he fell in love with a very honourable and noble Lady named Gutwere, whom he married and caried with him in that first happy expedition, wherin he accompanied his brethren the Lords, duke Godfrey and Eustace, persons very commendable in all vertues and of immortall memorie. But he had hard fortune in his journey, because his foresaid wife, being wearied with a long sicknes finished her life with a happie end neere the citie of Marasia, before the Christian armie came unto Antioch, where she was honourably buried, as we have declared before. Chronicon Hierosolymitanum in lib. 3. cap. 27. maketh also mention of this English Lady, which he calleth Godwera in this maner. jjAc in regione Maresch uxor Baldewini nobilissima, quam de regno Angliae eduxit, diutina corporis molestia aggravata, & duci Godefrido commendata, vitam exhalavit, sepulta Catholicis obsequiis; cujus nomen erat Godwera. The same in English. IN this province of Maresch the most noble wife of Baldwine, which he caried with him out of England being visited with dayly sicknesses and infirmities of A-D1102. body, and commended to the custody of duke Godfrey, the departed out of Christian maner. Her name was Godwera. this life, and was buried after The voyage of Edgar the sonne of Edward which was the sonne of Edmund surnamed Ironside, brother unto K. Edward the confessor, (being accompanied with valiant Robert the sonne of Godwin) unto Jerusalem, in the yeere of our Lord 1102. Recorded by William of Malmesburie, lib. 3. histo. fol. 58, Illud Godwini milite audacissimo Edgarus Hierosolymam pertendit. fuit tempus quo Turci Baldwinum regem apud Ramas obsederunt: qui cum obferre nequiret, per injuriam sidionis solius acies effugit, medias hostium Roberti opera liberatus praeeuntis, & evaginato gladio dextra levaque Turcos caedentis. Sed cum successu ipso truculentior, alacritate nimia procurreret, ensis manu excidit. Ad quern recolligendum cum se inclinasset, omnium incursu oppressus, vinculis palmas dedit. Inde Babyloniam (ut aiunt) ductus, cum Christum abnegare noUet, in medio foro ad signum positus, & sagittis terebratus, martyrium consecravit. Edgarus amisso milite regressus, multaque beneficia ab Imperatoribus Graecorum, & Alemannorum adeptus (quippe qui etiam eum retinere progeneris amplitudine tentassent) omnia pro natalis soli desiderio sprevit. Quosdam enim profecto fallit amor patriae, ut nihil eis videatur jucundum, nisi consuet um hauserint coelum. Unde Edgarus fatua cupidine illusus Angliam rediit, ubi (ut superius dixi) diverso fortunae ludicro rotatus, nunc remotus & tacitus, canos suos in agro consumit. 295