that friendly entertainment, sent them over unto the bishop of Ephesus ; and wrote his letters unto him giving him charge, the English Ambassadours might be admitted to see the true, and material habiliments of the seven Sleepers. And it came to passe that King Edwards vision was approved by all the Greekes, who protested they were advertised by their fathers, that the foresaid seven Sleepers had alwayes before that time rested upon their right sides ; but after the Englishmen were entered into the cave, those Sleepers confirmed the trueth of their countreymen. Neither were the calamities foretold, any long time delayed : for the Agarens, Arabians, Turkes and other unbeleeving nations invading the Christians, harried and spoiled Syria, Lycia, the lesser Asia, and many cities of Asia the greater, and amongst the rest Ephesus, yea, and Jerusalem also. the outlandish prophesie, unto The voyage of Alured bishop of Worcester unto Jerusalem, an. 1058. Recorded by Roger Hoveden in parte priore Annalium, fol. 255. linea 15. Luredus Wigorniensis Episcopus eccle- A.D. 1058. in civitate Glavorna a siam, quam fundamentis in honore construxerat, principis Apostolorum Petri honorifice dedicavit : & postea regis licentia Wolstanum Wigorniensem Monachum a se ibidem. ordinatum Abbatem constituit Dein praesulatu dimisso Wiltoniensis ecclesiae, qui sibi ad regendum commissus fuerat, & Hermanno, cujus supra mentionem fecimus, reddito, mare transiit, & per Hungariam profectus est Hierosolymam, &c. The same in English. IN the yere of our Lord 1058. Alured bishop of Worcester, very solemnely dedicated a Church (which himselfe had founded and built in the citie of Glocester) unto the honour of S. Peter the chiefe Apostle : and afterward by the kings permission ordained Wolstan a Monke of Worcester of his owne choice, to be Abbate in the same place. And then having left his Bishopricke which was committed unto him over the Church of Wilton, and having resigned the same unto Hermannus above mentioned, passed over the seas, and travailed through Hungarie unto Jerusalem, &c. The voyage of Ingulphus Abbat of Croiland unto Jerusalem, performed (according to Florentius Wigorniensis) in the yeere of our Lord, 1064, and described by the said Ingulphus himselfe about the conclusion of his briefe Historic quippe urbis Go Ingulphus humilis minister Sancti Guthlaci Monasteriique sui Croilandensis, natus in Anglia, & a parentibus Anglicis, pulcherrimae Londoniarum, pro literis addiscendis in teneriori astate constitutus, primum Westmonasterio, postmodum Oxoniensi studio traditus eram. Cumque in Aristotele arripiendo supra multos coaetaneos meos profecissem, etiam Rhetoricam Tullii primam & secundam talo tenus induebam. Factus ergo adolescentior, fastidiens parentum meorum exiguitatem, paternos lares relinquere, & palatia regum aut principum affectans, mollibus vestiri, pomposisque laciniis amiciri indies ardentius appetebam. Et ecce, inclytus nunc rex noster Angliae, tune adhuc comes Normanniae Wilhelmus ad colloquium tune regis Angliae Edwardi cognati sui, cum grandi ministrantium comitatu Londonias adventabat. Quibus citius ingerens me ubique ad omnia emergentia negotia peragenda, cum prospere plurima perfecissem, in brevi agnitus illustrissimo comiti & astrictissim6 adamatus, cum ipso Normanniam enavigabam. Factus ibidem scriba ejus, pro libito totam comitis curiam, ad nonnullorum invidiam 288 insertus, A.D. 1064. [ii. i. 9.] A.D. 1051. A.D. 1064, According to Florentius