The voyage of John Lacy to Jerusalem. IX73- [lg^¥jEj|Nno Domini 1172 fundata fuit abbatia de Stanlaw H^tl per dominum Johannem Lacy Constabularium y "^ Cestrias & dominum de Halton, qui obiit in Terra sancta anno sequenti: qui fuit vicessimus annus regni regis Henrici secundi. T he same in English. IN the yere of our Lord 1172 was founded the abbey of Stanlaw by the lord John Lacy Constable of Chester, & lord of Halton, who deceased in the Holy land the yere following : which was in the twentieth yere of king Henry the second. T he voyage of William Mandevile to Jerusalem. 1177- \\ yTIlliam Mandevile earle of Essex, with divers VV English lords and knights, went to the Holy land in the 24 yere of Henry the second. Holinshed pag. 101. English men were the guard of the Emperours of Constantinople in the reigne of John the sonne of Alexius Comnenus. Malmesburiensis, Curopolata and Camden, pag. 96. I Am inde Anglia non minus belli gloria, quam humanitatis cultu inter Florentissimas orbis I Christiani gentes inprimis floruit. Adeo ut ad custodiam corporis Constantinopolitanorum Imperatorum evocati fuerint Angli. Joannes enim Alexii Comneni filius, ut refert noster Malmesburiensis, eorum fidem suspiciens praecipue familiaritati suae applicabat, amorem eorum filio transcribens : Adeo ut jam inde longo tempore fuerint imperatorum illorum satellites, Inglini Bipenniferi Nicetae Choniatae, Barangi Curopolatae dicti. Qui ubique Imperatorem prosequebantur ferentes humeris secures, exhibebat, Anglice vitam diuturnam secures suas collidentes ut sonitum ederent, comprecabantur. The same in English. FRom this time forward the kingdome of England was reputed amongst the most flourishing estates of Christendome, no lesse in chivalrie then humanitie. So farforth that the English men were sent for to be the guarders of the persons of the Emperours of Constantinople. For John the sonne of Alexius Comnenus, as our countreyman William of Malmesburie reporteth, highly esteeming their fidelity, used them very nere about him, recommending them over to his sonne: so that long time afterwards the guard of those Emperours were English halberdiers, called by Nicetas Choniata, Inglini Bipenniferi, and by Curopolata, Barangi, which alwayes accom- their panied shoulders, which they held up when the Emperour comming from his Oratorie shewed himselfe to the people; and clashing their halberds together to make a terrible sound, they in the English tongue wished unto him long life. the Emperour with their halberds on A great supply of money to the Holy land by Henry the 2. fii. i. 18.] jlHe same yeere King Henry the second being at Waltham, assigned an aide to the maintenance of the Christian souldiers in the Holy lande, That is to wit, two and fortie thousand markes of silver, and five hundred markes of golde. Matth. Paris, and Holens. pag. 105.