cens, but that he ment to go through with the worke, that he had begunne. Whereupon sending a message unto Japhet, hee advised the English souldiers to come downe to Acres with their fleete, and to conferre and consult with him touching the besieging and assaulting of the citie of Sagitta, which rising immediatly upon the kings commaundement, and foorthwith hoysing up the sayles of their shippes aloft with pendants and stremers of purple, and diverse other glorious colours, their flagges of scarlet colour and silke, came with thither, and casting their ancres, rode hard by the citie. The king the next day calling unto him such as were privie & acquainted with his dealings, opened his griefe the chiefe Captaines of the English men and unto Danes, touching the slaughter of Hugh, and the death of his brother, and what great confidence he reposed in them concerning these warres : and that nowe therefore they being departed and dead, he must of neces- sity differre the besieging of Sagitta, & for this time dismisse the armie assembled. This resolution of the king being spred among the people, the armie was the Englishmen, Danes and Flemings, dissolved, and with sailes and oares going aboard their fleete, saluted the king, and returned home unto their native countries. The travailes of one Athelard an Englishman, recorded by master Bale Centur. 2. jlThelardus Bathoniensis Coenobii monachus, naturalium rerum mysteria, & causas omnes, dili- I genti& tarn undecunque exquisita perscrutatus est, ut cum aliquibus veteris seculi philosophis non indigne conferri possit. Hie olim spectatae indolis Adolescens, ut virente adhuc setate juvenile ingenium foecundaret, [II. i. 16.] atque ad res magnas pararet, relicta dulci patria longinquas petiit regiones. Cum ver6 iEgyptum & Arabiam peragrans, plura invenisset, quae ejus desiderabat animus, in Angliam cum magno laborum, ac literarum lucro turn demum revertebatur. Claruit anno virginei partus, 1130. Henrico primo regnante. The same in English. AThelard a Monke of the Abbie of Bathe was so diligent a searcher of the secrets, and causes of naturall things, that he deserveth worthely to be compared with some of the auncient Philosophers. This man although young, yet being of a good wit, and being desirous to increase and enrich the same with the things, and to prepare himselfe as it were for best left his Countrey for a time, and greater matters, travailed through into forreine Regions. He went Egypt, and Arabia, and found out many things which he desired to his owne private contentment, and the proiite of good letters generally, and so being satisfied, returned againe into his Countrey : he flourished in the yeere 1130. Henry the first being then king of England. A i 1 -i- ^f The life and travailes of one William of Tyre, an Englishman. Centur. 13. Ulielmus, Ecclesiae Dominici yren,515 r, darutt sub sepulchri Hie etiam Hierosolymae Regularium Canonicorum Guilielmus prior, natione Anglicus vir vita & mori- 1 bus commendabilis, Anno Dom. 1128. Henricoprimo. postquam Tyrorum Civitas fidei Christianae restituta est a Guimundo Hiero- solymorum patriarcha, eidem urbi primus Archiepiscopus prasficiebatur. Est autem Tyrus civitas antiquissima, Phoeniciae universae Metropolis, quae inter Syriae provincias, & bonorum omnium penb commoditate, & incolarum frequentia primum semper obtinuit locum : post conscripta quaedam opuscula, & Epistolas, ad Dominum migravit, An. Christi 1130. quum duobus tantum sedisset annis, & in Tyrensi Ecclesia sepelitur. -r^ 