turn demum revertebatur. Claruit anno virginei partus, 1130. Henrico primo regnante. The same in English. AThelard a Monke of the Abbie of Bathe was so diligent a searcher of the secrets, and causes of naturall things, that he deserveth worthely to be compared with some of the auncient Philosophers. This man although young, yet being of a good wit, and being desirous to increase and enrich the same with the things, and to prepare himselfe as it were for best left his Countrey for a time, and greater matters, travailed through into forreine Regions. He went Egypt, and Arabia, and found out many things which he desired to his owne private contentment, and the proiite of good letters generally, and so being satisfied, returned againe into his Countrey : he flourished in the yeere 1130. Henry the first being then king of England. A i 1 -i- ^f The life and travailes of one William of Tyre, an Englishman. Centur. 13. Ulielmus, Ecclesiae Dominici yren,515 r, darutt sub sepulchri Hie etiam Hierosolymae Regularium Canonicorum Guilielmus prior, natione Anglicus vir vita & mori- 1 bus commendabilis, Anno Dom. 1128. Henricoprimo. postquam Tyrorum Civitas fidei Christianae restituta est a Guimundo Hiero- solymorum patriarcha, eidem urbi primus Archiepiscopus prasficiebatur. Est autem Tyrus civitas antiquissima, Phoeniciae universae Metropolis, quae inter Syriae provincias, & bonorum omnium penb commoditate, & incolarum frequentia primum semper obtinuit locum : post conscripta quaedam opuscula, & Epistolas, ad Dominum migravit, An. Christi 1130. quum duobus tantum sedisset annis, & in Tyrensi Ecclesia sepelitur. -r^ The same in English. William the Prior of the Canons Regular in the Church of Jerusalem, called the Lords Sepulchre, was an Englishman borne, and of a vertuous and that the Citie of Tyre was good behaviour. After restored againe to the Christian faith, Guimunde the Patriarke of Jerusalem made him the first Archbishop of Tyre, in the yeere 1128. Which Tyre is a very ancient Citie, the Metropolis of all Phoenicia, and hath bene accompted the chiefest Province of Syria, both for fruitful commodities and multitude of inhabitants. This William having in his life written many Bookes and Epistles, died at last in the yeere 1130. having bene Archbishop the space of two yeeres, and was buried in the Church of Tyre. T he travailes of Robertus Ketenensis. Obertus Ketenensis natione & cognomine Anglus, degustatis primum per Anglorum gymnasia humanarum artium elementis literariis, ultramarinas statim visitare provincias in animo constituit : Peragratis ergo Galliis, Italia, Dalmatia, & Graecia, turn demum pervenit in Asiam, ubi non labore, ac vitae suae periculo inter Saracenos parvo linguam truculentissimum hominum genus, Arabicam ad amussim didicit. In Hispaniam postea navigio traductus, circa fluvium Hiberum Astrological artis studio, Claruitsub cum Hermanno quodam Dalmata, magni sui itineris eomite se totum dedit. Claruit anno servatoris nostri, Stepkano. 1143 Stephano regnante, & Pampilonae sepelitur. The same in English. rT^VHis Robert Ketenensis was called an Englishman -L by surname, as he was by birth : who after some time spent in the foundations of humanitie, and in the