The same in English. William the Prior of the Canons Regular in the Church of Jerusalem, called the Lords Sepulchre, was an Englishman borne, and of a vertuous and that the Citie of Tyre was good behaviour. After restored againe to the Christian faith, Guimunde the Patriarke of Jerusalem made him the first Archbishop of Tyre, in the yeere 1128. Which Tyre is a very ancient Citie, the Metropolis of all Phoenicia, and hath bene accompted the chiefest Province of Syria, both for fruitful commodities and multitude of inhabitants. This William having in his life written many Bookes and Epistles, died at last in the yeere 1130. having bene Archbishop the space of two yeeres, and was buried in the Church of Tyre. T he travailes of Robertus Ketenensis. Obertus Ketenensis natione & cognomine Anglus, degustatis primum per Anglorum gymnasia humanarum artium elementis literariis, ultramarinas statim visitare provincias in animo constituit : Peragratis ergo Galliis, Italia, Dalmatia, & Graecia, turn demum pervenit in Asiam, ubi non labore, ac vitae suae periculo inter Saracenos parvo linguam truculentissimum hominum genus, Arabicam ad amussim didicit. In Hispaniam postea navigio traductus, circa fluvium Hiberum Astrological artis studio, Claruitsub cum Hermanno quodam Dalmata, magni sui itineris eomite se totum dedit. Claruit anno servatoris nostri, Stepkano. 1143 Stephano regnante, & Pampilonae sepelitur. The same in English. rT^VHis Robert Ketenensis was called an Englishman -L by surname, as he was by birth : who after some time spent in the foundations of humanitie, and in the travailed through France, elements of good Artes in the Universities of England, determined to travaile to the partes beyond sea : and so Italie, Dalmatia, and Greece, and came at last into Asia, where he lived in great danger of his life among the cruell Saracens, but yet learned perfectly the Arabian tongue. Afterwardes he returned by sea into Spaine, and there about the river Iberus, gave him selfe wholy to the studie of Astrologie, with one Hermannus a Dalmatian, who had in his long voyage. He flourished accompanied him in the yeere 1143. Steven being then King of England, and was buried at Pampilona. A voyage of certaine English men under conduct of Lewes king of France unto Holy land. the [ IL *• !7-] the Antae expeditionis explicito apparatu uter- 1147. que princeps 5*. iter arripuit, & exercitu TemPore re&s J r* *. • Stepkam r f lmperator enim Conradus prse- separtito. cedebat itinere aliquot dierum, cum Italorum, Germanorum, alianimque gentium amplissimis copiis. Rex vero Lodovicus sequebatur Francorum, Flandrensium, Normannorum, Britonum, Anglorum, Burgundionum, Provincialium, Aquitanorum, equestri simul & pedestri agmine comitatus. Gulielmus Neobrigensis, fol. 371. The same in English. BOth the princes provision being made for so great an expedition, they severing their armies, entered on their journey. For the Emperour Conradus went before, certaine dayes journey, with very great power of Italians, Germans, and other countreys. And king Lewes followed after accompanied with a band of horsemen and footmen of French men, Flemmings, Normans, Britons, English men, Burgundions, men of ; Provence, and Gascoins.