Mention made of one Godericus, a valiant Englishman, who was with his ships in the voyage unto the Holy land in the second yeere of Baldwine King of Jerusalem, in the third yere of Henry the first of England. Hronicon Hierosolymitanum lib. 9. cap. 9. Verhm dehinc septem diebus evolutis rex ab Assur exiens, navem quae dicitur Buza ascendit, & cum eo Godericus pirata de regno Angliae, ac vexillo hastae praefixo & elato in a€re ad radios solis usque, Japhet cum paucis navigavit, ut hoc ejus signo cives Christiani recognito, fiduciam vitae regis haberent, & non facile hostium minis pavefacti, turpiter diffugium facerent, aut urbem reddere cogerentur. Sciebat enim eos multum de vita & salute ejus desperare. Saraceni autem viso ejus signo, & recognito, ea parte quae urbem navigio cingebat illi in galeis viginti & Carinis tredecim, quas vulgo appellant Cazh, occurrerunt, volentes Buzam regis coronare. Sed Dei auxilio undis maris illis ex adverso tumescentibus ac reluctantibus, Buza autem regis facili, & agili cursu inter procellas labente, ac volitante, in portu Joppae delusis hostibus subito affuit, sex ex Saracenis in arcu suo in navicula percussis, ac incolumis vulneratis. omnium pateret oculis, revixit spiritus cunctorum gementium & de ejus morte hactenus dolentium, eo quod caput & rex Christianorum & princeps Hierusalem adhuc vivus & incolumis receptus sit. itaque civitatem dum Intrans The same in English. BUt seven dayes afterward, the King comming out of the towne of Assur entred into a shippe called a Busse, and one Godericke a pirate of the kingdome of England with him, and fastening his banner on the toppe of a speare, and holding it up aloft in the aire against the beames of the Sunne, sailed unto Japhet with a small company ; That the Christian Citizens there seeing this his banner, might conceive hope that the King was yet living, and being not easily terrified with the threates of the enemies might shamefully runne away, or be constrained to yeeld up the citie. For hee knew that they were very much out of hope of his life and safetie. The Saracens seeing and knowing this his banner, that part of them which environed the Citie by water made towards him with twentie Gallies and thirteene shippes, which they commonly cal Cazh, seeking to inclose the Kings shippe. But, by Gods helpe the billowes of the Sea swelling and raging against them, and the Kings shippe gliding and passing through the waves with an easie and nimble course arrived suddenly in the haven of Joppa, the enemies frustrated of their purpose ; and sixe of the Saracens were hurt and wounded by shot out of the Kings shippe. So that the King entering into the Citie, and nowe appearing in safetie in all their sightes, the spirits of all them that mourned for him, and until then lamented as though hee had bene dead, revived, because that the head and King of the Christians, and prince of Jerusalem was yet alive, and come againe unto them in perfect health. Mention made of one Hardine of England one of the chiefest personages, and a leader among other of two hundred saile of ships of Christians that landed at Joppa in the yeere of our Lord God 1102. [Hronicon Hierosolymitanum libro 9. cap. 11. Interea dum haec obsidio ageretur 200. naves Christianorum navigio Joppen appulsae sunt, ut adorarent in Hierusalemterra Horum Bernardus Witrazh de Galatiae, Hardinus de Anglia, Otho de Roges, Hadewerck, unus de praepotentibus Westfalorum, primi & ductores fuisse referuntur, 