the beames of the Sunne, sailed unto Japhet with a small company ; That the Christian Citizens there seeing this his banner, might conceive hope that the King was yet living, and being not easily terrified with the threates of the enemies might shamefully runne away, or be constrained to yeeld up the citie. For hee knew that they were very much out of hope of his life and safetie. The Saracens seeing and knowing this his banner, that part of them which environed the Citie by water made towards him with twentie Gallies and thirteene shippes, which they commonly cal Cazh, seeking to inclose the Kings shippe. But, by Gods helpe the billowes of the Sea swelling and raging against them, and the Kings shippe gliding and passing through the waves with an easie and nimble course arrived suddenly in the haven of Joppa, the enemies frustrated of their purpose ; and sixe of the Saracens were hurt and wounded by shot out of the Kings shippe. So that the King entering into the Citie, and nowe appearing in safetie in all their sightes, the spirits of all them that mourned for him, and until then lamented as though hee had bene dead, revived, because that the head and King of the Christians, and prince of Jerusalem was yet alive, and come againe unto them in perfect health. Mention made of one Hardine of England one of the chiefest personages, and a leader among other of two hundred saile of ships of Christians that landed at Joppa in the yeere of our Lord God 1102. [Hronicon Hierosolymitanum libro 9. cap. 11. Interea dum haec obsidio ageretur 200. naves Christianorum navigio Joppen appulsae sunt, ut adorarent in Hierusalemterra Horum Bernardus Witrazh de Galatiae, Hardinus de Anglia, Otho de Roges, Hadewerck, unus de praepotentibus Westfalorum, primi & ductores fuisse referuntur, &c. Erat autem tertia feria Julii mensis, quando hae Christianorum copiae, Deo protegente, hue navigio angustiatis & obsessis ad opem collatae sunt. Sarracenorum autem turmae, videntes quia Christianorum virtus audacter facie ad faciem vicino sibi hospitio proximfe jungebatur, media nocte orbi incumbente, amotis tentoriis amplius milliari subtractae consederunt, dum luce exorta consilium inirent, utrum Ascalonem redirent, aut cives Japhet crebris assultibus vexarent. The same in English. [n. i. 13.] that they might performe WHile the Sarazens continued their siege against two hundred saile of Christian ships Joppa, arrived at Joppa, their devotions at Hierusalem. The chiefe men and leaders of these Christians are reported to have bene : Bernard Witrazh of the land of Galatia, Hardine of England, Otho of Roges, Haderwerck one of the chiefe noble men of Westphalia, &c. This Christian power through Gods speciall provision, arrived here for the succour and reliefe of the distressed & besieged Christians in Joppa, the third day of July, 1102. and in the second yeere of Baldwine king of Jerusalem. Whereupon the multitude of the Sarazens, seeing that the Christian power joyned themselves boldly, close by them even face to face in a lodging hard by them, the very next night at midnight, remooved their tents, and pitched them more then a mile off, that they might the next morning bee advised whether they should returne to Ascalon, or by often assaults vexe the citizens of Japhet. Chronicon Hierosolymitanum, eodem libro 9. cap. 12. continueth this historie of these two hundreth saile of ships, and sheweth how by their prowesse chiefly, the multitude of the Sarazens were in short space vanquished and overthrowen : The words are these ; Ab ipso vero die tertiae feriae dum sic in superbia & elatione suae multitudinis immobiles Saraceni persisterent, & multis terroribus Christianum populum vexarent, armorum sexta feria appropinquante, Rex Baldwinus in tubis & cornibus a Japhet egrediens, in manu robusta equitum & peditum virtutem illorum crudeli bello est aggressus, magnis hinc & hinc clamoribus intonantes. Christiani quoque qui navigio appulsi sunt horribili pariter clamore cum Rege Baldwino, & gravi strepitu vociferantes, Babylonios vehementi pugna sunt aggressi, saevissimis atque mortiferis plagis eos affligentes, donee bello fatigati, & ultra vim non sustinentes fugam versus Ascalonem inierunt. Alii vero ab insecutoribus eripi existimantes, & mari se credentes, intolerabili procellarum fluctuatione absorpti sunt. Et sic civitas Joppe cum habitatoribus suis liberata est. Ceciderunt hac die tria millia Sarracenorum: Christianorum vero pauci periisse inventi sunt. The same in English. YEt notwithstanding, after the said third day of July, the Sarazens persisted high minded and insolent, by reason of their great multitude, and much annoied the Christian people with their many forceable and terrible weapons ; whereupon, on the sixt day of July early in the morning king Baldwine issued out of Japhet, his trumpets and cornets yeelding a great and lowd sound, and with a very strong armie as well of horsemen as footemen, who on every side making great shoutes and outcries, with fierce and sharpe battell set on the maine power of their enemies. The Christians also who arrived in the navie, rearing great clamours and noyses, with loud voices and shoutings in horrible wise together, with king Baldwine assaulted likewise with strong battell the Babylonians, and afflicted them with most sore and deadly wounds, untill the Sarazens being wearied with fighting, nor able longer to endure and hold out against the valure of the Christians, fled towards Ascalon. And other of them hoping to escape from them that pursued them, lept into the sea, and were swalowed up in the waves thereof. And so the citie of Joppa with the inhabitants thereof were freed of their enemies. There were slaine this day three thousand Sarazens, and but a few of the Christians perished. A Fleete of Englishmen, Danes, and Flemmings, arrived at Joppa in the Holy land, the seventh yeere of Baldwine the second king of Hierusalem. Written in the beginning of the tenth booke of the Chronicle of Hierusalem, in the 8. yeere of Henry the first of England. Cap. 1. there to make j|T the same time also in the seventh yeere of the raigne of Baldwine the Catholike king of Hierusalem, a very great warrelike Fleete of the Catholike nation of England, to the number of about seven thousand, having with them more men of warre of the kingdom of Denmarke, of Flanders and of Antwerpe, arrived with ships which they call Busses, at the haven of the citie of Japhet, they determining having obtained the kings licence and safeconduct, might safely worship at Hierusalem. Of which navie the chiefest and best spoken repairing to the king, spake to him in this maner. Christ preserve the Kings life, and prosper his kingdome from day to day ; Wee, being men and souldiours of Christian profession, have, through the helpe of God, sayled hither through mightie and [II. i. 14.] large seas, from the farre countreys of England, Flanders, and Denmarke, to worship at Jerusalem, and to visit the sepulchre of our Lord. And therefore we are assembled to intreat your clemency touching the matter, that by your favour and safe conduct we may peaceably goe up to Jerusalem, and worship there, and so returne. their abode, untill 301