and long exercise therein, hee grewe to bee such an Oratour and Poet, as fewe were in that age living, by reason whereof hee grew in favour with Richard then King of England, and undertooke that long voyage with him into Palestina and Syria agaynst the Turkes. From whence being returned againe into England, hee faithfully described both in Verse and Prose all such things as hee had seene in the Cities, fieldes and tentes of the souldiours, where hee was present, and omitted not to note the behaviour, forme, and proportion of body in the foresayd king, giving to his notable worke this most apt name for the title, The Journall of King Richard. He flourished in the yeere of our Redemption 1200. under John king of England. The travailes of Gulielmus Peregrinus. Ulielmus Peregrinus, Poeta quidem per earn aetatem excellens, genere Anglus florebat, literarum, ut multi tune erant, amator maximus, & qui bona tempora melioribus impenderat studiis. Hie cum accepisset, expeditionem in Saracenos per Regem Richardum parari, accinxit se ad iter illud, non tantum ut miles, sed etiam peregrinus. Vidit ea quae in Mari Hispanico fiebant, vidit quae in Syria & Palaestina commissa fuerunt, in Sultanum Babyloniae Regem, ac perfidos Saracenos. Omnia haec scripsit, & vivis depinxit coloribus, ita ut quasi prae oculis, totum poneret negotium, id6mque Argumentum cum Richardo Canonico non infoeliciter, Heroico pertractavit carmine, opiisque jam absolutum Huberto Cantuariorum Archiepiscopo, & Stephano Turnhamo Capitaneo rerum bellicarum expertissimo dedicavit, addito hoc titulo, Odeporicon Richardi Regis. Multaque alia edidisse Poetam talem non dubito, sed num extent ilia ejus scripta, mihi non constat. Hoc tamen satis constat, eum fuisse in pretio, Anno k salutifero virginis partu 1200. sub Anglorum Rege Joanne. The same in English. William the Pilgrime, a very excellent Poet in those dayes and an Englishman borne, was of great fame, being much given to good letters, (as many then were) and bestowed his good time in the best kinde of studies. Hee understanding of the preparation of king Richard against the Saracens, prepared himselfe also for the same voyage, not onely as a Souldiour, but as a Pilgrime also. He sawe those things which happened in the Spanish Seas, and which were done in Syria and Palestina, against the Sultan the king of Babylon, and the trecherous Saracens. All which things he wrote and expressed them as it were in lively colours, as if they had bene still in doing before his eyes, and handled the same Argument forenamed Richard Canonicus did. And having finished his worke he dedicated it to Hubert Archbishop of Canterburie, and to Stephen Turneham a most expert Captaine of the warres, giving it this Title, The expedition of King Richard. And I doubt not but that so good a Poet as hee was published many other things, but whether they be extant yea or no, I know not : but this I know, that he was a man well accounted of, and flourished in the yeere after the birth of Christ 1200. under king John. in Heroicall verse which the Holy land, made by king John king of England, in the third yeere of his reigne 1201. Matth. Paris and Holinsh. pag. 164. T the same time also the kings of France and England gave large money towards the maintenance of the army which at this present went foorth under the leading of the earle of Flanders and other, to warre against the Christian faith at the instance of pope Innocent. There was furthermore granted unto them 345 the enemies of The large contribution to the succour of 