the fortieth part of all the revenues belonging unto ecclesiasticall persons, towards the ayd of the Christians then being in the Holy land: and all such aswel of the nobility, as other of the weaker sort, which had taken upon them the crosse, and secretly layed it downe were compelled eftsoones to receive it now againe. T he travailes of Hubert Walter bishop of Sarisburie. Ubertus Walterus Sarisburiensis Episcopus, vir probus, ingenioque ac pietate clarus, inter praecipuos unus eorum erat, qui post Richardum regem expugnanin Syriam dorum Saracenorum gratia proficiscebantur. Cum ex Palaestina in Sicilia, quod idem rediens, audiret Richardus in inimicorum manus incidisset, omisso itinere inccepto, ad eum cursim divertebat: Quern & ille statim in Angliam misit, ut illic regii Senatus authoritate, indicto pro ejus redemptione tributo pecuniam colligeret, quod & industrius fecit ac regem liberavit. Inde Cantuariorum Archiepiscopus factus, post ejus mortem Joanni illius fratri ac successori paria fidelitatis officia praestitit. Longa enim oratione toti Anglorum nationi persuasit, quod vir providus, prsestans, fortis, genere nobilissimus, & imperio dignissimus esset: quo salutatus a populo fiiit, atque in regem coronatus. Composuit quaedam opuscula, & ex immenso animi dolore demum obiisse fertur, Anno salutis humanae 1205. c um sedisset annos 11. Menses octo, & dies sex: quum vidisset ex intestinis ire, in odiis, omnia regnante Joanne. transmarinis regionibus pessum The same in English. HUbert Walter bishop of Sarisburie, a vertuous man, and famous for his good wit and piety, was one of the chiefest of them that followed king Richard into Syria going against the Saracens. As he returned from Palaestina and came in his journey into Sicilia, he there heard of the ill fortune of the king being fallen into his enemies handes, and thereupon leaving his journey homewards, he went presently and in all haste to the place where the king was captived, whom the king immediatly into England, that by the upon his comming sent authority of the councell, a tribute might be collected for his redemption: which this Hubert performed with great diligence, and delivered the king. After this he was made Archbishop of Canterburie, and after the death of king Richard he shewed the like dueties of fidelitie and trust to his brother John that succeeded him. For by a long oration he perswaded the whole nation of the English men, that he was a very circumspect man, vertuous, valiant, borne of noble parentage, and most woorthy of the crowne. Whereupon he was so received of all the people and crowned king. He wrote certaine books, and died at the last with very great griefe of minde, in the yeere 1205, having beene archbishop the space of 11 yeres 8 moneths and sixe dayes, by reason of the civil discords abroad, whereby all things went topsie turvy, and in the reigne of king John. The travailes of Robert Curson. Obertus Curson ex nobili quodam Anglorum ortus genere, disciplinis turn prophanis, turn sacris studiosus incubuit, idque (quantum ex conjecturis colligo) in celebratissima Oxonii Academia. Prsestantissimis illic institutoribus usus, ex industria, summa circa & assiduo labore, famam sibi inter suos celeberrimam comparavit. Ampliora deinde meditatus Parisiorum Lutetiam, atque Romam ipsam petiit, illic Theologus Doctor, hie vero Cardinalis effectus. Unde uterque Matthaeus Parisius, ac Westmonasterius, hoc de ipso testimonium adferunt: hie libro 2. ille 8. suorum Chronicorum. Anno Domini. 1218 (inquiunt) in cap347 ingenuas artes 