The same in English. William the Pilgrime, a very excellent Poet in those dayes and an Englishman borne, was of great fame, being much given to good letters, (as many then were) and bestowed his good time in the best kinde of studies. Hee understanding of the preparation of king Richard against the Saracens, prepared himselfe also for the same voyage, not onely as a Souldiour, but as a Pilgrime also. He sawe those things which happened in the Spanish Seas, and which were done in Syria and Palestina, against the Sultan the king of Babylon, and the trecherous Saracens. All which things he wrote and expressed them as it were in lively colours, as if they had bene still in doing before his eyes, and handled the same Argument forenamed Richard Canonicus did. And having finished his worke he dedicated it to Hubert Archbishop of Canterburie, and to Stephen Turneham a most expert Captaine of the warres, giving it this Title, The expedition of King Richard. And I doubt not but that so good a Poet as hee was published many other things, but whether they be extant yea or no, I know not : but this I know, that he was a man well accounted of, and flourished in the yeere after the birth of Christ 1200. under king John. in Heroicall verse which the Holy land, made by king John king of England, in the third yeere of his reigne 1201. Matth. Paris and Holinsh. pag. 164. T the same time also the kings of France and England gave large money towards the maintenance of the army which at this present went foorth under the leading of the earle of Flanders and other, to warre against the Christian faith at the instance of pope Innocent. There was furthermore granted unto them 345 the enemies of The large contribution to the succour of the fortieth part of all the revenues belonging unto ecclesiasticall persons, towards the ayd of the Christians then being in the Holy land: and all such aswel of the nobility, as other of the weaker sort, which had taken upon them the crosse, and secretly layed it downe were compelled eftsoones to receive it now againe. T he travailes of Hubert Walter bishop of Sarisburie. Ubertus Walterus Sarisburiensis Episcopus, vir probus, ingenioque ac pietate clarus, inter praecipuos unus eorum erat, qui post Richardum regem expugnanin Syriam dorum Saracenorum gratia proficiscebantur. Cum ex Palaestina in Sicilia, quod idem rediens, audiret Richardus in inimicorum manus incidisset, omisso itinere inccepto, ad eum cursim divertebat: Quern & ille statim in Angliam misit, ut illic regii Senatus authoritate, indicto pro ejus redemptione tributo pecuniam colligeret, quod & industrius fecit ac regem liberavit. Inde Cantuariorum Archiepiscopus factus, post ejus mortem Joanni illius fratri ac successori paria fidelitatis officia praestitit. Longa enim oratione toti Anglorum nationi persuasit, quod vir providus, prsestans, fortis, genere nobilissimus, & imperio dignissimus esset: quo salutatus a populo fiiit, atque in regem coronatus. Composuit quaedam opuscula, & ex immenso animi dolore demum obiisse fertur, Anno salutis humanae 1205. c um sedisset annos 11. Menses octo, & dies sex: quum vidisset ex intestinis ire, in odiis, omnia regnante Joanne. transmarinis regionibus pessum The same in English. HUbert Walter bishop of Sarisburie, a vertuous man, and famous for his good wit and piety, was one of the chiefest of them that followed king Richard into Syria going against the Saracens. As he returned from