Palaestina and came in his journey into Sicilia, he there heard of the ill fortune of the king being fallen into his enemies handes, and thereupon leaving his journey homewards, he went presently and in all haste to the place where the king was captived, whom the king immediatly into England, that by the upon his comming sent authority of the councell, a tribute might be collected for his redemption: which this Hubert performed with great diligence, and delivered the king. After this he was made Archbishop of Canterburie, and after the death of king Richard he shewed the like dueties of fidelitie and trust to his brother John that succeeded him. For by a long oration he perswaded the whole nation of the English men, that he was a very circumspect man, vertuous, valiant, borne of noble parentage, and most woorthy of the crowne. Whereupon he was so received of all the people and crowned king. He wrote certaine books, and died at the last with very great griefe of minde, in the yeere 1205, having beene archbishop the space of 11 yeres 8 moneths and sixe dayes, by reason of the civil discords abroad, whereby all things went topsie turvy, and in the reigne of king John. The travailes of Robert Curson. Obertus Curson ex nobili quodam Anglorum ortus genere, disciplinis turn prophanis, turn sacris studiosus incubuit, idque (quantum ex conjecturis colligo) in celebratissima Oxonii Academia. Prsestantissimis illic institutoribus usus, ex industria, summa circa & assiduo labore, famam sibi inter suos celeberrimam comparavit. Ampliora deinde meditatus Parisiorum Lutetiam, atque Romam ipsam petiit, illic Theologus Doctor, hie vero Cardinalis effectus. Unde uterque Matthaeus Parisius, ac Westmonasterius, hoc de ipso testimonium adferunt: hie libro 2. ille 8. suorum Chronicorum. Anno Domini. 1218 (inquiunt) in cap347 ingenuas artes tione Damiatae iEgypti urbis, sub Joanne Brenno Hierosolymorum rege, fuit cum Pelagio Albanansi Magister Robertus de Curson, Anglus, Clericus celeberrimus, genere nobilis, ac Romanae Ecclesiae Cardinalis, &c. [II. i. 32.] Bostonus Buriensis in suo Catalogo Cursonum aliquos libros eomposuisse narrat. Claruit anno superius numerato per prasdictos testes in Anglia regnante Henrico tertio Joannis regis filio: fuitque hie diebus Honorii tertii Romani pontificis teste, legatus. in Angliam, Bostono The same in English. RObert Curson descended of a noble family of England, used great diligence aswell in prophane as in divine studies in the famous University of Oxford (as I conjecture.) He had there the best scholemasters that were to be gotten, and was most industrious in the arts and continual exercises of learning: by meanes whereof he grew to be of great renowne where he lived. Afterward thinking of greater matters he went to Paris, and thence to Rome it selfe, and at Paris he proceeded doctor of Divinity, at Rome he was made cardinal!: whereupon both Matthew Paris & Matthew of Westminster produce this testimony of him, the one in his second booke, the other in his eight booke of Chronicles. In the yere of our Lord (say they) 1218, at the taking of Damiata a city of Egypt under John Brenne king of Jerusalem, M. Robert Curson an English man, a most famous clearke of noble parentage, and cardinall of the church of Rome, was there with Pelagius Albanensis, &c. Boston of Burie in Suffolke in his catalogue reporteth, that he wrote divers books. He flourished in the yeere aforesayd by the witnesses aforesayd. Henry the third sonne of king John being then king of England: and by the further testimony of Boston, this Curson was legate into England in the dayes of Honorious the third, bishop of Rome.