Constantinople, unto Henrie the second King of England, Anno Dom. 1177. wherein mention is made that certaine of king Henries Noble men and subjects were present with the sayd Emperour in a battell of his against the Soldan of Iconium. Recorded by Roger Hoveden, in Annalium parte posteriore, in regno Hen. 2. fol. 316, & 317Odem anno Manuel Constantinopolitanus imperator, habito praelio campestri cum illo devicto, in hac Soltano Iconii & forma scripsit Domino regi Angliae. nobilissimo Manuel in Christo deo Porphyrogenitus, divinitus coronatus, sublimis, potens, excelsus, semper Augustus, & moderator Romanorum, Comnenus, Henrico regi Angliae, charissimo amico suo, salutem & omne bonum. Cum imperium nostrum necessarium reputet notificare tibi, ut dilecto amico suo, de omnibus quae sibi obveniunt; ide6 & de his quae nunc acciderunt ei, opportunum judicavit declarare tuae voluntati. Igitur a principio coronationis nostrae imperium nostrum adversus dei inimicos Persas nostrum odium in corde nutrivit, dum cerneret illos in Christianos gloriari, elevarique in nomen dei, & Christianorum dominari regionibus. Quo circa & alio quidem tempore indifferenter invasit eos, & prout deus ei concessit, sic & fecit. Et quae ab ipso frequenter patrata sunt ad contritionem ipsorum & perditionem, imperium nostrum credit nobilitatem tuam non latere. Quoniam autem & nunc maximum exercitum contra eos ducere proposuit, & bellum contra omnem Persidem movere, quia res cogebat. Et non ut voluit multum aliquem apparatum fecit, sicut ei visum est. Veruntamen prout tempus dabat & rerum status, potenter eos invasit. Collegit ergo circa se imperium nostrum potentias suas: sed quia carpenta ducebat armorum, & machinarum, & aliorum instrumentorum conferentium civitatum expugnationibus, pondera portantia: idcirco nequaquam cum festinatione iter suum agere poterat. Ampliiis autem dum adhuc propriam regionem peragraret, antequam barbarorum aliquis adversus nos militaret in bellis adversarius, aegritudo difficillima fluxus ventris invasit nos, qui diffusus per agmina imperii nostri pertransibat, depopulando & interimendo multos, omni pugnatore gravior. Et hoc malum invalescens maxime nos contrivit. Ex quo vero fines Turcorum invasimus, bella quidem primum frequentia concrepabant, & agmina Turcorum cum exercitibus imperii nostri undique dimicabant. Sed Dei gratia ex toto a nostris in fugam vertebantur barbari. Post vero ubi ei qui illic adjacet angustiae loci, quae a Persis nominatur Cibrilcimam, propinquavimus, tot Persarum turmae peditum & equitum, quorum pleraeque ab interioribus partibus Persidis occurrerant in adjutorium contribulium suorum, exercitui nostro super venerunt, quot pene nostrorum excederent numerum. Exercitu itaque imperii nostri propter viae omnino angustiam & difficultatem, usque ad decem milliaria extenso; & cum neque qui praeibant possent postremos defendere, neque versa vice rursus postremi possent praeeuntes juvare, non mediocriter ab invicem hos distare accidit. Sane primae cohortes permultum ab acie imperii nostri dividebantur, postremarum oblitae, illas non praestolantes. Quoniam igitur Turcorum agmina ex jam factis praeliis cognoverant, non conferre sibi a fronte nobis repugnare, loci angustiam bonum subventorem cum invenissent, posteriora statuerunt invadere agmina, quod & fecerunt. Arctissimo igitur ubique loco existente, instabant barbari undique, a dextris & a sinistris, & aliunde dimicantes, & tela super nos quasi imbres descendentia interimebant viros & equos complures. Ad haec itaque imperium nostrum ubi reputans secum oportunum malum superabundabat, judicabat retro expectare, atque illic erant adjuvare, expectando utique contra infinita ilia Persarum 313 agmina bellum sustinuit. Quanta quidem, dum ab his circundaretur, patraverit, non opus est ad tempus sermonibus pertexere, ab illis autem qui interfuerunt, forsitan discet de his tua nobilitas. Inter haec autem existente imperio nostro, & omne belli gravamen in tantum sustinente, postremse cohortes universae Graecorum & Latinorum, & reliquorum omnium generum conglobatae, quae jaciebantur ab inimicis tela non sustinentes, impactione utuntur, & ita violenter ferebantur, dum ad [II. i. 19.] adjacentem ibi collem quasi ad propugnaculum festinarent : sed precedentes impellunt nolentes. Multo autem elevato pulvere, ac perturbante oculos, & neminem permittente videre quae circa pedes erant, in praecipitium quod aderat profundissimae vallis alius super alium homines & equi sic incontinenter portati corruerunt, quod alii alios conculcantes ab invicem interemerunt non ex gregariis tantum, sed ex clarissimis & intimis nostris consanguineis. Quis enim inhibere poterat tantae multitudinis importabilem impulsum ? At vero imperium nostrum tot & tantis confertum barbaris saucians, sauciatiimque, adeo ut non modicam in eos moveret perturbationem, obstupentes perseverantiam ipsius, & non remittebatur, bene juvante deo, campum obtinuit. Neque locum ilium scandere adversarios permisit, in quo dimicavit cum barbaris. Nee quidem equum suum illorum incitavit, celerius aliquando ponere vestigia. Sed congregando omnia agmina sua, & de morte eripiendo ea, collocavit circa se : & sic primos attigit, & ordinatim proficiscens ad exercitus suos accessit. Ex tune igitur videns Soltanus, quod post imperium tanta quse acciderant exercitibus nostris, nostrum, sicut oportunum erat, rem hujusmodi dispensavit, ut ipsum rursum invaderet: mittens supplicavit imperio nostro, & deprecatoriis usus est sermonibus, & requisivit pacem illius, promittens omnem imperii nostri adimplere voluntatem, & servitium suum contra omnem hominem dare, & omnes qui in regno suo tenebantur captivos absolvere, & esse ex toto voluntatis nostrae. 314 Ibidem ergo per duos dies integros, in omni potestate morati sumus, & cognito quod nihil poterat fieri contra civitatem Iconii, perditis testudinibus & machinis bellicis, eo qu6d boves cecidissent a telis in modo pluviae jactis, qui eas trahebant: Simul autem eo quod & universa animalia nostra irruente in ilia difficillima aegritudine laborabant, suscepit Soltani depraecationem & foedera & juramenta peracta sub vexillis nostris, & pacem suam ei dedit. Inde ingressum imperium nostrum in regionem suam regreditur, tribulationem habens non mediocrem super his quos perdidit consanguineis, maximas tamen Deo gratias agens, qui per suam bonitatem & nunc ipsum honoravit : Gratum autem habuimus, quod quosdam nobilitatis tuae principes accidit interesse nobiscum, qui narrabunt de omnibus quae acciderant, tuae voluntati seriem. Caeterum autem, licet contristati simus propter illos qui ceciderunt : oportunum tamen duximus, de omnibus quae acciderant, declarare tibi, ut dilecto amico nostro, & ut permultiun conjuncto imperio nostro, per puerorum nostrorum intimam consanguinitatem. Vale, Data mense Novembris, indictione tertia. The same in English. nople having fought a field with IN the yeere 1177, Manuel the emperour of Constantithe Soldan of Iconium, and vanquished him, wrote unto Henry the second king of England in maner following. Manuel Comnenus in Christ the everliving God a faithful emperour, descended of the linage of Porphyrie, crowned by Gods grace, high, puissant, mighty, alwayes most sovereigne, and governour of the Romans ; unto Henry the most famous king of England, his most deare friend, greeting and all good successe. Whereas our imperiall highnesse thinketh it expedient to advertise you our welbeloved friend of all our affaires : We thought it not amisse to signifie unto your royall Majestie certaine exploits at this present atchieved by invaded our imperiall highnes hath mainteined most deadly feod and hostility against Gods enemies the Persians, seeing them so to triumph over Christians, to exalt themselves against the name of God, and to usurpe over Christian kingdomes. For which cause our imperiall highnesse hath in some sort encountered them heretofore, and did as it pleased God to give us grace. And we suppose that your Majestie is not ignorant, what our imperiall highnesse hath often performed for their mine and subversion. For even now, being urged thereunto, we have determined to leade a mighty army against them, and to wage warre against all Persia. And albeit our forces be not so great as we could wish they were, yet have we according to the time, and the present state of things, them. Wherefore our Majestie strongly imperiall hath gathered our armies together : but because we had in our army sundry carts laden with armour, engines, & other instruments for the assault of cities, to an exceeding weight we could not make any great speed in our journey. Moreover, while our imperiall highnesse was yet marching in our owne dominions, before any barbarous enemy had fought the most against us : our people were visited with grievous disease of the fluxe, which being dispersed in our troups destroyed and slew great numbers, more then the sword of the enemy would have done. Which mischiefe so prevailing, did woonderfully abate our forces. But after we had invaded the Turkish frontiers, we had at the first very often and hot skirmishes, and the Turks came swarming to fight against our imperiall troups. those miscreants were Howbeit by Gods assistance altogether scattered and put to flight by our souldiers. But as we approched unto that straight passage which [II. i. 20.] is called by the Persians Cibrilcimam, so many bands of Persian footemen and horsemen (most whereof came from the innermost parts of Persia, to succour their Allies) encountred our army, as were almost superiour the army of our unto us in number. Wherefore Imperiall highnesse, by reason of the straightnesse and difficultie of the way, being stretched ten miles in length ; and the first not being able to helpe the last, nor yet contrarywise the last to rescue the first, it came to passe that they were very farre distant asunder. And in very deed the foremost troupes were much separated from the guard of our imperiall person, who forgetting their fellowes behind, would not stay any whit for them. Because therefore the Turkish bands knew full well by their former conflicts that it was bootlesse for them to assaile the forefront of our battell, and perceiving the narownesse of the place to be a great advantage, they determined to set upon our rereward, and did so. Wherefore our passage being very straight, and the infidels assayling us upon the right hand and upon the left, and on all sides, and discharging their weapons as thicke as hailestones against us, slew divers of our men and horses. Hereupon, the slaughter of our people still encreasing our majestie imperiall deemed it requisite the to stay behind, and rereward, and so expecting the fierce encounter of many thousand Persians. What in the same exploits our Imperiall person atchieved skirmish, I hold it needlesse at this time to recount : your majestie may perhaps understand more of this matter by them which were there present. Howbeit our Imperiall highnesse being in the middest of this conflict, and enduring the fight with so great danger, all our hindermost troups, both Greekes, Latines, and other nations, retiring themselves close together, and not being able to suffer the violence of their enemies weapons, pressed on so hard, and were caried with such maine force, that hastening to ascend the next hill for their better safegard, they urged on them which went before, whether they would or no. Whereupon, much dust being raised, which stopped our eyes and utterly deprived us of sight, and our men and horses pressing so sore one upon the necke of another, plunged themin them we sustained selves on the sudden into such a steepe and dangerous valley, that treading one upon another, they quelled to death not onely a multitude of the common souldiours, but divers most honourable personages, & some of our neere kinsmen. For who could restraine the irresistable throng of so huge a multitude ? Howbeit our Imperiall highnesse being environed with such swarmes of Infidels, and giving and receiving wounds (insomuch that the miscreants were greatly dismaied at our constancie) we gave not over, but by Gods assistance wonne the field. Neither did we permit the enemie to ascend unto that place, from whence we skirmished with him. Neither yet spurred wee on our horse any faster for all their assaults. But marshalling all our troupes together, and delivering them out of danger, we disposed them about our Imperial person ; and so we overtooke the foremost, and marched in good order with our whole army. Nowe the Soldan perceiving that notwithstanding the great damages which we had sustained, our Imperial highnes provided to give him a fresh encounter, humbly submitting himselfe unto us, and using submisse speaches, made suite to have peace at our hands, and promised to fulfill the pleasure of our majestie Imperiall, to doe us service against all commers, to release all our subjects which were captives in his realme, and to rest wholy at our commaund. Here therefore we remained two dayes with great authoritie; and considering that wee cou\^ attempt nought against the citie of Iconium, having with the enemies weapons, falling as thicke as hailestones: and also for because all our beasts in a maner were most grievously diseased; our majestie Imperial accepted of the Soldans petition, league, and oath being made and taken under our ensignes, and granted our peace unto him. Then returned we into our owne dominions, being greatly grieved for the losse of our deere kinsmen, and yeelding unto God most humble 318 The am of tended to have l o st a11 o ur warrelike engines both for defence and for thanks, who of his goodnesse had even now given us the victory. We are right glad likewise that some of your Certaine noble majesties princes and nobles accompanied us in this ^rfthehng action, who are able to report unto you all things which ^; . / ^^ the have happened. And albeit we were exceedingly grieved Emperor in for the losse of our people; yet thought it we expedient his battell to signifie unto you the successe of our affaires, as unto our welbeloved friend, & one who is very neerly allied unto our highnesse Imperial, by reason of the consanguinitie of our children. Farewell. Given in the moneth of November, and upon the tenth Indiction. y^^he into Asia, for The woorthy voiage of Richard the first, K. of recoverie of England Jerusalem out of the hands of the Saracens, drawen out of the booke of Acts and Monuments of the Church of England, written by M. John Foxe. the jllng Richard the first of that name, for his great valure surnamed Ceur de Lion, the sonne of Henry the second, after the death of his father remembring the rebellions that he had undutifully raised against him, sought for absolution of his trespasse, and in part of satisfaction for the same, agreed with Philip the [II. i. 21.] French king to take his voiage with him for the recoverie of Christes patrimonie, which they called the Holy land, whereupon the sayd king Richard immediately after his Coronation, to prepare himselfe the better towards his journey, used divers meanes to take up summes of money, and exacted a tenth of the whole Realme, the Christians to make threescore and ten thousand pounds, and the Jewes which then dwelt in the Realme threescore thousand. Having thus gotten sufficient money for the exploite, he sent certaine Earles and Barons to Philip the French king in the time of his Parliament at S. Denis, to put him in mind of his promise made for the recoverie of