The voyage of Henrie Earle of Derbie, after Duke of Hereford, and lastly Henry the fourth king of England, to Tunis in Barbarie, with an army of Englishmen written by Polidore Virgill. pag. 1389. Ranci interim per inducias nacti ocium, ac simul Genuensium precibus defatigati, bellum in Afros, qui omnem oram insulasque Italiae latrociniis infestas redde- bant, suscipiunt. Richardus quoque rex Angliae rogatus auxilium, mittit Henricum comitem Derbiensem cum electa Anglicae Igitur Franci id bellum faciendum. pubis manu ad Anglique viribus & animis consociatis in Africam trajiciunt, qui ubi littus attigere, eatenus a Barbaris de- scensione prohibiti sunt, quoad Anglorum sagittariorum virtute factum est, ut aditus pateret : in terram egressi recta Tunetam urbem regiam petunt, ac obsident. Barbari timore afFecti de pace ad eos legatos mittunt, quam nostris dare placuit, ut soluta certa pecuniae summa ab omni Ita deinceps Italiae, Galliseque ora manus abstinerent. peractis rebus post paucos menses, quam eo itum erat, domum repediatum est. The same in English. THe French in the meane season having gotten some leasure by meanes of their truce, and being sollicited and urged by the intreaties of the Genuois undertooke to wage warre against the Moores, who robbed and spoyled all the coasts of Italy, and of the Ilandes adjacent. Likewise Richard the second, king of England, being sued unto for ayde, sent Henry the Earle of Derbie with a choice armie of English souldiers unto the same warfare. Wherefore the English and French, with forces and mindes united, sayled over into Africa, who when they approched unto the shore were repelled by the Barbarians from landing, untill such time as they had passage made them by the valour of the English archers. Thus having landed their forces, they foorthwith marched unto the royall citie of Tunis, and besieged it. Whereat the Barbarians being dismayed, sent Ambassadours unto our Christian Chieftaines to treat of peace, which our men graunted unto them, upon condition that they should pay a certaine summe of money, and that they should from thencefoorth abstaine from piracies upon all the coasts of Italy and France. And so having dispatched their businesse, within a fewe moneths after their departure they returned home. The Historie is somewhat otherwise recorded by Froysard and Holenshed in manner following, Pag- 473IN the thirteenth yeere of the reigne of king Richard the second, the Christians tooke in hand a journey against the Saracens of Barbarie through sute of the Genouois, so that there went a great number of Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen of France and England, the Duke of Burbon being their Generall. Out of England there went John de Beaufort bastarde sonne to the Duke of Lancaster (as Froysard hath noted) also Sir John Russell, Sir John Butler, Sir John Harecourt and others. They set forwarde in the latter ende of the thirteenth yeere of the Kings reigne, and came to Genoa, where they remayned not verie long, but that the gallies and [II. i. 70.] other vessels of the Genouois were ready to passe them the over into Barbarie. And so about midsomer begining of the foureteenth yere of this kings reigne the whole army being embarked, sailed forth to the coast of Barbary, where neere to the city of Africa they landed: at which instant the English archers (as the Chronicles of The ChroGenoa write) stood all the company in good stead with n"^* *f their long bowes, beating backe the enemies from the shore, which came downe to resist their landing. After 4S 1 in iv they had got to land, they invironed the city of Africa (called by the Moores Mahdia) with a strong siege: but at length, constrained with the intemperancy of the scalding ayre in that hot countrey, breeding in the army sundry diseases, they fell to a composition upon certaine articles to be performed in the behalfe of the Saracens: and so 61 dayes after their arrivall there they tooke the seas againe, and returned home, as in the histories of France and Genoa is likewise expressed. Where, by Polydore Virgil it may seeme, that the lord Henry of the Lancaster earle of Derby should be generall of English men, that (as before you heard) went into Barbary with the French men and Genouois. The memorable victories in divers parts of Italie of John Hawkwood English man in the reigne of Richard the second, briefly recorded by M. Camden, pag. 339. j|D alteram ripam fluvii Colne oppositus est Sibble I Heningham, locus natalis, ut accepi, Joannis Hawkwoodi (Itali Aucuthum corrupte vocant) quern illi tantopere ob virtutem militarem suspexerunt, ut Senatus Florentinus propter insignia merita equestri statua & tumuli honore in eximise fortitudinis, fideique testimonium ornavit. Res ejus gestas Itali pleno ore praedicant; & Paulus Jovius in elogiis celebrat: sat mihi sit Julii Feroldi tetrastichon adjicere. Hawkwoode Anglorum decus, & decus addite genti Italicae, Italico presidiumque solo, Ut tumuli quondam Florentia, sic simulachri Virtutem Jovius donat honore tuam. William Thomas in his Historie of the common wealthes of Italy, maketh honorable mention of him twise, to wit, in the common wealth of Florentia and Ferrara.