The comming of the Emperor of Constantinople into England, to desire the aide of Henry the 4. against the Turkes, 1400. Thomas Wai- [ g S | ] Ub eodem tempore Imperator Constantinopolitanus singham. ||fa2f| venit in Angliam, postulaturus subsidium contra [Hg^JJl Xurcas. Cui occurrit rex cum apparatu nobili ad le Blackheath, die Sancti Thomae Apostilo, suscepitque, [II. i. 71.] prout decuit, tantum Heroem, duxitque Londonias, & per multos dies exhibuit gloriose, pro expensis hospitii sui solvens, & eum respiciens tanto fastigio donativis. Et paulo post: His auditis rumoribus, Imperator laetior recessit ab Anglis, honoratus a rege donariis preciosis. The same in English. ABout the same time the emperor of Constantinople came into England, to seeke ayde against the Turkes : whom ye king accompanied with his nobilitie, met withall upon Blackheath upon the day of saint Thomas the Apostle, and received him as beseemed so great a prince, and brought him to London, and roially entertained him for a long season, defraying the charges of his diet, and giving him many honorable presents. And a litle afterward: Upon the hearing of these newes, the emperor departed with great joy out of England, whom the king honoured with many precious gifts. The Voiage of the bishop of Winchester to Jerusalem, in the sixt yeere of the reigne of Henry the fift, which was the yeere of our Lord, 1417. Thomas Walsing. jlLtimo die mensis Octobris, episcopus Wintoniensis I accessit ad concilium Constanciense, peregrinaturus Hierosolymam post electionem summi pontificis celebratam, ubi tantum valuit ejus facunda persuasio, ut & excitaret dominos Cardinales ad concordiam, & ad electionem summi pontificis se ocyus praepararent, THe last day of October the bishop of Winchester came to the Councell of Constance, which after the chusing of the Pope determined to take his journey to Jerusalem : where his eloquent perswasion so much prevailed, that he both perswaded my lords the Cardinals to unity and concord, and also moved them to proceed more speedily to the election of the Pope. A preparation of a voyage of King Henrie the fourth to the Holy land against the infidels in the yere 1413, being the last yere of his reigne : wherein he was prevented by death : written by Walsingham, Fabian, Polydore Virgile, and Holenshed. IN this foureteenth and last yere of king Henries reigne a councell was holden in the White friers in London, at the which among other things, order was taken for Order taken ships and gallies to be builded and made ready, and all other things necessary to ij be provided ^fj^g9 for a voyage, which he meant to make into the Holy land, there to recover the city of Jerusalem from the infidels: for it grieved him to consider the great malice of Christian princes, that were bent upon a mischievous purpose to destroy one another, to the perill of their owne soules, rather then to make warre against the enemies of the Christian faith, as in conscience, it seemed to him, they were bound. We finde, sayeth Fabian in his Chronicle, that he was taken with his last sickenesse, while he was making his prayers at Saint Edwards shrine, there as it were, to take his leave, and so to proceede foorth on his journey. He was so suddenly and grievously taken, that such as were about him feared least he would have died presently: wherefore to relieve him, if it were possible, they bare