your highnes letters to your officers whom it may concerne, that we may perceive, that our subjects right and liberty hath especially beene maintained upon this our commendation. Which we will take in most thankfull part, and your highnes shal find us in the like or a greater matter most ready to gratifie you, whom we wish most heartily well to fare. From our Court at Waltham the 15. of October 1531. A voyage made with the shippes called the Holy [II. i. 98.] to a and Chio, about Crosse, and the Mathew Gonson, to the lies of the yeere 1534, Candia according to Master John Williamson, Richard Hackluit, by Cooper and citizen of London, who lived in the yere 1592, and went as cooper the Mathew Gonson the next voyage after. relation made in in Gonson depart He shippes called the Holy Crosse, and The Hob the Mathew Gonson, made a voyage to J"os™ at! the Ilandes of Candia and Chio Turkie, about the yeere 1534. And in fir Turkic the Mathew went as Captaine M. Richard Gonson, sonne of old Master William Gonson, paymaster of the kings navie. In this first voyage went William Holstocke (who afterwards was Controuller of her Majesties Navie, lately deceased) as page to M. Richard Gonson aforesaid, which M. Gonson died in Chio in this his first voyage. The ship called the Holy Crosse was a short shippe, and of burden 160 tunnes. And having beene a full yeere at the sea in performance of this voyage, with great danger she returned home, where, upon her arrivall at Blackwall, in the river of Thames, her wine and oyle caske was found so weake, that they were not able to hoyse them out of the ship, but were constrayned to draw them as they lay, and put their wine and oyle into new vessels, and so to unlade the shippe. Their chiefe fraight, A.D. CI534THE ENGLISH VOYAGES was very excellent Muscatels and red Malmesie, the like whereof were seeldome seene before in England. They brought home also good quantitie of sweete oyles, cotton woolles, Turkie Carpets, Galles, Cynamon, and some other spices. The saide shippe called the Holy Crosse was so shaken in this voyage, and so weakened, that she was layd up in the docke, and never made voyage after. the shippe Another voyage to the lies of Candia and Chio the Mathew Gonson, made by about the yeere 1535, according to the relation of John Williamson, then Cooper in the same ship, made to M. Richard Hackluit the yeere 1592. in He good shippe called the Mathew Gonson, of burden 300 tunnes, whereof was owner old M. William Gonson, paymaster of the kings Navie, made her voyage in the yere 1535. In this ship went as Captaine Richard Gray, who long after died in Russia. Master William Holstocke afterward Controuller of the Queenes Navie went then as purser in the same voyage. The Master was one John Pichet, servant to old M. William Gonson, James Rumnie was Masters mate. The master cooper was John Williamson citizen of London, living in the yeere 1592, and dwelling in Sant Dunstons parish in the East. The M. Gunner was John Godfrey of Bristoll. In this ship were 6 gunners and 4 trumpetters, all which foure trumpetters at our returne homewards went on land at Messina in the Hand of Sicilia, as our ship road there at anker, & gat them into the Gallies that lay neere unto us, & in them went to Rome. The whole number of our companie in this ship were about 100. men, we were also furnished with a great bote, which was able to cary 10 tunnes of water, which at our returne homewards we towed all the way from Chio