certaine clothes called Statutes, and others called Cardinalwhites, and Calveskins which were well sold in Sicilie, &c. The commodities which they returned backe were Silks, Chamlets, Rubarbe, Malmesies, Muskadels and other wines, sweete oyles, cotten wooll, Turkie carpets, Galles, Pepper, Cinamom, and some other spices, &c. Besides, the naturall inhabitants of the foresayd places, they had, even in those dayes, traffique with Jewes, Turkes, and other forreiners. Neither did our merchants onely employ their owne English shipping before mentioned, but sundry strangers also : as namely, Candiots, Raguseans, Sicilians, Genouezes, Venetian galliasses, Spanish and Portugale ships. All which particulars doe most evidently appeare out of certaine auncient Ligier bookes of the R. W. Sir William Locke Mercer of London, of Sir William Bowyer Alderman of London, of master John Gresham, and of others ; which I Richard Hakluyt have diligently perused and copied out. And here for authorities sake I doe annexe, as a thing not impertinent to this purpose, a letter of king Henry the eight, unto Don John the third, king of Portugale. A letter of the king of England Henry the eight, to John king of Portugale, for a Portingale ship with the goods of John Gresham and Wil. Locke with others, unladen in Portugale from Chio. Erenissimo Principi, domino Joanni Dei gratia Regi Portugalliae, & Algarbiorum citra & ultra mare in Africa, ac domino Guineae, & conquistae, navigationis, & iEthiopiae, Arabiae, Persiae, commercii atque Indiae, &c. Fratri, & amico nostro charissimo. Henricus Dei gratia, Rex Angliae & Franciae, fidei defensor, ac dominus Hiberniae, Serenissimo Principi; biorum citra & ultra mare in Africa, ac domino Guineae, & conquistas navigations, & commercii iEthiopiae, Arabiae, Persiae, atque Indiae, &c. Fratri, & amico nostro charissimo, salutem. Tanto libentius, promptiiisque justas omnes causas vestrae Serenitati commendandas suscipimus, quanto apertiori indies nostrorum, qui in ejusdem vestrae Serenitatis regno ac ditione negotiantur, subditorum testimonio cognoscimus, ipsam ex optimi principis officio ita accurate, exacteque jus suum cuique praebere, ut ad earn nemo justitiae consequendae gratia frustra unquam confugiat. Ciim itaque dilectus ac fidelis subditus noster Joannes Gresham mercator Londoniensis nuper nobis humiliter exposuerit, quod quidam Willielmus Heith ipsius Factor, & negotiorum gestor navim quandam Portugallensem, cui nomen erat Sancto [II. i. 97.] Antonio, praeeratque Diego Peres Portugallensis superioribus mensibus in Candia conduxerit, cum navisque praefecto convenerit, ut in insulam Chium ad quasdam diversi generis merces onerandas primo navigaret, in Candiamque mox aliarum mercium onerandarum gratia rediret, omnes quidem in hoc nostrum regnum postmodern advecturus ad valorem circiter duodecim millium ducatorum, quemadmodum ex pactionis, conventionisque instrumento apertihs constat, accidit, ut praefatus Diego vestrae Serenitatis subditus, dictis susceptis mercibus, & jam in itinere parum fideliter, & longe praeter initas conventiones, gravissimo certe nostrorum subditorum detrimento, ubi in Portugalliae portum divertisset, sententia hue navigandi mutata, in eodem portu commoretur, nostronimque etiam subditorum merces detineat : quam injuriam (quum subditis nostris in vestrae Serenitatis regno, & ab ejus subdito illata sit) ex aequitate, ac justitia ab ipsa corrigi, emendarique confidimus, nostro quoque potissimum intuitu, qui vestrae Serenitatis ipsiiisque subditorum causas, mercesque, si quando in hoc nostrum regnum appulerint, semper commendatissimas habemus, id quod superiori anno testati sumus : proinde ipsam vehementer rogamus, ut Joannem Ratliffe praesentium latorem, & dicti Johannis Gresham novum constitutum procuratorem, hujus rei causa istuc venientem, velit in suis agendis, in dictisque bonis recuperandis, impuneque asportandis remittendisque vectigalibus (quod nos in vestros subditos fecimus) quum per navis praefectum fraude, ac dolo istuc merces fuerint advectae, nisi istic vendantur, ac toto denique ex aequitate conficiendo negotio, sic commendatum suscipere, sicque ad suos, quos opus fore intellexerit magistratus missis literis rem omnem juvare, & expedire, ut perspiciamus ex hac nostra commendatione fuisse nostrorum subditorum juri, & indemnitati quam maxime consultum. Quod nobis gratissimum est futurum, & in re consimili, aut graviori vestra Serenitas nos sibi gratificandi cupidissimos experietur, quae foeliciter valeat. Ex Regia nostra de Waltham, Die 15. Octobr. 1531. The same in English. T O the high and mighty prince, John by the grace of God, king of Portugale, and of Algarve on this side and beyond the sea in Africa, lord of Ghinea, and of the conquest, navigation, and traffique of ^Ethiopia, Arabia, Persia, India, &c. our most deere and welbeloved brother. Henry by the grace of God, king of England and of France, defender of the faith, and lord of Ireland : to John by the same grace, king of Portugale and Algarve, on this side and beyond the sea in Africa, and lord of Ghinea, and of the conquest, navigation, and traffique of Aethiopia, Arabia, Persia, India, &c. our most deare and welbeloved brother, sendeth greeting. So much ye more willingly and readily we undertake the recommending of all just causes unto your highnesse, because by the daily testimonie of our subjects which traffike in your kingdoms and dominions, we are informed, that according to the dutie of a most worthy prince, so carefully and exactly you minister justice unto every man, that all men 65 v most willingly repaire unto your highnesse, with full trust to obtaine the same. Whereas therefore our welbeloved and trustie subject John Gresham merchant of London, of late in humble maner hath signified unto us, that one William Heith his Factor and Agent, certaine moneths agoe had hired in Candie a certaine Portugale ship called Santo Antonio, (the patrone whereof is Diego Perez) and covenaunted with the patrone of the sayd ship, that he should first saile to the Isle of Sio, to take in merchandize of sundry sortes, & then eftsoones returne to Candie, to be fraighted with other goods, all which he was to bring into our kingdome of England, to the value of 12000 ducats, as by their billes of covenant & agreement more plainly appeareth : it so fel out, that ye aforesaid Diego your highnes subject having received the said goods, very trecherously & much contrary to his covenant, to the exceeding great losse of our subjects, putting in by the way into an haven of Portugale, & altering his purpose of comming into England, he remaineth still in that haven, & likewise detaineth our subjects goods. Which injury (seeing it is done in your Highnes kingdome) we hope your Highnes will see reformed according to equity & right, the rather at our request, which alwayes have had a speciall care of the causes & goods of your Highnes, & of your subjects whensoever they come into our kingdome, wherof we made proofe the last yeere. Wherefore we instantly request your Highnes, y* you would so receive John Ratcliffe the bearer of these present letters, & the new appointed agent of John Gresham, which cummeth into your dominions about this busines, being thus commended unto you in this busines, & recovering & freely bringing home of the said goods, & in remitting of the customs, unlesse they were sold there (the like whereof we did towards your subjects) seeing by the fraud & deceit of the patron of the ship, the wares were brought thither, & finally in dispatching ye whole matter, according to justice, & so further the same by directing your highnes letters to your officers whom it may concerne, that we may perceive, that our subjects right and liberty hath especially beene maintained upon this our commendation. Which we will take in most thankfull part, and your highnes shal find us in the like or a greater matter most ready to gratifie you, whom we wish most heartily well to fare. From our Court at Waltham the 15. of October 1531. A voyage made with the shippes called the Holy [II. i. 98.] to a and Chio, about Crosse, and the Mathew Gonson, to the lies of the yeere 1534, Candia according to Master John Williamson, Richard Hackluit, by Cooper and citizen of London, who lived in the yere 1592, and went as cooper the Mathew Gonson the next voyage after. relation made in in Gonson depart He shippes called the Holy Crosse, and The Hob the Mathew Gonson, made a voyage to J"os™ at! the Ilandes of Candia and Chio Turkie, about the yeere 1534. And in fir Turkic the Mathew went as Captaine M. Richard Gonson, sonne of old Master William Gonson, paymaster of the kings navie. In this first voyage went William Holstocke (who afterwards was Controuller of her Majesties Navie, lately deceased) as page to M. Richard Gonson aforesaid, which M. Gonson died in Chio in this his first voyage. The ship called the Holy Crosse was a short shippe, and of burden 160 tunnes. And having beene a full yeere at the sea in performance of this voyage, with great danger she returned home, where, upon her arrivall at Blackwall, in the river of Thames, her wine and oyle caske was found so weake, that they were not able to hoyse them out of the ship, but were constrayned to draw them as they lay, and put their wine and oyle into new vessels, and so to unlade the shippe. Their chiefe fraight,