untill we came through the straight of Gibraltar into the maine Ocean. We had also a great long boat and a skiff. We were out upon this voyage eleven moneths, yet in all this time there died of sicknesse but one man, whose name was George Forrest, being servant to our Carpenter called Thomas Plummer. In a great lygier booke of one William Eyms, servant unto Sir William Bowyer Alderman of London, bearing date the 15 of November 1533, and continued untill the 4 of July 1544. I find that he the said William Eyms was factor in Chio, not only for his Master, but also for the duke of Norfolkes grace, & for many other worshipful marchants of London, among whom I find the accompts of these especially, to wit, of his said Master, sir William Bowyer, of William & Nicholas Wilford Marchant-taylors of London, of Thomas Curtis pewterer, of John Starky Mercer, of William Ostrige Marchant, & of Richard Field Draper. And further I find in the said ligier booke, a note of the said Eyms, of all such goods as he left in the hands of Robert Bye in Chio, who became his Masters factor in his roome, and another like note of particulers of goods that he left in the hands of Oliver Lesson, servant to William and Nicholas Wilford. And for proofe of the continuance of this trade untill the end of the yeere 1552. I found annexed unto the former note of the goods left with Robert Bye in Chio, a letter being dated the 27 of November 1552 in London. The Epitaph of the valiant Esquire M. Peter [II. i. 99.] Read in the south He of Saint Peters Church in the citie of Norwich, which was knighted by Charles the fift at the winning of Tunis in the yeere of our Lord 1538. HEre under lyeth the corpes of Peter Reade Esquire, who hath worthily served, not onely his Prince and Countrey, but also the Emperour Charles the fift, both at his conquest of Barbarie, and at his siege at Tunis, as also in other places. Who had given him by the sayd Emperour for his valiant deedes the order of Barbary. Who dyed the 29 day of December, in the yeere of our Lord God 1566. The voyage of Sir Thomas Chaloner to Alger with Charles the fift 1541, drawen out of his booke De Republica Anglorum instauranda. Homas Chalonerus patria Londinensis, studio Cantabrigensis, educatione aulicus, religione pius, vereque Christianus fuit. Itaque cum juvenilem aetatem, men ternque suam humanioribus studiis roborasset, Domino Henrico Knevetto a potentissimo rege Henrico ejus nominis octavo ad Carolum quintum imperatorem transmisso legato, una cum illo profectus est, tanquam familiaris amicus, vel eidem a consiliis. Quo quidem tempore Carolo quinto navali certamine a Genua & Corsica in Algyram in Africa contra Turcas classem solvente ac hostiliter proficiscente, ornatissimo illo Knevetto legato regis, Thoma Chalonero, Henrico Knolleo, & Henrico Isamo, illustribus viris eundem in ilia expeditione suapte sponte sequentibus, pariterque militantibus, mirifice vitam suam Chalo- nerus tutatus est. Nam triremi ilia, in qua fuerat, vel scopulis allisa, vel gravissimis procellis conquassata, naufragus cum se diu natatu defendisset, deficientibus viribus, brachiis manibusque languidis ac quasi enervatis, prehensa dentibus cum maxima difficultate rudenti, quae ex altera triremi jam propinqua turn fuerat ejecta, non sine dentium aliquorum jactura ac fractura sese tandem recuperavit, ac domum integer relapsus est. The same in English. THomas Chaloner was by birth a Londiner, by studie a Cantabrigian, by education a Courtier, by religion a devout and true Christian. Therfore after he had