come, and of my present good will: but with your accustomed goodnesse towards me, to defend the same against such persons, whose tongues too readily roule sometime against other mens painfull travels, perswading themselves to purchase the sooner some credit of learning with the ruder sort, by controlling and overdaintie sifting of other mens laboured tasks. For I know in all ages to be found as well Basilisks as Elephants. Thus nothing doubting of your ready ayd heerein, as I assuredly trust of your honours favourable acceptation of this my poore present, wishing long life with the increase of Gods holy spirit to your lordship and to all your most honourable familie (unto whom I have wholly dedicated my selfe by mine owne choise and election for ever) I, craving pardon for my former boldnesse, most humbly thus take my leave. From Lambhith the 23 of March. Ann. 1572. Your honours most humble and faithfull servant for ever, William Malim. A briefe description of the Hand of Cyprus : by the which not onely the Venetians title why they have so long enjoyed it, but also the Turks, whereby now he claimeth it, may plainly appeare. j]He Hand of Cyprus is invironed with divers seas : for Westward it is washed with the sea called Pamphilium : Southward, with the sea iEgyptium: on the East part, with the sea Syrium : and Northward, with the sea called Cilicium. The which Hand in time past had divers names : called once Acamantis, as Sabel[II. i. 120.] licus witnesseth. Philonides maketh mention, that it was called sometime Cerasis. Xenogoras writeth, that it was named Aspelia, Amathusa, & Macaria. There were in times past fifteene cities or famous townes in it, but now very few, amongst the which Famagusta is the chiefest & strongest, situated by the sea side. There is also Nicosia, which was woont, by the traffike of Marchants, to be very wealthy : besides the city of Baffo, Arnica, Saline, Limisso, Melipotamo, & Episcopia. Timosthenes affirmeth, that this Hand is in compasse 429 miles : and Arthemidorus writeth the length of the same to be 162 miles, measuring of it from the East to the West, betwixt two promontories named Dinaretta and Acamanta. This Hand is thought to be very rich, abundant of Wine, Oile, Graine, Pitch, Rozin, Allum, Salt, and of divers precious stones, pleasant, profitable, and necessary for mans use, and much frequented of Marchants of Syria, unto the which it lieth very nere. It hath bene, as Plinie writeth, joyned sometime with Syria, as Sicilia hath beene also with Italy. It was a long time subject unto the Romans, after to the Persians, and to the Soldan of JEgypt. The selfesame Hand was sometime also English, being conquered by king Richard the first, in his voyage to Hierusalem in the yeere of our Lord 1192. Who (as Polydore writeth in his fourteenth booke of our English historie) being prohibited by the Cypriottes from arrivall there, invaded and conquered the same soone after by force: and having left behinde him sufficient garrisons to keepe the same, departed from thence to Ptolemayda : who afterward exchanged the same with Guy of Lusignan, that was the last christened king of Hierusalem, for the same kingdome. For the which cause the kings of England were long time after called kings of Hierusalem. And last of all, the Venetians have enjoyed it of late a long time, in this order following. In the yeere of our Lord 1470, John king of the sayd Hand, sonne to Janus of Lusignan, had by Helen his wife, which was of the Emperiall house of Paleologus, one daughter only called Charlotta, and a bastard called James : the which James was afterward consecrated Bishop of Nicosia. This Charlotta was married first to the king of Portingall, of whom he had no issue, so that he being dead, Lewes Duke of Savoy (to whom shee was the second time whom the said Hand by the right of this his wife Charlotta did appertaine) had the possession of the same. James the bastard assoone as his father was dead, of a Bishop became a souldiour, and with an army wanne the Hand, making it his owne by force. This Duke of these newes, with a number of well Savoy hearing appointed souldiers, arrived shortly after in Cyprus, and recovering againe the Hand, compelled the bastard to flie foorthwith over to the Soldan of JEgypt. Who making himselfe his subject, in time so wrought and tempered the matter, that the Soldan in person at his request passed over into Cyprus, besieged Duke Lewes in the castle of Nicosia, and at length compelled him to depart, this Bishop became leaving his kingdome. So that againe King of this Hand : who shortly after cleaving to the Venetians having made a league of friendship with them, married by their consent one Catherina the daughter of Marco Cornaro, which Catherin the Senate of Venice adopted unto them soone after as their daughter. This Bishop not long after sickened, and died, leaving this his wife with child, who lived not long after his fathers death. By the which meanes the Venetians making themselves the next heires to Catherina by the law of adoption, tooke unto them the possession of this kingdome, and have kept and enjoyed the same almost this hundred yeeres. Now this great Turke called Sultan Selim in the right of the Soldan of iEgypt, whom his grandfather (called also Sultan Selim) conquered, pretendeth a right title unto it, and now, as you may understand by reading of this short Treatise, hath by conquest obtained the same. Whom I pray the everliving God, if it be his holy will, shortly to root out from thence. To the Reader. Am not ignorant (gentle Reader) how hard a matter it is for any one man to that, which should please and write satisfie all persons, we being commonly of so divers opinions and contrary judgements : againe Tully affirmeth it to be a very difficult thing, to finde out any matter which in his owne kinde may be in all respects perfect. Wherefore I trust by your owne judgement I ought of reason to be the sooner pardoned (my translation being precisely tied to mine authours meaning) if any thing heerein besides be thought to be wanting : I have learned by the way how comberous a thing it is to turne the selfesame matter out of the Italian language into our countrey speech. But who so doeth what he possibly can is bound to no more. And I now at the request of others (who put me in minde, that I was not onely borne unto my selfe) have accomplished that in the ende, which I promised and was required. With what paine and diligence, I referre me [II. i. 121.] to them which are skilfull in the Italian tongue, or may the better judge, if it please them to trie the same, casting aside this exampler. I speake it not arrogantly, travels I take God to witnesse : but mens painefull ought not lightly to be condemned : nor surely at any time are woont to be of the learned, or dLscreet. By whose gentle acceptation if these my present doings be now supported, I will perswade my selfe that I have reaped sufficient fruit of my travell. Unto whome with all my heart I wish prosperous successe in all their affaires. Ann. Dom. 1572. W. M. 127 In Turchas preeatio. jjUmme Deus, succurre tuis, miseresce tuorum, Et subeat gentis te nova cura tuae. Quern das tantorum finem, Rex magne, laborum ? In nos vibrabit tela quousque Sathan ? Ante Rhodum, mox indfe Chium, nunc denique Cyprum, Turcharum cepit sanguinolenta manus. Mustafa foedifragus partes grassatur in omnes, Et Veneta Cypriam strage cruentat humum. Nee finem imponit sceleri, mollitue furorem, Nee nisi potato sanguine pastus abit. Qualis, quae nunquam nisi plena tum6nsque cruore Sanguisuga obsessam mittit hirudo cutem. Torturam sequitur tortura, cruorque cruorem, Et caedem admissam caedis altus amor. Saevit inops animi, nee vel se temperat ipse, Vel manus indomitum nostra domare potest. At tu, magne Pater, tumidum disperde Tyrannum, Nee sine mactari semper ovile tuum. Exulet hoc monstrum, ne sanguine terra redundet Excutiantque novum Cypria regna jugum/ Et quod Christicolae foedus pepigere Monarchae, Id faustum nobis omnibus esse velis. Tu pugna illorum pugnas, & bella secundes. Captiv6sque tibi subde per arma Scythas. Sic tua per totum fundetur gloria mundum, Unus sic Christus fiet, & una fides. Gulielmus Malim. made by the Earle Nestor Martiningo, unto the renowmed Prince the Duke of Venice. He sixteenth day of February, * 1571, the * In Italy and fleet which had brought the ayde unto 0{1 Famagusta, departed from thence, whereas f^ v were found in all the army, but foure Lord is' thousand footmen, eight hundred of them akoayes €^anSed the chosen (accounting the Citizens and other of ™ orm*' in number were New yeres souldiers, and thousand three ' the rest two hundred the arrivall of the which day, and from the Villages) souldiers of Albania. After succour, the fortification of the City went more diligently that daJ reck~ forward of all hands, then it did before, the whole gari- ^ithoTTwee son, the Grecian Citizens the Towne, the heere in Enginhabiting Governours and Captaines not withdrawing themselves land,espedally from any kinde of labour, for the better incouragement the temP°™U and good example of others, both night and day searching c^inecauses the watch, to the intent with more carefull heed taking are not woont they might beware of their enemies, against whom they to alter the made no sally out of the City to skirmish but very same untill the seldome, especially learne the intent of the enemies. Whilest we made this diligent provision within the Citie, the Turks without made no lesse preparation of all things necessary, fit to batter the fortresse withall, as in bringing out of Caramania and Syria with all speed by the Sea, many woollpacks, a great quantitie of wood and timber, divers pieces of artillery, engins, and other things expedient for their purpose. they might ^nunc^ttJn to understand when At the beginning of April Halli Basha landed there with fourscore gallies or thereabout in his company, who [II. i. 122.] brought thither that, which of our enemies was desired, who soone after departing leaving behinde him thirty gallies, which continually transported souldiours, munition, fresh victuals, and other necessaries, 129 thence, and from v lini be vessels like unto ye French Gabards, sailing daily upon the river of Bordeaux, which saile wt a misen or triangle saile. * Maone be vessels like unto ye great hulks, which come hither from Denmarke, some of the which cary 7 or 8 hundred tunnes a piece, flat and broad, which saile some of them with seven misens a piece, * Palandrie be great flat vessels made like Feriboats to transport horse. Nicosia, otherwise called iTuosia. Sig. Bragadino was Pro- veditore, that is, Governour, and Sig. BagHone Generall of the Christian armie. THE ENGLISH VOYAGES besides a great number of * Caramusalins, or Brigandines, great Hulkes called *Maones, and large broad vessels termed of them * Palandrie, which continually passed to and fro betweene Cyprus and Syria, and other places thereabout, which they did with great speed, standing in feare of the Christian army. And about the middest of the same moneth the Turkes caused to be brought out of the Citie of Nicosia, which they had woone a little before, fifteene pieces of artillery, and raising their army from whence they were before, making ditches and trenches necessary, incamped themselves in gardens, and toward the West part of Famagusta neere a place called Precipola. The five and twentieth day of the same moneth they raised up mounts to plant their artillery upon, and caused trenches to be made for harquebuzers, one very nigh another, approching still very neere the Citie, in such order, as was almost impossible to stay the same, fortie thousand of their Pioners continually labouring there the most part of all the night. The intent of the enemie being then knowen, and in what part of the Citie he minded most to plant his battery, we tooke diligent heed on the other part, to repaire and fortifie all places necessary within. For the which cause wee placed a great watch in that way, which was covered with a counterscharfe, and in the sallies of their privy Posternes, for the there were new defence of flanckers made, also Traverses called Butterisses made upon the Cortaine, with one trench of Turves two foot high and broad, the which was made on that side of the wall of the Citie, which was already battered with the shot of the Turkes, with certaine loope holes for our Harquebuzers, by the which they defended the counterscharfe. Two noble personages Bragadino and Baglione personally tooke this charge on them, by the which meanes the Christian affaires passed in very good order. All the bread for our Souldiers was made in one storethe noble gentleman Lorenzo house, of the said counterscharfe, the which Tiepolo captaine of * Baffo had charge, who refused no * Baffo of the paine, where he thought his travell might prevaile. the castle was placed Bragadino, who with a diligent gard had charge on that in the which' part of the castle principally, next unto the sea side, Citie there trimming and digging out new flanckers for the better wasa^umP defence If the •%£*. that famous gentleman Andrea ^amedPaphos, In anc\ent S, . A valiant knight named Foito was appointed Master Venus. of the Ordinance, who was slain within few dayes after in * Arsenall in a skirmish, whose garrison the noble Bragadino Provedi- Constantinople tore before named presently delivered over to me. Three and Ventc* is other captaines were appointed over the wilde-fire with J^itionand twentie footmen for every one of them, chosen out of the artillery to armie, to use and execute the same as occasion should fo in. serve. The best pieces of Ordinance were brought foorth unto that side of the Towne, where the battery was looked for to be made : and they made privy fences to cover the better their cannon shot withall. There was no want in the Christians to annoy their enemies in issuing often out of every side against them, aswell to hinder their determinations, as to hurt them otherwise at divers times. They also rendered to us the like. For three hundred of the inhabitants of Famagusta one time issuing out of the citie, armed onely with their swords and targets, with so many Italian Harquebuzers also in the their company, received great dammage, because trenches of the enemies were made about so thicke, although at the same present wee compelled them to flie, and slew also many of them : yet they increased to such number, that they killed presently thirty, and hurt there threescore of our company. For the which cause order was taken, that our men should no more come forth of their holde, committing themselves to manifest perill to bid their enemies the base. The Turkes in processe of time by little and little with their trenches, came at length to the toppe of the counterscharfe, and having furnished their forts the nineteenth threescore and foureteene pieces of great artillary within there were foure their custody, amongst the which Basiliskes (for so they terme them) of an immeasurable greatnesse, and began to batter from the gate Limisso unto the Arsenall, and layed five batteries against the towne, the one against the great high Turret of the Arsenall, which was battered with five pieces of Ordinance mounted upon that fort of the rocke, the other against the Cortaine it selfe of the Arsenall, battered by one fort with eleven pieces : another against the Keepe of Andruzzi with two commanders, or cavaliers, which were above with one fort of eleven other pieces : another battery against the Turret of S. Nappa, the which was battered with foure Basilisks. The gate of Limisso, which had one high commander or cavalier alone, and a Brey and Cortaine without was battered by the forts with three and thirty pieces of artillery, whereas Mustafa himselfe Generall of the Turkes army tooke the charge in person. At the first they seemed not to care much to spoile the walles, but shot still into the city, [II. i. 123.] and against our Ordinance, which greatly galled them. Whereupon they, who were within the city, aswell our souldiours, as the Grecians, assoone as the battery began, withdrawing themselves, came and dwelt by the walles of the citie, whereas they continued from that time to the end of the siege. The noble Bragadino lodged in the Keepe of Andruzzi, Baglioni in that ward of S. Nappa. The honourable Tiepolo in that which was called Campo Santo. Wherefore they being present at all that was done, both encouraged, and punished the souldiers according to their deserts. The right worshipfull Luigi Martiningo was appointed chiefe over the Ordinance, who answering all mens expectation of him, with great courage divided the charge thereof unto sixe other inferiour captaines, who tooke order and care for that company, and for the provision of things necessary for the gunners : one company of the Grecians being appointed to every gate of the Citie for to attend upon the service of the artillery. The valiant captaine Francesco Bagone warded at the Keepe, and at the great Commander of the Arsenall. Captaine Pietro Conte attended upon the Cortaine, at the Commander of the Volti, and at the Keepe of Campo Santo. I for my part attended upon the Commander of Campo Santo, and upon the Commander of Andruzzi, and of the Cortaine, unto the Turret of Santa Nappa. The Earle Hercole Martiningo attended upon the Commander of Santa Nappa, and to the whole Cortaine, unto the gate of Limisso. Horatio Captaine of Veletri attended upon the Brey and Cortaine toward the Bulwarke. Upon the high Commander of Limisso, which was more troubled then all the rest, attended the Captaine Roberto Malvezzi. At the same time, when the battery began (by the commission of the honourable Bragadino) victuals were appointed, and given to all the souldiers, aswell Grecians, as Italians, and Gunners : namely Wine, Pottage, Cheese, and Bakon : all the which things were brought to the walles as need did require in very good order, so that no souldier there spent any more in bread then two souses a day. They were payed at the end Two Venetian of every thirty dayes with the great travell of that right souses f / ' /f amount but to 1 • V 11 TT • • 1 A i ^- TV* worshiprull Venetian gentleman M. Giovanni Antonio one peny EngQuerini, who besides this his ordinary charge was found Vtsh. present in all weighty and dangerous affaires to the great incouragement of our souldiours. And wee made a counterbattery against our enemies for ten dayes space, with so great rage, that we choked and destroyed fifteene of their best pieces, also we killed and dispatched of them about thirty thousand at that season, so that they were disappointed at that time of their battery in that place, and were greatly dismayed. But we foreseeing that we had no great store of powder left, there was made a restraint, and such order taken, that thirty pieces should not shoot off but thirty shot a piece every day, and that in the presence of the Captaines, who were still present, because The nine and twentieth day of May there came towards us from Candia a Fregat or Pinnace, the which giving us great hope and lightening of ayde, encreased marvellously every mans courage. The Turks with great travell and slaughter of both sides, had woonne at the last the counterscharfe from us, with great resistance and mortalitie on both parts. Whereupon they began on the other side of the fift battery to fill up the ditch, with the earth that they threw downe, which was taken neere the wall of the counterscharfe. But all that earth and falling downe of the wall made by the shot of their artillery, was caried away of us within the city, all our company labouring continually aswell by night as day, untill our enemies had made certaine loope-holes in the wall, thorow the which they flancking and scouring all the ditch with their harquebussie, stopped our former course of carying, or going that way any more, without certaine and expresse danger. But M. Giovanni Marmori, a fortifier, had devised a certaine kinde of joyned boords, the which being caried of the souldiers, defended them from the shot of the Harquebuzers, so that some other quantity of earth, but no great store, was caried also away : in the which place this foresayd fortifier was slaine, who had done especiall good service in all our necessary affaires. And our enemies having cast so much earth into the ditch, as filled it up againe, and made it a firme way to the wall of the counterscharfe, and casting before them the earth by little and little, they made one traverse even unto the wall on two sides in all their batteries, the which they made thicke and strong with woolpacks, and other fagots, to assure themselves the better of our flanckers. When they had once possessed the ditch, that they could not be hurt of us but by chance, they began foorthwith to cast and digge out undermines to undermine the Brey, the Turret of Santa Nappa, the Commander of Andruzzi, the Keepe of Campo Santo, the Cortaine, longer to serve our turne injoy those fewe flanckers, we into our enemies campe, the threw downe wilde-fire them very sore, because it fired their which annoyed woolpacks, & also their fagots. And for the better encouragement of the souldiers, the right honorable Bragadino gave to every souldier one duckat, ye which could gaine or recover any of the former woolpackes, [II. i. 124.] making countermines in all places. To the which charge Maggio the fortifier knight was appointed, who in all our businesse served with such diligence and courage, as he was able, or was requisite. But the countermines met not, saving those of the Commander of S. Nappa, of Andruzzi, and that of Campo Santo, because they * Albanois were open, and our men sallied out often both by day souldiers, souland night into the ditch to perceive better the way of diers of the mines, and to fire the fagots and wooll. Nor we Al^am^ ceassed at any time through the unspeakable travell of caneei EPjrus the Lord Baglione (who had the oversight of all these who commonly matters) to trouble our enemies intents, by all maner of serve the wit and policie, dividing the companies for the batteries, Venetians both r t . j 1 joyning and planting in all places a garrison or the anci foot * Albanois souldiours, who aswell on foot as on horse- skilfull backe, shewed alwayes notable courage and manhood, painfull °. n • c J.-L on horsebacke The first assault. THe one and twentieth day of June they put fire to the mine of the Turret of the Arsenall, whereas Giambelat Bey tooke charge, who with great ruine rent in sunder a most great and thicke wall, and so opened the same, that he threw downe more then halfe thereof, breaking also one part of the vaimure, made before to upholde the assault. And suddenly a great number of the Turkes skipping upon the ruines thereof, displayed their Ensignes, even to the toppe of the same. Captaine Pietro Conte with his company was in that ward, the which was much shaken and terrified by that sudden ruine. I with my company came first thither, so that freshed themselves with new supplies five or sixe times, yet they failed of their purpose. There fought £>ersonOfthis noble ally the Lord Baglione : Bragadino and Querini being a r m e c j stood not farre off to refresh and comfort our & painfull gentleman M Souldiours, and the Captaine of the Castell with the Gio. Antonio Ordinance, that was planted upon the Butteries destroyed Querini (who many of our enemies, when they gave ye assault, the was{ferj~ which endured five houres together : so that of Turkes In sunder 7v * w e re slaine very many, and of our side betweene them the commande- that were slaine and hurt one hundred : most part of mentofMus- the which number were cast away by a mischance of o ur w ilde-fire, the which being unadvisedly and neglitafa) 1 was g e n dy handled, burnt up many of our owne company. ^tn'coar- the Earle Gio. Francesco teously in my There died at that present travell at Goro, the Captaine Barnardino Agubio : and by the Corcyra, now throwing of stones Hercole Malatesta, Captaine Pietro o ther Captaines and Standerdbearers, were °he \ein there Mag. Castellano or Capitaine of from Candia, which bringing newes of most certaine ayd e greatly increased both the mirth and courage of one of the / r Castles. us all, so that we made soone after, with the helpe of the Captaine Marco Crivellatore, and Maggio the knight, certaine retreats flancked to all the places beaten downe, and whereas they suspected that the enemy had digged up any mines, with Hogsheads, Chests, Tikes, and Sacks stuffed full of moist earth (the Grecians with all speed having already brought almost all that which they had)t: The night following arrived then Conte, W1th very sore hurt. 1 1 j & • 1 1 1 r / in Cyprus a Pinnasse their Canveis about In extremities because men have no necessary uses, they brought "pare trifles carPets> e v en they having dispatched to their hangings, cortaines, their very sheets, to make and stuffe up their foresayd sacks, a very good and ready way to make up againe their vaimures, the which were throwen the artillery, which never downe with the stinted, so that we made up againe still that in night, the which was in throwen downe and broken the day, sleeping very seldome : all the souldiers standing alwayes upon the walles, visited continually of the 136 all the night at any time^ muckiessein dangerous Governors of the Citie, which slept at no time, but in Provident the extreame heat of the day, having no other to giving us continually alarmes, not suffering us long to seldom skepe breath. their rest, because the enemie was at hand, f J ™ ™ '' time y careM take TTT The second assault. . r r 1 1 • 1 < , - ,, in pieces, and caused great the vaimure being helpeth much. He nine and twentieth day of the same moneth seasons. they set the mine made towards the Brey on fire, the which mine was digged in stone, which brake and cleft all things ruine, making an easie way for the enemy to assault us, who with an outragious fury came to the toppe, whereas Mustafa their Generall was altogether present, which assault was received, and stayed at the beginning of ^smal1 th}nS the Earle Hercole Martiningo with his garrison, and at.the bePn~ ning, or in due jone & so were repulsed by our company, who fought with- t-me out any advantage of covert, throwen downe by the mine. There were slaine of our company Captaine Meani the Sergeant Major of our armie, Captaine Celio de Fuochi, Captaine Erasmo da Fermo: and Captaine Soldatello, Antonio d'Ascoli, Captaine Gio. d'Istria, Standerd bearers, with many other officers, were sore wounded, there died also 30 other of our common souldiers. At the Arsenall they were beaten backe with greater dammage of our enemies, and small hurt to us. Five onely of our [II. i. 125.] part being slaine there, whereas Captaine Giacomo de Fabriano also was killed, and I was wounded in my left legge with an harquebush shot. The which assault That certaine continued sixe houres, the Bishop of Limisso standing women inthe Souldiours. Where also £ J S r£ up were found present stout women, who came thither gOh or Ja"" with weapons, stones, and water, to helpe the Soul- kind, I saw diours. Our enemies understanding how great hin- sufficient triall derance changed fury they had received at their mindes, and began againe with greater they had before accustomed Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Notre Dame Law Library, on 30 Aug 2021 at 14:02:29, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781107286290.017 two assaults, ^^ l*st ilZVity^ to lay Saline. battery to all places, and into our retreats, so that they labouring more speedily then ever they did, made seven other forts more, under the castle, and taking them which were farther off, away the artillery from planting of it somewhat neerer, to the number of fourescore, they battered the holde with so great rage, that on the eighth day of July, with the same night also were numbred five thousand Canon shot, and after that sort they overthrew to the ground the vaimures, that scarsely with great travell and paine we could repaire them againe, because our men that laboured about them were continually slaine by their Ordinance, and by reason of the endlesse tempest of the shot of their Harquebuzers. And our men beganne to de. , , ] in J : s u c" J sort> ™at , there being no more standing It is accounted crease. For the Turkes caused us to retire from our agoodwarlike B r e y es by the violence of their artillery and mining, shift, to leave that to our enemies with for our Souldiours, because we making our vaimures Mnderance, more thicke, our standing began to waxe narrower, the which we can which presently we of necessitie enlarged with boords not any longer . keepe, and use as a scaffolde to the vaimure, whereby we might have to our owne more elbow roome to fight. Captaine Maggio also made commodity. one mine under the said Brey, to the intent, that we being not able any longer to keepe it, the same might be left to our enemies to their great hinderance. 1 r left • 1.^ r~ i_ i- i_ ,, 1 \ , The third assault. T3 the said Brey the ninth day of July they gave the third assault, to the Turrion of Santa Nappa, to that of Andruzzi, to the Cortaine, to the Keepe of the Arsenall: the which assault having continued more then sixe houres, they were beaten backe in foure places, but we left the Brey to their great losse, and ours also : because we being assaulted, our company being not able to mannage their Pikes in good order, by reason of the narrownesse of the standing where they were, being willing to retire in that order, as the L. Baglione had prescribed unto them, and could not, cast themselves at the last into a confuse order, and retired, they being mingled amongst the Turkes: so that fire being given to our mine, the same (with a to beholde) terrible slew presently of our sight then one thousand, and above one enemies more hundred of us. There was slaine Roberto Malvezzi, and Captaine Marchetto de Fermo was grievously wounded. At the assault of the Arsenall was slaine Captaine David Noce master of the Campe, & I my selfe was hurt by the racing of a Cannon shot. This assault continued five houres, and the Citizens of Famagusta shewed great courage in every place, with their women also, and yoong striplings. The Brey was so defaced by reason of this mine set on fire, that no body any more attempted to recover the same: because there was no apt place remaining to stay upon. The left flancker onely remained still, whereas another mine was made. The gate of Limisso was over against this foresayd Brey, and somewhat lower, which was alwayes open, having made to the same a Portall, with a Percollois annexed to it, the which Percollois by the cutting of a small cord, was a present defence to the gate, and our Souldiours gave their attendance by that gate to bring in the battered earth, which fell in the ditches from the rampaire : and when they saw that their enemies in foure dayes came not thither, they beganne to entrench above the Brey, and by the flanckers above they suffered no The fi™ard~ J • r 1 1 #**• of the person to passe out of the gate, the which thing captaine at brought great suspition unto our enemies, because they dangerous Ames not only were often times assailed of our company. much comforteththe common soulThe fourth assault. 1 • 1 1 • II 7"Herefore they came the foureteenth day of July dier, but also VV to assault the gate of Limisso, and laying their increased battery to all other places, they came and planted their greaf/yJ1" T- -L Ensignes even before the gate, whereas the L. Baglione, mendation w* and Sig. Luigi were in readinesse, who had taken upon all men. credit &com-D v 1 r T j. 1 ^ • they had encouraged foorth, killed, and put they beganne in traverses it violently out of one of them to defend that gate of the Citie. Who assoone their Souldiours, sallying as swiftly to flight the greater part of them, and at the last giving fire to the mine of the flancker slew foure hundred Turkes, and Sig. Baglione at the same time woon an Ensigne of our enemies, wrasting the Ensigne bearers hands. The day following they gave fire to the mine of the Cortaine, the which thing not [II. i. 126.] falling out greatly to their purpose, they followed not to their prepared assault. Wherefore fortifie, and advance higher the their ditches, for their better assurance against they should give the assault : and they had emptied and carried away all the earth neere unto the counterskarfe, where they lodged in their pavillions, so that we could not them. They shot seven pieces of artillery descrie that upon the wall of the counterscharfe so covertly, they were not seene : two from the the Brey of Turrion of Santa Nappa, one from Andruzzi, and two other all along the battery of the Cortaine. And they came with certaine boordes covered with rawe and green e hides, under which they brought their men to digge in the vaimures, we being nothing behinde or forgetfull to cast wilde-fire amongst them, and sometime to issue foorth of our sallies called Posternes, to offend their Pioners, although to our great hinderance. And we still repaired the vaimures by all meanes possible, with BufFe skinnes, being moist and wet, throwing in also earth, shreads, and cotton with water, being well bound together with cordes : all the women of Famagusta gathering themselves together into companies in every street (being guided of one of their Monkes called Caloiero) resorted dayly to a certaine place appointed, to labour, gathering and providing for the souldiers, stones and water, the which was kept for all assaults in halfe buts to quench the fire, which the Turks threw amongst them. r j . J Having had no great successe in taking of the gate, they found out a newe way, never heard of before, in gathering together a great quantitie of certaine wood called Teglia, which easily burned, and smelt very evill, Te8l}a in the which they throwing before the former gate of the ^. 1 Litie, and fagots fastened to the same, with certaine taine woo^ beames besmeered with Pitch, kindled suddenly so which bumeth great a fire, as was not possible for us to quench the eas*b* and same, although we threw upon it whole Buts of water, ^J^™]* which were throwen downe from an high Commander, ^ w ^ which Buts presently brake in sunder. there is great This fire continued foure dayes, wherefore we were store in Sidlia; L"tine?alled Tedaisacer. i r • i , ' . r , J torc^ r , ' done was left inforced by reason of the extreame heat and stinch, to some*l™;e u u withdraw our selves further inward, and they descend- ing towardes their lower flanckers, beganne other mines, so that the gate was shut up, because it could be no longer kept open, and suddenly (a thing marvellous No necessarie to be spoken) the standing of the Brey being repaired, rtwgtobee , b. p they planted one piece over unattemptei and made up againe, against the gate, the which of us with stones, earth on either part. and other things, was suddenly buried up. By this time we were driven to an exigent, all our provision within the Citie stooping very lowe, saving onely hope, the noble Mans courage courage of the Governours and Captaines, and the stout °f o^fef^f readinesse of the Souldiours: our wine, and flesh as well fo^Jketh^ powdered as unpowdered was spent, nor there was any Saguntina Cheese to be gotten, but upon an unreasonable price, our fames. company having eaten up their Horses, Asses, and Cats, for lacke of other victualls: there was nothing left to be eaten, but a small quantitie of Bread, and Beanes, and we dranke water and Vineger together, whereof was not much left. When that we perceived that our enemies had digged and cast up three mines in the Commander of the gate, they labouring in all places more diligently then ever they did before, bringing into the ditch, over against the battery of the Cortaine, a hill of earth, as high as the wall: and already they came to the wall above the Counterscharfe over against the Turrion of the Arsenall, shares, like unto plough shares, in proportion and height correspondent to ours. the greater and better part also of In July the heat is so extreme in this I land, that the inhabitants thereof are not woont to travell, but by night onley. A letter or supplication exhibited by the Cypriottes unto Sig. Bragadino. Within the Citie were remaining but five hundreth Italian Souldiours, who were not hurt, yet very faint and weary by their long watching and paines # in fighting in those fervent and burning heates, which are in those parts. And the Grecians were by this time slaine, whenas the chiefe of those Citizens remaining did fully resolve themselves (the which was about the twentieth day of July) to present a supplication in writing to that noble gentleman Bragadino Proveditore, desiring and beseeching him, that seeing their Citie and Fortresse was thus battered and brought to extremitie, without sufficient ayde to defend the same, without substance or sustenance, having no hope of succour, or any newe supply, they having spent and consumed not onely their goods, but also their lives for the defence of them, and in testifying of their dutifull service towardes the noble and royall state of the Segniorie of Venice, that it might nowe please him, and the rest of the honourable Governours, that were present, and put in trust, having a carefull eye unto some honourable conditions, to have now at the last a respect to the credit and honour of their long travelled wives, and the safegard of their poore children, which otherwise were shortly very like to be a pray to their bloudthirsting and ravening enemies. To the which letter or supplication speedy answere was made by the forenamed honourable Bragadino, comforting them, that they should by no meanes for abate their courage, and succour from the Segniorie, diminishing as much as hee might, the feare which they had conceived in their hearts, dispatching and sending away suddenly from Cyprus into [II. i. 127.] Candia, a Pinnesse to certifie the duke and governours there, in what extremitie they were. The Turkes by this time had ended their mines, and set them on fire, the 29. of July: in the which space our men, according as they 142 The answere of the former letter. that shortly he were woont to doe, renued and made up againe the vaimures ruined before by the Ordinance, and having no other stuffe left to advaunce them with, made sackes of Kersie, unto the which the noble Tiepolo diligently looked. The three mines of the Commander did great It standeth damage to us, having throwen downe the greater part of ftth, reas™> 1 P ^i T* ^, tn hope of the earth, whereas the governour Randacchi was slaine. savingthe The mine of the Arsenall overthrew all the rest of the greater, to let Turrion, having smoldered and choked one whole the lesser go, garrison of our souldiers, the two flanckers onely still remaining. 1 • 1 • 1 The fift assault. THe enemies travelled much to become masters of those foresayd flankers, and to sally foorth by the other batteries, and this assault lasted from three of the clocke in the after noone until night, where, and at what In this time were slaine very many of our enemies. assault Sig. Giacomo Strambali, amongst the rest, shewed much worthinesse, as hee had done before in other conflictes. T he sixt and last assault. their Gallies, shooting THe next morning following, at the breake of the day, they assailed all places, the which assault continued more then sixe houres, with very little hurt on our side, because our enemies fought more coldly then they were wont to doe, annoying of us continually on the Sea side with in all their assaults and batteries continually Cannon shot in all parts of the Citie, as neere as they might. After we Necessitie oft had defended and repulsed this assault, and perceived things brought wont to be at, wee having left in all the whole Citie our will conbut seven barrels of pouder, the governours of the tinually Citie fully determined to yeelde up themselves and the 5Pur™th Citie, with honourable conditions. Wherefore the first a&mU of August in the after noone, they tooke a truce, one 143 to a narrower straite then they were u/0 ^ ™Uch being come for that purpose from Mustafa the Generall, with whom they concluded the next morning following to give two hostages a piece, untill such time as both armies were agreed. For our hostages (by the appointment of the right honourable Bragadino) were sent the earle Hercole Martinengo, and Signior foorth Matteo Colsi a Citizen of Famagusta, and from our enemies came into the Citie the Lieutenant of Mustafa, 1 1 1. i_ - , imparld with The Lord Baglione t j ie g a te o f t^e Q t ; e o f Signiour Baglione 1 Giannezeribe and the Aga of the Giannizzers, the which were met, the gard of the e v en u n to great Turke, 1 so that Aga de W l t " t wo hundreth harquebusers : ours also were met Giannizeri is in like maner with great pompe with horsemen and the captaine of harquebusers, with the sonne also of Mustafa in person, theTurkes w^o made very much of them. gar ' these hostages, which were then come for that purpose of the articles of peace, requiring by them of their Generall, their lives, armour, and goods, five «peeces of Ordinance, three of the best horses, and safe passage from thence their Gallies, and last unto Candia accompanied with inhabiting the Island, might of all, that the Grecians their dwell still Christians owne goods and possessions, Just Turkish hereafter, as they had done before. All the which dealing, to tmeaTednst s u b s c r i b ed u n to by t he h a nd of Mustafa. Foorthwith s e nt Gallies, and other vessels into the haven, so dainh to pro- w e re mise, and that our souldiers immediatly began to imbarke themnever toper- selves, of the which the greater part were already gone firm the same. abOOrde, the Nobilitie and our chiefe Captaines also requests and articles were agreed upon, granted, and there still quietly, and enjoy peaceably living being likewise very desirous to depart. The 15. of August in the morning, the worthy Bragadino sent me with a letter unto Mustafa, by the which hee signified, that the same night hee would come unto him to deliver up the keyes of the Citie, and that he would leave in the holde the honourable gentleman Tiepolo, praying him therefore, that whilest hee should have just cause thus to bee abroad, that there might be to I speedily returning made to be done the Citie. So no harme done at h o m e, and in the Citie. T he T u r k es from o ur truce taking untill that time, practised with us all familiarly, and without any suspition of sinister or double dealing, they having shewed us much courtesie both in word and deede. Mustafa himselfe by worde of mouth presently answered me to this letter, in this sort, that I should returne, and m a ke relation to this noble man Bragadino, who had sent mee, that he should come over to him at his owne pleasure, for hee was very desirous both to see and know him, for his great worthinesse and prowesse, that hee had tried to be in him, and in the other of his Captaines and Souldiers, of whose manhood and courage he would honourably report, where soever he came, as occasion should serve t h e r e u n t o: and to conclude, that hee should nothing d o u bt of any t h i n g: because in no maner of condition hee would suffer any [II. i. 128.] violence those, which remained behind true within report of the s a m e: and towards night about foure of the clocke, the right honourable Bragadino accompanied with the L. Baglione, with Signior Aluigi Martinengo, with the right worshipfull Signior Gio. Antonio Querini, with the right worshipfull Signior Andrea Bragadino, with the knight of H a s t e, with the captaine Carlo Ragonasco, with captaine Francesco Straco, with of Brescia, with captaine Girolomo di Sacile, and with other gentlemen and the Governours and souldiours, Noble men with their swordes, and the souldiours with their harquebuzes came foorth of their hold, and went unto the pavillion of Mustafa, of whom, all they at the to sit beginning were curteously received, and caused them downe by him, he reasoning and discoursing with of divers things, a certaine time, and drawing them from one matter to another, at the last upon a sudden picked a noble quarell u n to Bragadino with an u n t r u e t h, laying to his charge f he had caused certaine of his slaves in the time that the truce T he continued betweene K especially burdening captaine H e c t or to death. them, them, fiftie that to be p ut MS which thing was most false. So that hee being angry therewith, suddenly stept foorth, and commaunded them to bee bound. Thus they being unarmed (not suffered at that time to enter into his pavillion, with their former weapons) and bound, were led one by one into the market place, before his pavillion, being presently cut and hewen in sunder in his presence, and last of all from that woorthy and noble Bragadino (who being bound as the rest, and being commaunded twise or thrise to stretch though hee should have bene Thepropertu foorth his necke, as oftruefirti- beheaded, the which most boldly hee did without any tude is, not to 1 • be broken with sparke of feare) his eares were cut off, and causing him sudden ter- to bee stretched out most vilely upon the ground, Mustafa talked with him, and blasphemed the holy name of rors. Mustafa,costn o ur Saviour, demaunding him, where is now thy Christ, ^hkfi™wMdi ^ at hee helpeth thee not ? To all the which no answere at all was given of that honourable gentleman. The earle hong on the the left side of our Hercole Martinengo, which was sent for one of ^ Z ^^ \ 1 • r r rr 1 J h o s t ag e s> w ho w as a l so b o u n d, was hidden by one of Mustafas eunuches untill such time as his furie was past, afterward his life being graunted him, hee was made the eunuches slave. Three Grecians which were under his pavillion were left untouched. All the souldiers which were found in the campe, and all sortes of Christians to the number of three hundred, were suddenly slaine, they nothing mistrusting any such treason, or tirannie. The Christian souldiers which were embarked a litle before, were linked and fettered with iron chaines, made slaves, all things being taken from them, and stripped into their shirtes. The second day after this murther was committed, which was the 17. of August, Mustafa entred the first time into the Citie, and caused the valiant and wise governour Tiepolo to bee hanged, who remained behind, I being in the waiting the returne of Signior Bragadino. citie at that present, when other of my countreymen were thus miserably slaine and made slaves, hid my selfe in certaine of the Grecians houses the space of five dayes, such that unfaithfull tirant Mustafa, and they not being able to keepe mee in covert anylonger for feare of the great penaltie, which was pro- claimed agaynst transgressors and concealers, I offred, and gave my selfe slave to one Sangiaccho del Bir, promising him five hundred *Zechins for my ran- *ZeMni,k some, with whom I remained in the Campe. T he Friday "f^* p)eJes folowing (being the Turkes sabboth day) this woorthy °{oined (n° Feand pacient gentleman Bragadino was led still in the nice, every one presence of to the of the which is batteries made unto the Citie, whereas he being com- pelled to cary two baskets of earth, the one upon his backe, the other in his hand slave-like, to every sundry mony, battrie, being enforced also to kisse the ground as oft as what better: he passed by him, was afterward brought unto the sea side, where he being placed in a chaire to leane and stay upon, was winched up in that chaire, and fastened unto Byraltom. the maineyard of a galley, and hoisted up with a crane, to shew him to all the Christian souldiours and slaves (which were in the haven already shipped) hee being afterward let downe, and brought to the market place, the tormenters tooke of his clothes from him, and tacked him unto the pillorie, whereas he was most cruelly flaied quicke ; with so great constancie and faith on his part, that he never lost or abated any jot of his stedfast courage, being so farre from any fainting, that hee at His death that present with most stout heart reproched them, and f arable to his former life. tn^kstx^ ^ ^equf aj^j^ J v . r i - 'j. r , . J J traiterous dealing in spake much shame of his most breaking of his faithfull promise. At the last without any kind of alteration of his constancie, he recommending * A Foist is as his soule unto almightie God, gave up the ghost. When it were a Brihee had thus ended his life (thanks be to God) his skin gandine, being being taken and filled with strawe, was commaunded foorthwith to be hanged upon the bowsprit of a *Foist, Mfe a gdleh and to be caried alongst the coast of Syria by the sea side, much used of that all the port townes might see, and understand who the Turkish 1 Cursaros,or as h e J ™ S \ we call them This is now so much as 1 am able to declare to your pirates or 5^^!^hin T r j , , highnesse by that I sawe my selfe, and can remember Rovers. whilest that I was in the Fortresse : that also which by true relation of others I could understand, and sawe also my selfe in the campe, whilest I was slave, I will likewise briefly utter unto you. The enemies armie was in num[II. i. 129.] ber two hundred thousand persons of all sortes and qualities. Of souldiers which tooke pay there were 80. thousand, besides the which number, there were 14. thousand of Giannizzers taken out from all the holdes of Syria, Caramania, Natolia, and part of them also which in number. The with the sword were 60. thousand dominion, that Famagusta was much more wealthy and rK^> t^l en t'le c^e °^ Nicosia was : so for that cause, and ^y t^ie c o m mo d i o us and easie passage from Syria over into Cyprus, these venturers were easily induced to come In 75. dayes (all the which time the batterie thither. * The gate of came from the * gate of the great Turke. The venturers &f&ea* much'to^saL reason, why there were so many of this sort, was because as Constantly Mustafa had dispersed a rumour through the Turkes opk: the Wkir **? Turkish language Stanboli. GliVenturieri still continued) 140. thousand iron pellets were shot of, daspada,are n u mb r e d, and seene. The chiefe personages which were turin?soul™ *n their armie neere unto Mustafa, were these following : diers, who the Bassa of Aleppo, the Bassa of Natolia, Musafer Bassa the Bassa of Caramania, the Aga of commonly are of Nicosia, ihTarJ^r G i a n n i z z e r s> Giambelat *Bey, the Sangiaccho of Tripolis, hopToVthe t'ie *Begliarbei of Greece, the Bassa of Scivassi and spoile. the * Sangiaccho of three Sangiacchos of Arabia, Aleppo, a fa- Antipo, Soliman Bey, mom citie Mustafa Bey generall of the Venturers, Fergat goverX L *£ otherwise Sangiaccho of Arabia and other Sangiacchos of called in Greeke, rjXto- besides, as by the muster made by his Commission might 7tie'stn? WeU aPPeare0/ e unne. Turkish language, signifieth knightwtthus. ^{Q]^ \ s a w? being very leane and evill appoynted for , j ^e Framburaro which was at Rhodes, was appointed anc^ left governour at Famagusta, and the report was that there should bee left in all the Island of Cyprus, twentie thousand persons, with two thousand horses, many of the credite, with the number of fourescore thousand persons of Marasco, Ferca Framburaro, the Framburaro of Diverie, nour of Malathia, the lesser the It seemeth also a thing not impertinent to the * Begliarbei service. matter, to signifie to you, how I, by the especiall grace of si^lfifth lord God, was delivered out of their cruel hands, I having i^™ paied within two & fortie dayes (all the which time I was is thaT slave) five hundred Zechins for my ransome to him, w* the whose prisoner I was, by the meanes of the Consul for Turks, that the French merchants, a ligier then at Tripolis, who a g0^cf^. litle before came from Tripolis in Syria unto Cyprus, into counfreV.* the Turkes campe. Yet for all that I had paied this God suffereth summe of money to him, hee would not so set me at much to be libertie, but fed mee up still with faire wordes, and pro- done t0 his mised mee that hee would first bring mee unto his 1 * 11 1 • r r servants*hut never jorgovernement, which abutted upon a piece or the famous saketh them. river of Euphrates, and afterward dismisse me. The Necessitie oft which malice and falsehood of his I perceiving, deter- times sharpmined with my selfe to give him the slip, and to flie ; so ene,th I waiting my time, and repairing often to the Citie, at ^^ length met with a small Fisher boate, of the which a poore Grecian was Owner and master, with whom in one night with two onely oares and a small saile made of two shirts, I passed over from Cyprus unto Tripolis, being in very great danger of drowning, whereas I remained in covert in the house of certaine Christians, untill the five and twentie of September, at what time I departed from thence in a little French shippe called Santa Vittor, which came into these partes, and as wee rode, wee touched at a part of Cyprus Westward, called Capo delle Gatte, where as I came on land, and talking with certaine of the inhabitants of the Villages, who were then by chaunce a Hauking, demaunded of them, how they were intreated of the Turkes, and after what sort the Island was tilled : to the which they answered, that they could not possiblie The nature oy bee in worse pickle then they were at that present, not every commoenjoying that quietly which was their owne, being made ditie is sooner villaines and slaves, and almost alwayes carying away the understood by Bastonados, so that now (they sayd) they knew by triall Z^tinuTll too perfectly the pleasant and peaceable government of enjoying of the Christians, wishing and praying God that they might the same. shortly returne. And concerning the tillage of the Island they made answere moreover, that no part of it was plowed or laboured, saving onely that mountaine which r • 1 1 1 1 there was small seede 1 * Candia, of was towards the West, and that because they were litle the old writers troubled with the crueltie of the Turkes, but as for the called Creta p i a j ne a n cj j? a st p a rt of t j ie Islancl m latin, • EKarofiiroXis s°wen therein, but became in a maner desert, there being in Greek, be- left but few inhabitants, and lesse store of cattell there. cause it had Afterward wee departing from thence arrived in * Candia, j £QT m y p a rt bej[ng. dothed in sackecloth, whereas soone once a 100. now there re- a^ t er by the great curtesie of the right honourable Signior maining but Latino Orsino, I was new apparelled accordingly, friendly onely 4. thus welcommed, and my necessitie relieved. From whence I commonly shortly after sayling in a Cypriottes ship (thankes be to , named, Can- dia la Cania almightie God; arrived in this Citie in health, and am Retima,and7 safely come home now at the honorable feete of your Scythia. highnesse. - r > & . J \ t , ,< ~. ^ / . . . , . . 1 j • [II. i. 130.] The Captains of the Christians slaine in Famagusta. THe lord Estor Baglione. The lord Aluigi Martinengo. The lord Federico Baglione. The knight of Asta Vicegovernor. The capitaine David Noce Master of the Campe. The capitaine Meani of Perugia Serjeant Major. The earle Sigismond of Casoldo. The earle Francesco of Lobi of Cremona. The captaine Francesco Troncavilla. The captaine Hannibal Adamo of Fermo. The captaine Scipio of the citie of Castello. The captaine Charles Ragonasco of Cremona. The captaine Francesco Siraco. The captaine Roberto Malvezzo. The captaine Caesar of Adversa. The captaine Bernardin of Agubio. The captaine Francesco Bugon of Verona. The captaine Hector of Brescia, the successour to the captaine Caesar of Adversa. The captaine Flaminio of Florence, successor unto Sebastian del Sole. The captaine Erasmus of Fermo, successor to the captaine of Cernole. The captaine Bartholomew of Cernole. The captaine John Battista of Rivarole. The captaine John Francesco of Venice. T he names of Christians made slaves. THe Earle Herocles Martinengo, with Julius Caesar Ghelfo a Souldiour of Bressa. The earle Nestor Martinengo, which fled. The captaine Marco Crivellatore. The lord Herocles Malatesta. The captaine Peter Conte of Montalberto. The captaine Horatio of Veletri. The captaine Aluigi Pezano. The Conte James of Corbara. The captaine John of Istria. The captaine Soldatelli of Agubio. The captaine John of Ascoli. The captaine Antonie of the same towne. The captaine Sebastian of the same towne. The captaine Salgano of the citie of Castello. The captaine Marcheso of Fermo. The captaine John Antonio of Piacenza. The captaine Carletto Naldo. The captaine Lorenzo Fornaretti. The captaine Barnardo of Brescia. The captaine Barnardino Coco. [David Noce. The captaine Simon Bagnese, successour to the captaine The captaine Tiberio Ceruto, successor unto Conte Sigismond. The captaine Joseph of Lanciano, successour unto capThe Lieutenant, successour unto the captaine Scipio. The Standerdbearer, successour to captaine Roberto. to The captaine Ottavio of Rimini, successour the captaine Francesco Bugon. The captaine Mario de Fabiano, successour to captaine The captaine Francesco of Venice, successour unto capJacomo. taine Antonio. The captaine Matteo of Capua. The captaine John Maria of Verona. The captaine Mancino. The Fortifiers. John Marmori, slaine. The knight Maggio, slave. Turkish Captaines at Famagusta. "Ustafa Generall. M1 The Bassa of Aleppo. The Bassa of Natolia, slaine. Musafer Bassa of Nicosia. The Bassa of Caramania. The Aga of the Giannizers. Giambelat Bey. The Sangiaccho of Tripolis, slaine. The Begliarbei of Greece. [II. i. 131.] The Bassa of Scivassi and Marasco. Ferca Framburaro. The Sangiaccho of Antipo, slaine. Soliman Bey, slaine. Three Sangiacchos of Arabia, slaine. Mustafa Bey, General of the Venturers, slain. Fergat, ruler of Malathia, slaine. The Framburaro of Diverie, slaine.