The King of Spaine his letters to the Lieutenant, for the placing of John Fox in the office of a Gunner. T3 the illustrious Prince, Vespasian Gonsaga Colonna, our Lieutenant and Captaine Generall of our Realme of Valentia. Having consideration, that John Fox Englishman hath served us, and was one of the most principall, which tooke away from the Turkes a certaine gallie, which they have brought to Tarento, wherein were two hundred, fiftie, and eight Christian captives : we licence him to practise, and give him the office of a Gunner, and have ordained, that he goe to our said Realme, there to serve in the said office in the Gallies, which by our commandement are lately made. And we doe commaund, that you cause to be payed to him eight ducats pay a moneth, for the time that he shall serve in the saide Gallies as a Gunner, or till we can otherwise provide for him, the saide eight duckats monethly of the money which is already of our provision, present and to come, and to have regarde of those which come with him. From Escuriall the tenth of August, 1577. I the King. Juan del Gado. And under that a confirmation of the Councell. The renuing and increasing of an ancient and commodious trade unto diverse places in the Levant seas, and to the chiefest partes of all the great Turks dominions, by the meanes of the Right worsh. citizens Sir Edward Osburne Alderman, and M. Richard Staper marchant of London. jlHis trade into the Levant (as is before mentioned, page 96 of this present volume, whereunto I 'referre the Reader) was very usuall and much frequented from the yeere of our Lord 1511, till the yeere 1534, and afterward also, though not so commonly, untill the yeere 1550, when as the barke Aucher under the conduct of M. Roger Bodenham made a prosperous voyage unto Sicilia, Candia, Sio, and other places within the Levant. Since which time the foresaid trade (notwithstanding the Grand Signiors ample privilege granted [II. i. 137.] to M. Anthony Jenkenson 1553, and the strong and weighty reasons of Gaspar Campion for that purpose) was utterly discontinued, and in maner quite forgotten, as if it had never bene, for the space of 20 yeares and Howbeit the discreete and worthy citizens Sir more. id Ob Edward Osborne and M. Richard Staper seriously considering what benefite might grow the common wealth by renuing of the foresaid discontinued trade,. to the inlarging of her Majesties customes, the furthering of navigation, the venting of diverse generall commodities of this Realme, and the inriching of the citie of London, determined to use some effectuall meanes for the reestablishing and augmenting thereof. to S il y The voyage of John Wight, and Joseph Clements to Constantinople. The first voyage of M. stantinople. Wherefore about the yeere 1575 the foresaid R. W. m a r chants at their charges and expenses sent John Wight anc* J o s eph Clements by the way or Poland to Constantinople, where the said Joseph remained 18 monethes the grand Signior, for to procure a safe conduct from M. William Harborne, then for Sir Edward Osborne, to have free accesse into his Highnes dominions, and obtained the same. factor Which businesse after two yeres chargeable travell and s u i t kejng accomplished, the sayd M. Harborne the first of J u l 7 Z578 departed from London by the sea to Hamburgh, and thence accompanied with Joseph Clements his guide and a servant, he travailed to Leopolis in Poland, and then apparelling himselfe, his guide, and his servant after the Turkish fashion (having first obteyned the king of Poland his safe conduct to passe at Camienijecz the frontier towne of his dominions next unto Turky) by good means he obteined favour of one Acmet Chaus the Turks ambassadour then in Poland, and readie to returne to Constantinople, to bee received into his companie and carovan. And so the fourth of September 1578 he departed with the said Acmet from Leopolis in Poland, and travelling through Moldavia, Valachia, Bulgaria, and Romania, gratifying the Voiavodes with certaine courtesies, he arrived at Constantinople the 28 of October next insuing. Where he behaved himselfe so wisely and discreetely, that within few moneths after he obtained not onely the great Turkes large and ample priviledge for himselfe, and the two worshipful! persons aforesaid, but also procured his honourable and friendly letters unto her Majestie in maner following. The letters sent from the Imperiall Musulmanlike highnesse of Zuldan Murad Can, to the sacred regall Majestie of Elizabeth Queene of England, the fifteenth of March 1579, conteyning the grant of the first privileges. IN greatnes and glory most renowmed Elizabeth, most sacred Queene, and noble prince of the most mightie worshippers of Jesus, most wise governor of the causes and affaires of the people and family of Nazareth, cloud of most pleasant raine, and sweetest fountaine of noblenesse and vertue, ladie & heire of the perpetuall happinesse & glory of the noble Realme of England (whom all sorts seeke unto and submit themselves) we wish most prosperous successe and happie ends to all your actions, and do offer unto you such pleasures and curtesies as are worthy of our mutuall and eternall familiaritie : thus ending (as best beseemeth us) our former salutations. In most friendly maner we give you to understand, that a certaine man hath come unto us in the name of your most excellent Regall Majestie, commending unto us from you all kindnesse, curtesie and friendly offices on your part, and did humbly require that our Imperiall