panie and carovan. And so the fourth of September 1578 he departed with the said Acmet from Leopolis in Poland, and travelling through Moldavia, Valachia, Bulgaria, and Romania, gratifying the Voiavodes with certaine courtesies, he arrived at Constantinople the 28 of October next insuing. Where he behaved himselfe so wisely and discreetely, that within few moneths after he obtained not onely the great Turkes large and ample priviledge for himselfe, and the two worshipful! persons aforesaid, but also procured his honourable and friendly letters unto her Majestie in maner following. The letters sent from the Imperiall Musulmanlike highnesse of Zuldan Murad Can, to the sacred regall Majestie of Elizabeth Queene of England, the fifteenth of March 1579, conteyning the grant of the first privileges. IN greatnes and glory most renowmed Elizabeth, most sacred Queene, and noble prince of the most mightie worshippers of Jesus, most wise governor of the causes and affaires of the people and family of Nazareth, cloud of most pleasant raine, and sweetest fountaine of noblenesse and vertue, ladie & heire of the perpetuall happinesse & glory of the noble Realme of England (whom all sorts seeke unto and submit themselves) we wish most prosperous successe and happie ends to all your actions, and do offer unto you such pleasures and curtesies as are worthy of our mutuall and eternall familiaritie : thus ending (as best beseemeth us) our former salutations. In most friendly maner we give you to understand, that a certaine man hath come unto us in the name of your most excellent Regall Majestie, commending unto us from you all kindnesse, curtesie and friendly offices on your part, and did humbly require that our Imperiall were Sir Edward Osborne and M. Richard Staper. [II. i. 138.] \\Hecalleth the Germaine emperor but king of Germanic. highnesse would vouchsafe to give leave and libertie to him and unto II two other merchants of your kingdome, to resort hither and returne againe, and that by way of traffike they might be suffered to trade hither with their goods and merchandizes to our Imperiall dominions, and in like sort to make their returne. Our stately Court and Countrey hath beene ever open for the accesse both of our enemies and friends. But because we are informed that your most excellent Regall Majesty doth abound with good will, humanitie, & all kind of loving affection towards us, so much the rather shall the same our Countrey be alwayes open to such of your subjects, as by way of merchandize shall trade hither : and we will never faile to aide & succor any of them that are or shal be willing to esteeme of our friendship, favour, & assistance: but will reckon it some part of our dutie to gratifie them by all good meanes. And forasmuch as our Imperiall highnesse is given to understand that your most excellent Regall Majestie doth excell in bountie & curtesie, we therfore have sent out our Imperiall commandement to all our kings, judges, and travellers by sea,; to all our Captaines and voluntarie seafaring men, all condemned persons, and officers of Ports and customes, straightly charging and commanding them, that such foresaid persons as shall resort hither by sea from the Realme of England, either with great or small vessels to trade by way of marchandize, may lawfully come to our imperiall Dominions, and freely returne home againe, and that no man shall dare to molest or trouble them. And if in like sort they shall come into our dominions by land, either on foote or on horsebacke, no man shall at any time withstand or hinder them : but as our familiars and confederates, the French, Venetians, Polonians, and the II king of Germany, with divers other our neighbours about us, have libertie to come hither, & to returne againe into their owne countreys, in like sort the marchants of your most excellent Regall Majesties kingdome shall have safe conduct and leave to repayre into their own Country : straightly charging that they be suffered to use and trade all kind of marchandize as any other Christians doe, without let or disturbance of any. Therefore when these our Imperiall letters shall be brought to your most excellent Regall Majestie, it shall be meet, according to our benevolence, humanity, and familiarity towards your most excellent Majesty, that you likewise bethinke your selfe of your like benevolence, humanitie and friendshippe towards us, to open the gate thereof unto us, and to nourish by all good meanes this kindnesse and friendship : and that like The libertie may be granted by your Highnesse to our d™™dethl[ke ,. J J . , & J, & , . , privileges for subjects and merchants to come with their merchan- ^s su^ects \n dizes to your dominions, either by sea with their ships, the Queenes or by land with their wagons or horses, and to returne dominions. home againe : and that your most excellent Regall Majestie do alwayes declare your humanitie, good will, and friendship towards us, and alwayes keepe open the dore thereof unto us. , Given at our citie of Constantinople the fifteenth day of March, and in the yeere of our most holy Prophet Mahomet II 987. \\ With us the yeere 1579. The answere of her Majestie to the aforesaid Letters of the Great Turke, sent the 25 of October 1579, in the Prudence of London by Master Richard Stanley. |LIZABETHA Dei ter maximi, & unici coeli terraeque Conditoris gratia, Angliae, Franciae & Hibernise regina, fidei Christianae inter Christianos degentium, & Christi nomen falso profitentium invictissima & potentissima Defensatrix, augus- tissimo, invictissimoque principi Sultan Miirad Can, Imperiique Turcici omnes omnium potentissimo, Idololatrias dominatori contra regni 