tractarentur. Quemadmodum nos vicissim humaniter omnes magni Caesaris subditos omni humanitatis genere tractabimus, si in Oceani maria, alidve loca venerint, quse nostro parent imperio. Postremo excellentiam vestram pro eo quern in nostros extendet favore iis omnibus officiis prosequemur, quae a gratissima principe in optime de se merentes debent proficisci. Bene & foeliciter valeas. Datum e castro nostro Windesorii die vicessimo mensis Novembris, Anno Jesu Christi salvatoris nostri 1582. Regni ver6 nostri vicessimo quarto. in other places A briefe Remembrance of things to be indevoured in at Constantinople, and Turkie, touching our Clothing and our Dying, and things that bee incident to the same, and touching ample vent of our naturall commodilabour of our poore people ties, & of the withall, and of the generall enriching of this Realme : drawen by M. Richard Hakluyt of the middle Temple, and given to a friend that was sent into Turkie 1582. Nile wherewith we colour Blew to be brought into this realme by seed or roote. 2 And the Arte of compounding of the same. 3 And also all other herbes used in dying in like maner to bee brought in. 4 And all Trees, whose Leaves, Seedes, or Barkes, or Wood doe serve to that use, to be brought into this realme by Seed or Roote. 5 All little Plants and Buskes serving to that use to be brought in. 6 To learne to know all earths and minerals forren used in dying, and their naturall places, for possible the like may here be found upon sight. 7 Also with the materials used in dying, to bring in the excellencie of the arte of dying. into 8 To procure from Muhaisira a citie in iEgypt to Constantinople, the seed of Sesamum the herbe, and the same this realme. Common trade is betweene Alexandria and Constantinople, and therefore you may easily procure the seeds. Of this seed much oyle is made, and many mils set on worke about the same in the sayd Muhaisira, and if this seede may prosper in England, infinite benefite to our Clothing trade may rise by the same. This citie is situate upon Nilus the river, and thence this is brought to Venice and to divers other Cities of Italie, and to Antwerpe. 9 To note all kindes of clothing in Turkie, and all degrees of their labour in the same. 10 To endevour rather the vent of Kersies, then of other Clothes as a thing more beneficiall to our people. 11 To endevour the sale of such our clothes as bee coloured with our owne naturall colours as much as you can, rather then such as be coloured with forren colours. 12 To seeke out a vent for our Bonettos, a cap made for Barbarie, for that the poore people may reape great profite by the trade. 13 To endevour vent of knit Stocks made of Norwich yarne, & of other yarne, which brought to great trade, may turne our poore people to great benefite, besides the vent of the substance, of our colours, and of our divers labour. 14 To endevor a vent of our Saffron for the benefit of our poore people : for a large vent found, it setteth manv on worke.