otherwise then in secret and counsell. You are carefully to foresee the charge of the house, that the same may be in all honest measure to the companies profit and your owne health through moderation in diet, and at the best hand, and in due time to provide things needfull, to save what may be : for he that buyeth every thing when he needeth it, harmeth his owne house, and helpeth the retailer. So as it is, in mine opinion, wisdome to foresee the buying of all things in their native soile, in due time, and at the first hand every yeere, as you are to send the company the particular accounts of the same expenses. Touching your selfe, you are to cause to be employed fifty or threescore ducats, videlicet, twenty in Sope, and the rest in Spices, whereof the most part to be Pepper, whereof we spend very much. The Spices are to be provided by our friend William Barrat, and the Sope buy you at your first arrivall, for that this shippe- lading the same commodity will cause it to amount in price. From our mansion Rapamat, the fift of September 1583. A letter to the right honourable William Harethe borne her Majesties Ambassadour with Grand Signior from Alger. Ight honorable, we have received your honors letters dated in Constantinople the 5 of November, and accordingly delivered that inclosed to the king of this place, requiring of him, according as you did command us in her Majesties name, that he would vouchsafe to give order to all his Captaines & Rajes that none of them should meddle with our English shippes comming or going to or from these parts, for that they have order not to passe by the Christian coast, but upon the coast of Barbary, and shewing him of the charter given by the Grand Signior, requiring him in like case that for the better fulfilling of the amity, friendship and holy league betweene the Grand Signior and her Majesty, he would give us five or six safe-conducts for our ships, that meeting with any of his gallies or galliots, they might not meddle with them neither shoot at them: who made me answere he would neither give me any safe conduct nor commission to his men of war not to meddle with them, for that he trusted to take some of them this yere, and made good account thereof. In like maner I spake to the chiefe of the Janisers and the Levents, who made me answere, the best hope they had this yere was to take some of them, and although they have the Grand Signiors commandement we care not therefore: for we will by policy, or one meanes or other provoke them to shoot some ordinance, which if they do but one piece, the peace is broken, and they be good prizes. And some of them say further, we care not for their safeconduct, for if they shew it us, we will convey it away, we are sure the dogs cannot be beleeved against us. The premisses considered, your honor is with all speed to procure the Grand Signior his favorable letters directed to Hazan, the Cady, Captaines, Janisers, & Levents, & another like to Romadan Bassa, king of Tripolis, commanding them in no maner whatsoever to deale with our English ships bound into those parts or returning thence with their commodities, although they should shoot one at another : for when our ships shall meet them, for that, as your honor is advertised, the gallies of Carthagena, Florence, Sicilia and Malta have made a league to take all our ships comming in or going out of the Grand Signiors dominions, therefore if they meet with any of these gallies of Alger or Tripolis, thinking they be of them, and not knowing them a far off, they may shoot at them, which if therefore they should make them prizes, were against Gods lawes, the Grand Signior his league, all reason and conscience, considering that all the world doth know that Marchants ships laden with marchandise do not seeke to fight with men of warre, but contrariwise to defend themselves from them, when they would do them harme. Wherefore if your honor do not get out [II. i. 174.] two letters of the Grand Signior as aforesayd, & send them hither with all speed by some one of your gentlemen accompanied with a chaus of the Court, or some other of the Grand Signiors servants, it is impossible that our English ships can escape freely from these or the Christians: for either they must of force go on the Christian coast, and so fall into their hands, or els on this coast, and fall into the kings of this towne, or Tripolis, their hands, which if they should, will never be recovered. And if your honor cannot obtaine this thing, I beseech your honor in the behalfe of all the English marchants (who sent me hither to follow such order as your honor should give me) to certifie her Majesty, to the end leave off that they may be commanded to traffique, and not to lose their goods, and her poore subjects the Mariners. And thus humbly taking my leave, I desist from troubling your honor. From Algier the tenth of February 1583. A letter of M. Harborne to Mustapha, challenging him for his dishonest dealing in translating of three of the Grand Signior his commandements. jlOmine Mustapha, nescimus quid sibi velit, cum nobis mandata ad finem utilem concessa perperam reddas, quae male scripta, plus damni, quam utilitatis adferant: quemadmodum constat ex tribus receptis mandatis, in quibus summum aut prinIn posterum cipale deest aut aufertur. noli ludibrio erimus omnibus in nostrum & tuum dedecus. Cum nos multarum actionum spem Turcicfe scriptarum in tua prudentia reponimus, ita providere debes, ut non eveniant hujusmodi mala. Quocirca deinceps cum mandatum aut scriptum aliquod accipias, verbum ad verbum convertatur 265 ita nobiscum agere. 