to three hundred and thirty thousand * , and in sterling English money to fourescore and nineteene thousand pounds. The Captaine of the guard in the meane time went to the great Turke, and returned againe, then they of the Court made obeisance to him, bowing downe their heads, and their hands on their breasts, and he in like order resaluted them : he was in cloth of silver, he went and came with two or three with him and no more. Then wee went out at the first gate, and there we were commanded to stay untill the Captaine of the guard was passed by and all his guard with him, part before him and part behinde him, some on horsebacke and some on foot, but the most part on foot carrying on their shoulders the money before mentioned, and so we passed home. There was in the Court during our abode there, for the most part a foole resembling the first, but not naked as was the other at the Bassas : but he turned him continually, & cried Hough very hollowly. The third of May I saw the Turke go to the church : he had more then two hundred and fifty horses before and behinde him, but most before him. There were many empty horses that came in no order. Many of his Nobilitie were in cloth of golde, but himselfe in white sattin. There did ride behinde him sixe or seven youthes, one or two whereof carried water for him to drinke as they sayd. There were many of his guard running before him and behinde him, and when he alighted, they cried Hough very hollowly, as the aforesayd fooles. A letter of Mustapha Chaus to the Queenes most excellent Majestic jjErenissima, prudentissima, & sacra Regia Majestas, domina mihi semper clementissima, meorum fidelium officiorum promptam paratissimimque commendationem. Generosus & virtuosus Gulielmus Hareborne legatus vestrae Majestatis venit ad portam excelsissimam potentissimi & invictissimi, & semper Augustissimi Caesaris Sultan Murad Can, cui Deus omnipotens benedicat. Et quanto honore, quanta dignitate, quantaque humanitate aliorum confoederatorum legati accipiuntur, praefatus quoque legatus vester tanta reverentia, tantaque amplitudine acceptus & collocatus est in porta excelsissima. Et posthac subditi & homines vestrae sacrae Majestatis ad ditiones omnes Caesareas venire, & sua negocia tractare, & ad suam patriam redire sine impedimenta, ut in literis excelsissimi, potentissimi, & invictissimi, & semper Augustissimi Caesaris ad vestram sacram Regiam Majestatem datis facile patet, tranquilly & pacifice possunt. Ego autem imprimis diligentem operam & fidele studium & nunc eodem confirmando navavi, & in futurum quoque usque in ultimum vitae spiritum in negotiis potentissimi & invictissimi Caesaris, & vestrae sacrae Regiae Majestatis egregiam navabo operam. Quod Deus omnipotens ad emolumentum & utilitatem utridsque Reipublicae secundet. Amen. Sacram Regiam Majestatem fcelicissime valere exopto. Datum Constantinopoli anno 1583, die octavo Maii. A letter of the English Ambassadour to M. Harvie Millers, appointing him Consull the English nation in Alexandria, Cairo, and other places of Egypt. for jlAving to appoint our Consull in Cayro, Alexandria, Egypt, and other parts adjacent, for the safe protection of body and goods of her Majesties subjects ; being well perswaded of your sufficient abilitie ; in her Majesties name I doe elect and make choise of you, good friend Harvie Millers, to execute the same [II. i. 172.] worshipfull office, as shall be required for her Majesties better service, the commodity of her subjects, and my contentation : having and injoying for merit of your travell in the premisses the like remuneration incident to the rest of ours in such office in other parts of this Empire. Requiring you (all other affaires set aside) to