privileges, it would please your Highnesse in like maner to assist us in the same, graunting us by your authoritie, your ayde and favour, according as our hope is, that these poore men so detained in captivitie, as is aforesaid, may be set at libertie, & returne into their countrey. And likewise that your highnesse would send to give order to the captaines, masters and people of your gallies, that from hencefoorth they would suffer us to use our ,. traffique with sixe ships yerely into Turkie unto the dominions of the Grand Signor in peace and safetie, [II. i. 176.] that they do not withstand those our said privileges, every one of our foresaid ships carying with them a passeport of his most high and most mightie majestie to be knowen by. And for that your so singular favour and curtesie which in so doing we shall receive, we on our part with all bounden duetie unto your highnesse, will seeke to honour you in that behalfe, according as the sayd master John Tipton (to whom wee referre our selves touching all other circumstances) shall more at large enforme your highnesse, whose most excellent person and estate, we pray and beseech almighty God to prosper and increase with all felicitie and honour. From the Citie of London, the 20. of July, 1584. The money of Alger. At the service of your highnesse, for and in the name of our whole company trading into Turkie, I Maior of London, Edward Osburne. Notes concerning the trade of Alger. He money that is coined in Alger is a piece of gold called Asiano, & Doublaes, and two Doublaes make an Asiano, but the Doubla is most used, for all things be sold by Doublaes, which Doubla is fiftie of their Aspers there. The Asper there is not so good by halfe & more, as that in Constantinople ; for the Chekin of gold of the Turkes made at Constantinople is at Alger worth an 150. Aspers, and at Constantinople it is but 66. Aspers. The pistolet and roials of plate are most currant there. The said pistolet goeth for 130. Aspers there : & the piece of 4. roials goeth for 40. Aspers, but oftentimes is sold for more, as men need them to cary up into Turkic Their Asianos and Doublaes are pieces of course gold, worth here but 40.s. the ounce, so the same is currant in no place of Turkie out of the kingdom of Alger, neither the Aspers, for that they be lesse then others be, for they coine them in Alger. to the Turke, to be paid of the commoditie it selfe, or as it shall be rated. There is another custome to the Ermine, of one & an halfe per centum, which is to the Justice of the Christians: the goods for this custome are rated as they are for the kings custome. Having paid custome inwards, you pay none outwards for any commoditie that you doe lade, more then a reward to the gate keepers. The custome to the king is inward 10. per centum, The custom. The waight there is called a Cantare for fine wares, as The walghts. mettals refined, and spices &c. which is here I2o.li. subtil. Mettall not refined, as lead, iron, and such grosse wares, are sold by a great Cantare, which is halfe as big againe : so it is 180.H. subtil of ours here. The measure of corne is by a measure called a The measure. Curtia, which is about 4. bushels of our measure, and corne is plentiful there and good cheape, except when there hapneth a very dry yeere. The surest lodging for a Christian there is in a The surest Jewes house : for if he have any hurt, the Jew and ^&ni/or a his goods shall make it good, so the Jew taketh great chnstian* care of the Christian and his goods that lieth in his house, for feare of punishment. An Englishman called Thomas Williams, which is trade of merM. John Tiptons man, lieth about chandize in the streete called The Soca of the Jewes. Notes concerning the trade in Alexandria. the Ermyn Lexandria in Egypt is a free port, and when a man commeth within the castles, presently sends aboord to have one come and speake with him, to know what goods are aboord : and then hee will set guards aboord the ship to see all the goods discharged. And then from the Ermin you goe to the * Bye, onely for that he will inquire newes of you, and so from thence to the Consuls house where you lie. The Venetians have a Consul themselves. But all other nations goe to the French nations Consul, who will give you a chamber for your selves apart, if you will so have it. The customs inward of all commodities are ten in the hundred, & the custome is paid in wares also that you buy : for the same wares in barter you pay also ten in the hundred, at the lading of the wares. But if you sell for mony, you pay no more custome but the ten aforesaid, and one and a half in the hundred, which is for the custome of the goods you lade for the sayd mony, for more custome you pay not. But for all the money you bring thither, you pay nothing for the custome of the same. And if you sell your wares for mony, and with the same money buy wares, the custome you pay but two in the hundred for thereof. And it be taken, you pay double custome for that you steale. if you steale any custome, if is a kintal The weight of Alexandria is called Pois Forforeine, which that place, which maketh at Marseils 109.H. of Marseils waight, at 15 ounces the pound, which is 103.H. of 16. ounces to the li. There 272 in This is another officer. Other smal customs you pay besides, which may be at two in the hundred: and for Consullage you pay two in the hundred. is another waight called Pois Gerrin, which is 150.U. of Marseils waight, by which are sold all things to eate : but spice is sold by the former waight. . j . 1 . / •, From Alexandria to Cairo is three daies journey,, Cairo three take a Janissarie with you : & to go but you must o up thither by water it is 8. dayes journey. Roials or J Spaine are currant mony there, and are the best money you can cary. And 4. roials are woorth 13. Medins, and 2. Medins, are 3. Aspers. Pistolets and crownes of France and Dollers will goe, but of all Roials are best. dfesi°fney -r» • 1 ** r from Alexandria $„ ia J Rice is not permitted to goe out of the land, but is kept for a victuall. But with a present to the Bye and Ermine some may passe. All sortes of spices be garbled after the bargaine is made, and they be Moores which you deale withall, which be good people and not ill disposed. And after you be searched & have leave to passe, you must presently depart out of the port, and if you doe not, they will search you againe. And you must depart in the day, for in the night the castles will not suffer you to depart. The duetie to the Consul is 2. in the hundred, for his aide, and meate and drinke and all. is good when one is And within is better currant then gold in Alexandria, but both are good. it with good ankers and cables. Silver the port of Alexandria Commonly the Caravans come thither in October from Mecca to Cairo, and from thence to Alexandria, the spices, and where the merchants be that buy therfore the spices are brought most to Alexandria, where each Christian nation remaineth at the Consuls houses. Yet oftentimes the Christians go up to Cairo to buy drugs & other commodities there, as they see the commodities there vendible are all cause. And sorts of kersies, but the most part blewes, and of clothes all colours except mingled colours and blacks. Pepper the quintal, v is usually sold for 24. ducats 273 Ginger for 14. ducats. You must take canvas to make bags to put your commoditie in from Alexandria, for there is none. There is also fine flaxe, and good store of Buffe hides. A letter of the English ambassador to M. Edward Barton. to the ende our Aster Barton I send you 3. commandements in Turkish, with a copy thereof in English, ships might not come in danger of breach of league, if they should shoote at the gallies of those of Algier, Tunis, and Tripolis in the West : which after you have shewed the Bassas, receive againe into your hands, and see them registred, and then deliver one of them to our friend M. Tipton, & the like you are to do with the privilege which you cary with you, and see them jointly registred in the Cadies booke, delivering the copy of the said privilege sealed by the Cadi, also to the sayd our friend M. Tipton, taking a note of his hand for the receipt thereof, and for deliverie at all times to us or our assignes. And require them in her majesties and the grand Signors name, that they will have our ships passing too and fro under friendly licence and safeconduct for recommended maner. Touching your proceedings in Tripolis with Romadan, as I have not received any advise thereof, since your departure, so must 1 leave you to God and my former direction. The ship patronised of Hassan Rayes, which you wrote to be ours, prooved to be a Catalonian. As for ours, by report of that Hassan and other Jewes in his ship, it was affirmed to be sold to the Malteses, which with the rest you are to receive there. And having ended these affaires and registred our privilege, and three commandements, in Tripolis, Tunis, and Alger, I pray you make 274 these 