understand to be acceptable to your Imperiall Majestie, which God, the onely maker of the world, most best and most great, long keepe in health, and flourishing. Given in our pallaice at London, the fift day of the moneth of September, in the yeere of JESUS CHRIST our Saviour, 1584. And of our raigne, the 26. The Turkes letter to the King of Tripolis in Barbarie, commanding the restitution of an English ship, called the Jesus, with the men, and goods, sent from Constantinople, by Mahomet Beg, a Justice of the Great Turkes, and an English Gentleman, called Master Edward Barton. Anno 1584. ^nourable, and worthy Bassa Romadan Beglerbeg, most wise and prudent Judge of the West Tripolis, wee wish the ende of all thy enterprises happie, and prosperous. By these our highnesse letters, wee certifie thee, that the right honourable, William Hareborne, Ambassadour in our most famous Porch, for the most excellent Queenes Majestie of England, in person, and by letters hath certified our highnesse, that a certaine shippe, with all her furniture, and artillerie, worth thousand duckets, arriving in the port of Tripolis, and discharged of her lading and marchandize, paide our custome according to order, and againe, the marchants laded their shippe with oyle, which by constraint they were inforced to buy of you, & having answered in like maner the custome for the same, determined to depart: a Frenchman assistant to the Marchant, unknowen to the Englishmen, caried away with him another Frenchman to a certaine Moore in foure hundred duckets, and by force caused the Englishmen, and shippe to depart: who neither suspecting fraude, nor deceite, hoised sailes. In the meane time, this man, whose debter the Frenchman had 314 indebted stollen away, went to the Bassa with the supplication, by whose meanes, and force of the Castle, the Englishmen were constrained to returne into the port, where the Frenchman, author of the evill, with the Master of the ship an Englishman, innocent of the crime were hanged, [II. i. 193O and sixe and twentie Englishmen cast into prison, of whom through famine, thirst, and stinke of the prison, eleven died, and the rest like to die. Further, it was signified to our Majestie also, that the marchandise and other goods, with the shippe, were worth 7600. duckets: which things if they be so, this is our commandement, which was granted and given by our Majestie, that the English shippe, and all the marchandize, and whatsoever else taken away bee wholy restored, and that the Englishmen be let goe free, and suffered to returne into their Countrey. Wherefore when this our commaundement shall come unto thee, wee straightly commaund, that the foresaid businesse be diligently looked unto, and discharged- And if it be so, that a Frenchman, and no Englishman hath done this craft, and wickednesse unknowen to the Englishmen, and as authour of the wickednesse is punished, and that the Englishmen committed nothing against the peace and league, or their articles: also if they payd custome according to order, it is against lawe, custome of Countreys, and their privilege, to hinder or hurt them. Neither is it meete, their shippe, marchandise, and all their goods taken, should be withholden. Wee will therefore, that the English shippe, marchandize, and all other their goods, without exception, be restored to the Englishmen: also that the men bee let goe free, and if they will, let none hinder them, to returne peaceably into their Countrey: do not commit, that they another time complaine of this matter, and how this businesse is dispatched, certifie us at our most famous porche. Dated in the Citie of Constantinople, in the 992. yeere of Mahomet, and in the ende of the moneth of October; and in the yeere of JESUS 1584, T HE ENGLISH VOYAGES the letter of Master William Hareborne, English Ambassadour, Ligier in Constantinople, to the Bassa Romadan, the Beglerbeg of Tripolis in Barbarie, for the restoring of an English shippe called the Jesus, with the goods, and men, detained as slaves, Anno 1585. Olto magnifico Signor, un per sopra la sua ria malitia, non Noi ha stato significato per diverse lettere di quanto ha passato circa di una nave nostra chiamata Jesus, sopra il quale in agiuto di Ricciardo Skegs, u no de gli nostri mercanti di essa gia m o r t o, veniva cargo, certo Francese chiamato Romano Sonings, il quale per non esser ben portato secondo che doveva, volendo importar seco un altro Francese debitore a certi vostri sensa pagarcene, per giusticia era appiccato col patron Inglese A n d re Dier, che come simplice credendo al detto Francese, senza avedercene de retornava, quando da vostra magnifica Signoria gli era m a n d a te La morte del detto tristo Francese approviamo como cosa benfatta. Ma al contrario, dove lei ha confiscate la detta nave e mercantia en essa, & fatto sciavi li marinari, como cosa molto contraria a li privilegii dal Gran Signor quattro anni passati concessi, & da noi confirmati di parte de la Serenissima Magesta d'Ingilterra nostra patrona, e molto contraria a la liga del detto Gran Signor, il quale essendo dal sopra detto apieno informato, noi ha conceduto il suo regale mandamento di restitutione, la qual mandiamo a Edoardo vostra magnifica Signoria col presente portator Edoardo Mahumed Barton, nostro Secretario, & M a h u m ed Beg, droguemano di sua porta excelsa, con altre lettere del excellentissimo Beg. Vizir, & invictissimo capitan di m a r: chiedendo, tanto di parte del Gran Signor, quanto di sua Serenissima Magesta di V. S. M. che gli huomini, oglii, nave col fornimento,