foedus faciant, ita ut nunquam hujusmodi querela hue te expostulabimus. veniat, quia quicquid accident, a Negligentiam postponito, & insigni Caesareo fidem adhibeto. A commaundement for Egypt. SCito quod orator Reginae Angliae in porta mea existens libellum supplicem ad portam nostram mittens significavit, quod cum ex iEgypto Consul eorum abesset, Consul illic Gallicus existens, Vento nuncupatus, quamvis ante haec tempora ne manus in Anglos mitteret mandatum nostrum fuerit datum, Angli sub vexillo & tutela nostra sunt inquiens, mandatum Caesareum vili existimans, non cessavit perturbare Anglos. Quare scito quod Reginae Angliae privilegium nostrum est datum. Juxta illud privilegium Anglis nulla ratione Consul Gallicus Consulatum agat, neve manus immittat, mandatum nostrum postulavit ejus legatus. Quare mando, ut contra privilegium nostrum Consul Gallicus Anglis injuriam non inferat, neve Consulatum agat. Judici JEgypti literae nostrae sunt datae : hanc ob causam mando tibi quoque, ut juxta illud mandatum nostrum, contra privilegium nostrum Anglis Gallum Consulatum agere nunquam patiare. Sic scito, & insigni meo fidem adhibeto. Cadie or Judge of Alexandria. THe Embassadour for the Queenes most excellent Majestie of England certified us howe that at the death of one of their marchants in Alexandria called Edward Chamberlaine, the French Consul Vento sealing up his fondego and chamber, tooke under his seale al his goods and marchandise into his power, and required our commandement that all the goods might be restored againe according to justice unto the Englishmen : wherefore we commaund you that having received this our commandement, you assemble those of the one part and of the other together, and if it be not passed five yeeres, if 288 to it, & if it be according to their Arz or certificate presented unto us, that the foresaid French Consull Vento hath wrongfully taken into his power the goods of the deceased English marchant under his seale, that then you cause him to restore all the said goods and marchandise sealed by him, and make good that which is thereof wanting unto the English marchants : doe in this matter according to justice, and credite this our seale. A commandement to the Bassa of Alexandria. THe Embassadour for the Queenes most excellent Majesty of England by supplication certified us, how that notwithstanding our privilege granted them to make Consuls in al parts of our dominions to governe their nation according to their owne custome & law, to defend them against all wrongs and injuries whatsoever : yet that the French Consull affirming to thee that art Bassa, that they were under his banner, and that he should governe them, and oversee their businesse, and having got a new privilege, mentioning the English men to be under his banner, did by all meanes molest & trouble them, insomuch that their Consull oppressed with many injuries fled away, and that thou which art Beglerbie didst maintaine the French Consul herein ; whereupon the Embassadour required our commandement, that these injuries : wherefore we command thee that having received this our commandement, you examine diligently that his privilege, and send the copie thereof hither, and if it be found that the French Consull Vento hath by subtiltie got the aforesaid privilege written, that you then see him punished, and suffer not hereafter the French or Venetian Consuls to intermeddle with their businesse. Obey this our commaundement, and give credite to the seale. they might have justice for therein v 289 [A commaundement