Persia, and from hence is gone the Bassa of a towne called Rahemet, and shortly after goeth the Bassa of Tripolis, and the Bassa of Damasco, but they have not all with them above 6000. men from hence, and they goe to a towne called Asmerome, which is three dayes journey from Trapezunde, where they shal meete with divers captaines and souldiers that come from Constantinople and other places thereabout, which goe altogether into Persia. This yeere many men goe into the warres, and so hath there every yeere since the beginning thereof, which is eight yeeres or thereabouts, but very fewe of them returne againe. Notwithstanding, they get of the Persians, and make castles and holds in their countrey. I pray you make my hearty commendations to master Peter Guillame, and master Philip Jones, and to M. Walter Warner, and to all the rest of our friends. Master Fitch hath him heartily commended unto you: and so I commit you to the tuition of the Almightie, who blesse and keepe you, and send us a joy full meeting. From Alepo, the 28. of May 1583. Your loving friend to command in all that I may. John Newberie. Another letter of the said M. Newberie, written to Master Leonard Poore of London, from Alepo. [light welbeloved, my very heartie commendations unto you, and the rest of my friends remembred. My last I sent you was the 25. of February last, from Dele out of the Downes, after which time with contrary windes wee remained upon our owne coast, untill the 11. day of March, and then wee set saile from March n. Falmouth, and the thirteenth day the winde came contrary with a very great storme, which continued eight dayes, and in this great storme wee had some of our goods wette, but God bee thanked no great hurt done. After which time we sailed with a faire wind within the Streights, and so remained at Sea, and ankered at no APnl* Currdl. ^ergreese' Broken gksse. a n d T HE E N G L I SH V O Y A G ES the small trifles you sent him, which towards Babylon and Balsara, and so place until our comming into the roade of Tripolis in last day of April. T h is was a Syria, which was the v e l y g O Od passage. God make us thankfull for it. T he foureteenth day of this present wee came from Tripolis, and the twentieth day arrived here in Alepo, and with the helpe of God to morrowe or next day, wee beginne our voyage into India. O ur friend Master Barret hath him commended in the E m a n u el a ball of to you, who hath sent you I N u t m e gs for hope long since you have received. Also hee hath by his letter certified you in what order hee solde those things, whereof I can say nothing, because I have not i t: seene the accompt thereof, neither have demaunded for ever since our comming hither hee hath bene still busie about the dispatch of the shippe, and our voyage, and I likewise in buying of things here to cary to Balsara, t he Indies. W ee have bought in currall for 1200. a n c [ and odde ducats, and amber for foure hundreth ducates, s o m ^ sope and broken glasse, with all other small trifles, all which things I hope will serve very wel for those places that wee shall goe u n t o. All the rest of the Barke Reinolds was sent home in the accompt of the Emanuel, which was 3600. ducats, which is 200. pound more then it was rated. F or master Staper rated it but 1100. li. and it is 1300. pound, so that our part it shall please is 200. pound. Besides such profit as God to sende thereof: wherefore you shall doe very well to speake to M. Staper for the accompt. A nd if you would content your selfe foure yeeres, I would wish you to come hither or goe to Cairo, if any goe thither. F or wee doubt not if you had remained three or foure moneths, you would like so well of the place, that I thinke you would foure yeeres. not desire to returne againe And, if it should be my chance to remaine in any place out of England, I would choose this before all other that I know. My reason is, the place is healthfull and 454 in three or there b ut travell for % three or pleasant, and the gaines very good, and no doubt the profit will bee hereafter better, things being used in good order: for there should come in every ship the fourth part of her Cargason in money, which would helpe to put away our commodities at a very good price. Also to have two very good ships to come together, would doe very well: for in so doing, the danger of the voyage might be accompted as little as from London to Antwerpe. Master Giles Porter and master Edmund Porter, went [II. i. 247.] from Tripolis in a small barke to Jaffa, the same day that we came from thence, which was the 14 day of this present, so that no doubt but long since they are in Jerusalem : God send them and us safe returne. At this instant I have received the account of M. Barret, and the rest of the rings, with two and twentie duckats, two medines in readie money. So there is nothing remaining in his hands but a few bookes, and with Thomas Bostocke I left certaine small trifles, which I pray you demaund. And so once againe with my hearty commendations I commit you to the tuition of the almightie, who alwayes preserve us. From Aleppo the 29 of May 1583. Y o u rs a s s u r e d) J o hn NeWberie. Another letter of Master Newberie to the aforesaide M. Poore, written from Babylon. Y last I sent you, was the 29 of May last past from Aleppo, by George Gill the purser of the Tiger, which the last day of the same moneth came from thence, & arrived at Feluge the 19 day of June, which Feluge is one dayes from hence. Notwithstanding journey some of our company came not hither till the last day of the last moneth, which was for want of Camels to cary our goods: for at this time of the yeere, by reason of the great heate that is here, Camels are very scant to be gotten. And since our comming hither we have