[II. i. 245.] Letters concerning the voyage of M. John Newbery and M. Ralph Fitch, made by the way of the Levant Sea to Syria, and overland to Balsara, and thence into the East Indies, and beyond, In the yeere 1583. A letter written from the Queenes Majestie, to Zelabdim Echebar, King of Cambaia, and sent In February Anno 1583. by John Newbery. Lizabeth by the grace of God, &c. To the most invincible, and most mightie prince, lord Zelabdim Echebar king of Cambaya. Invincible Emperor, &c. The great affection which our Subjects have, to visit the most distant places of the world, not without good will and intention to introduce the trade of marchandize of al nations whatsoever they can, by which meanes the mutual and friendly trafique of marchandize on both sides may come, is the cause that the bearer of this letter John Newbery, joyntly with those that be in his company, with a curteous and honest boldnesse, doe repaire to the borders and countreys of your Empire, we doubt not but that your imperial Majestie through your royal grace, will favourably and friendly accept him. And that you would doe it the rather for our sake, to make us greatly beholding to your Majestie ; wee should more earnestly, and with more wordes require it, if wee did think it needful. But by the singular report that is of your imperial Majesties humanitie in these uttermost parts of the world, we are greatly eased of that burden, and therefore we use the fewer and lesse words: onely we request that because they are our subjects, they may be honestly intreated and received. And that in respect of the hard journey which they have undertaken to places so far distant, it would please your Majestie with some libertie and securitie of voiage to gratifie it, with such privileges as to you shall seeme good: which curtesie if your Imperial! majestie shal to our subjects at our requests performe, wee, according to our royall honour, wil recompence the same with as many deserts as we can. And herewith we bid your Imperial Majestie to farewel. A letter written by her Majestie to the King of China, in Februarie 1583. is mooved jILizabeth by the grace of God Queene of England, &c. Most Imperial and invincible prince, our honest subject John Newbery the bringer hereof, who with our favour hath taken in hand the voyage which nowe hee pursueth to the parts and countreys of your Empire, not trusting upon any other ground then upon the favour of your Imperiall clemencie and humanito undertake a thing of so much tie, difficultie, being perswaded that hee having entred into so many perils, your Majestie will not dislike the same, especially, if it may appeare that it be not damageable unto your royall Majestie, and that to your people it will bring some profite : of both which things he not doubting, with more willing minde hath prepared himselfe for his destinated voyage unto us well liked of. For by this meanes we perceive, that the profit which by the mutual trade on both sides, al the princes our neighbors in ye West do receive, your Imperial majestie & those that be subject under your dominion, to their great joy and benefit shal have the same, which conthings sisteth whereof we have plenty, & in bringing in such things as we stand in need of. It cannot otherwise be, but that seeing we are borne and made to have need one of another, & that wee are bound to aide one another, but that your imperial Majestie wil wel like of it, & by your subjects wl like indevor wil be accepted. For increase whereof, if your imperial Majestie shall the transporting outward of such 