come thither to bring refreshments to the said captaine of the pilgrimage, as also to sell unto the pilgrims some victuals. From thence they set forward, and comming to Birca within two leagues of Cairo, there is the master of the house of the Bassha of Cairo with all his horsemen come thither to receive him, with a sumptuous and costly banket made at the cost of the Basha for the captaine and his retinue, who after he is well refreshed departeth toward the castle of Cairo to salute the Basha, who receiving him with great joy and gladnesse in token of good wil presenteth him with a garment of cloth of golde very rich : and the captaine taking the Alcaron out of the chest presenteth it to the Basha, who having kissed it, commandeth to lay it up againe. Some there are which affirme, that being arrived at Cairo, they kill that goodly camell which carried the Alcaron, and eate him ; which is nothing so : for they are so superstitious to the contrary, that to gaine all the world they would not kill him. [II. i. 213,] But if by casualty he should die, in this case happy and blessed they thinke themselves, which can get a morsell to eat. And thus much concerning the voyage of the captaine of the carovan of Cairo. T he voyage and travell of M. Caesar Fredericke, India, Marchant of Venice, the Indies. Wherein are conand beyond teined the customes and rites of those countries, the merchandises and commodities, aswell of golde and silver, as spices, drugges, pearles, and other jewels : translated out of Italian by M. Thomas Hickocke. the East into Caesar Fredericke to the Reader. Having (gentle Reader) for the space of eighteene Cxsar Freden^travelled yeeres continually coasted and travelled, as it were, all the East Indies, and many other countreys be- "fe%™n the yond the Indies, wherein I have had both good and ill East Indies. successe in my travels : and having seene & understood in the travels in my many things woorthy the noting, and to be knowen to all the world, the which were never as yet written of any : I thought it good (seeing the Almighty had given me grace, after so long perils in passing such a long voyage to returne into mine owne countrey, the noble city of Venice) I say, I thought it good, as briefly as I could, to write and set forth this voyage made by me, with the marvellous things I have seene Indies : The mighty Princes that governe those countreys, their religion and faith that they have, the rites and customes which they use, and live by, of the divers successe that happened unto me, and how many of these countreys are abounding with spices, drugs, and jewels, giving also profitable advertisement to all those that have a desire to make such a voyage. And because that the whole world may more commodiously rejoyce at this my travell, I have caused it to be printed in this order : and now I present it unto you (gentle & loving Readers) to whom for the varieties of things heerein conteined, I hope that it shall be with great delight received. And thus God of his goodnesse keepe you. A voyage to the East Indies, and beyond the Indies, &c. N the yere of our Lord God 1563, I Caesar Fredericke being in Venice, and very desirous to see the East parts of the world, shipped my selfe in a shippe called the Gradaige of Venice, with certaine marchandise, governed by M. to Jacomo Vatica, which was bound Cyprus with his ship, with whom I went : and when we were arrived in Cyprus, I left that ship, and went in a lesser to Tripoly in Soria, where I stayed a while. Afterward I tooke my journey to Alepo, and there I acquainted my selfe with marchants of Armenia, and Moores, that 366 "The authours going from Venice to Cyprus and were marchants, and consorted to go with them to Ormus, and wee departed from Alepo, and in two dayes journey and a halfe, wee came to a city called Bir. Of the city called Bir. Bir is a small city very scarse of all maner of victuals, and nere unto the walles of the city runneth the river of Euphrates. In this city the marchants divide themselves into companies, according to their merchandise that they have, and there either they buy or make a boat to carry them and their goods to Babylon downe the river Euphrates, with charge of a master and mariners ^ rwer to conduct the boat in the voyage : these boats are in EuPhratesa maner flat bottomed, yet they be very strong : and for all that they are so strong, they will serve but for one voyage. They are made according to the sholdnesse of the river, because that the river is in many places full of great stones, which greatly hinder and trouble those that goe downe the river. These boats serve but for one voyage downe the river unto a village called Feluchia, because it is impossible to bring them up the river backe againe. At Feluchia the marchants plucke their boats in pieces, or else sell them for a small price, for that at Bir they cost the marchants forty or jfifty chickens a ' piece, and they sel them at Feluchia for seven or Feluckia a eight chickens a piece, because that when the marchants returne from Babylon backe againe, if they have marchandise or goods that oweth custome, then they make their returne in forty dayes thorow the wildernesse, passing that way with a great deale lesser charges then the other way. And if they have not marchandise that oweth custome, then they goe by the way of Mosul, Mosul where it costeth them great charges both the Carovan and company. From Bir where the marchants imbarke [II. i. 214.] themselves to Feluchia over against Babylon, if the river have good store of water, they shall make their voyage in fifteene or eighteene dayes downe the river, and if the water be lowe, and it hath not rained, then it is 367 much trouble, and it will be forty or fifty dayes journey downe, because that when the barks strike on the stones that be in the river, then they must unlade them, which is great trouble, and then lade them againe when they have mended them : therefore it is not necessary, neither doe the marchants go with one boat alone, but with two or three, that if one boat split and be lost with striking on the sholdes, they may have another ready to take in their goods, untill such time as they have mended the broken boat, and if they draw the broken boat on land to mend her, it is hard to defend her in the night from the great multitude of Arabians that will come downe there to robbe you: and in the rivers every night, when you make last your boat to the banckeside, you must keepe good watch against the The Arabian Arabians which are theeves in number like to ants, yet theeves are in when they come to robbe, they will not kill, but steale number hke to a i_ Ants TT J j & run away. Harquebuzes are very good weapons against them, for that they stand greatly in feare of the shot. And as you passe the river Euphrates from Bir to Feluchia, there are certein places which you must passe by, where you pay custome certaine medines upon a bale, which custome is belonging to the sonne of Aborise king of the Arabians and of the desert* who hath certaine cities and villages on the river Euphrates. Feluchia and Babylon. FEluchia is a village where they that come from Bir doe unbarke themselves and unlade their goods, and it is distant from Babylon a dayes journey and an halfe The olde Babylon hath by land : Babylon is no great city, but it is very popugreat trade iOUSj a n d of great trade of strangers because it is a great thorowfare for Persia, Turkia, and Arabia : and still very often times there goe out from thence Carovans into divers countreys : and the city is very copious of victuals, which comme out of Armenia downe the river of Tygris, on certaine Zattares or Raffes made of blowen hides or skinnes called Utrii. This river Tygris doeth wash the walles of the city. These Raffes are bound fast together, and then they lay boards on the aforesayd blowen skinnes, and on the boards they lade the commodities, and so come they to Babylon, where they unlade them, and being unladen, they let out the winde out of the skinnes, and lade them on cammels to make another voyage. This city of Babylon is situate in the kingdome of Persia, but now governed by the Turks. On the other side of the river towards Arabia, over against the city, there is a faire place or towne, and in it a faire Bazarro for marchants, with very many lodgings, where the greatest part of the marchants strangers which come to Babylon do lie with their marchandize. The passing over Tygris from Babylon to this Borough is by a long bridge made of boates chained together with A bf'Mge great chaines : provided, that when the river waxeth made °fboatsgreat with the abundance of raine that falleth, then they open the bridge in the middle, where the one halfe of the bridge falleth to the walles of Babylon, and the other to the brinks of this Borough, on the other side of the river : and as long as the bridge is open, they passe the river in small boats with great danger, because of the smalnesse of the boats, and the overlading of them, that with the fiercenesse of the streame they be overthrowen, or els the streame doth cary them away, this meanes, many people are lost and so drowned: this thing by proofe I have many times seene. that by Of the tower of Babylon. THe Tower of Nimrod or Babel is situate on that side of Tygris that Arabia is, and in a very great plaine distant from Babylon seven or eight miles : which tower is ruinated on every side, and with the falling of it there is made a great mountaine : so that it hath no forme at all, yet there is a great part of it standing, which is compassed and almost covered with the aforethis Tower was builded and made of sayd fallings : v 369 be In thicknes six or seven inches, and a >>/ y <* square. THE ENGLISH VOYAGES j d 1 t h en f B r i c k es fouresquare Brickes, which Brickes were made of earth, ancj dried in the Sunne in maner and forme following : first ^ Canes, square as the Brickes, and in stead or lime, they daubed it with earth : these Mats of Canes are at this time so strong, that it is a thing woonderfull to beholde, being of such great antiquity : I have gone round about it, and have not found any place where there hath bene any doore or entrance : it may be in my judgement in circuit about a mile, and rather lesse then more. m a d e a M at of This Tower in effect is contrary to all other things which are seene afar off, for they seeme small, & the more nere a man commeth to them the bigger they be : but this tower afar off seemeth a very great thing, and the nerer you come to it the lesser. My judgement & [II. i. 215.] reason of this is, that because the Tower is set in a very great plaine, and hath nothing more about to make any shew saving the ruines of it which it hath made round about, and for this respect descrying it a farre off, that piece of the Tower which yet standeth with the mountaine that is made of the substance that hath fallen from it, maketh a greater shew then you shall finde comming neere to it. Babylon and Basora. FRom Babylon I departed for Basora, shipping my selfe in one of the barks that use to go in the river Tigris from Babylon to Basora, and from Basora to Babylon : which barks are made after the maner of Fusts or Galliots with a Speron and a covered poope : they have no pumpe in them because of the great abundance of pitch which they have to pitch them with all : which pitch they have in abundance two dayes journey from Babylon. Nere unto the river Euphrates, there is a city called Heit, nere unto which city there is a great plaine full of pitch, very marvellous to beholde, and a thing almost incredible, that out of a hole in the earth, which is throwen with such force, This hole is that ^Zfmost the plaine the plaine, in such abundance tinuall smoake, this pitch that being hot it falleth like as it were sprinckled over hereout all alwayes full of pitch : the Mores and the Arabians of true, and the that place say, that that hole is the mouth of hell : and water y in trueth, it is a thing very notable to be marked : and P}tch runneth by this pitch the whole people have great benefit to pitch J * j £ * £j their barks, which barks they call Daneck and Saffin. the pitch When is well replenished with resteth, & the water, you may passe from Babylon to Basora in eight water runneth or nine dayes, and sometimes more and sometimes lesse : ™t0 ferwer , . , we were halfe so much more which is 14 or 15 daies, anditmaketk because the waters were low: night, and there are some places in this way where you he as j*we™ pay so many medins on a baile : if the waters be lowe, *™^™f* it is 18 dayes journey. they may saile day & all the river to the river of Tygris nuphrates, /i r' - . . , pLTLd brimstone, -r. Basora. BAsora is a city of the Arabians, which of olde time was governed by those Arabians called Zizarii, but Zizarii, an ancientP^now it is governed by the great Turke where he keepeth an army to his great charges. the sea hath divided The Arabians called Zizarii have the possession of a great countrey, and cannot be overcome of the Turke, their countrey into because that an Hand by channels with the ebbing and flowing of the sea, and for that cause the Turke cannot bring an army against them, neither by sea nor by land, and another reason is, the inhabitants of that Hand are very strong and warlike men. A dayes journey before you come to Basora, you shall have a little castle or fort, which is set on that point of the land where the rivers of Euphrates and Tygris meet together, and the castle At the castle two rivers make a of Coma the the is called Corna : at this point, monstrous great river, that runneth into the sea, which f™*r " is called the gulfe of Persia, which is towards the South: Tygris do Basora is distant from a city of great trade of spices and drugges which come from Ormus. Also there is great store of corne, Rice, I shipped and Dates, which the countrey doth yeeld. Ormus is the my selfe in Basora to go for Ormus, and so we sailed barrennest thorow the Persian sea six hundred miles, which is the Hand mall distance, from Basora to Ormus, and we sailed in small ships made of boards, bound together with small cords in stead of calking they lay betweene or ropes, and they have, and so every board certaine straw which they sowe board and board the straw betweene, wherethorow there commeth much water, and they are very dangerous. Departing from Basora we passed 200 miles with the sea on our right hand, along the gulfe, until at length we arrived at an Hand called together, with Carichii an Carichii, fro whence we sailed to Ormus Hand in ye gulfeofPersw. towards Arabia we discovered infinite Hands. in sight of the Persian shore on the left side, and on the right side Ormus. . / ^ R m us is an Hand in circuit five and twenty or thirty \Jf miles, and it is the barrenest and most drie Hand t he W Q r ld because that in it there is nothing to j . Ormus is alwayes re- plenishedwith in a ll abundance of , vktuall and be had, but salt water, and wood, all other things necesyet there is twelve none that^ miles off, and out of other Hands neere thereunto adgrowethmthe ;Oyninpr } n s u c h abundance and quantity, that the city Hand. sary for mans life are brought out of Persia -xi. J i • n u ^ i . . t r 1 5> • u J the which \ J , • is alwayes replenished with all maner or store : there is standing neere unto the waters side a very faire castell, in the king of Portugall is alwayes resident with a good band of Portugalles, in the and before this castell is a very faire prospect: city dwell the maried men, souldiers and marchants of there are Moores and every nation, amongst whom the captaine of In this city there is very great trade for all Great trade Gentiles. of merchandise s o r ts o f Spices, drugges, silke, cloth of silke, brocardo, fll i^2i#61 anc* divers other sorts of marchandise come out of Persia : and amongst all other trades of merchandise, the trade of Horses is very great they carry from thence into the Indies. This Hand hath a Moore 372 fQ^f°^ king of the race of the Persians, who is created and made king by the Captaine of the castle, in the name of the king of Portugall. At the creation of this king I The election of was there, and saw the ceremonies that they use in it, which are as followeth. The olde King being dead, the Captaine of the Portugals chuseth another of the blood royall, and maketh this election in the castle with great is elected, the Captaine ceremonies, and when hee sweareth him to be true and faithfull to the King of Portugall, as his Lord and Governour, and then he giveth him the Scepter regall. After this with great feasting & pompe, and with great company, he is brought into the royall palace in the city. This King keepeth a good traine, and hath sufficient revenues to maintaine himselfe without troubling of any, because the Captaine of the castle doeth mainteine and defend his right, and when that the Captaine and he ride together, he is honoured as a king, yet he cannot ride abroad with his traine, without the consent of the Captaine first had : it behooveth them to doe this, and it is necessary, because of the great trade that is in the city : their proper language is the Persian tongue. There I shipped my selfe to goe for Goa, a city in the Indies, in a shippe that had fourescore horses in her. This is to advertise those Marchants that go from Ormus to Goa to shippe themselves in those shippes that carry horses, because every shippe that carrieth twenty horses or upwards is privileged, that all the marchandise whatso- A privilege ever they carry shall pay no custome, whereas the shippes for Mar~ that carry no horses are bound to pay eight per cento c ants' of all the goods they bring. Goa, Diu, and Cambaia. GOa is the principall city that the Portugals have in the Indies, where is resident the Viceroy with his Court and ministers of the King of Portugall. From Ormus to Goa is nine hundred foure score and ten miles distance, in which passage the first city that you come to T HE E N G L I SH V O Y A G ES in the Indies, is called Diu, and is situate in a little Hand in the kingdome of Cambaia, which is the greatest strength that the Portugals have in all the Indies, yet a small city, but of great trade, because there they lade very many great ships for the straights of Mecca and Ormus with marchandise, and these shippes belong to the Moores and Christians, but the Moores can not trade neither saile into those seas without the licence of the Viceroy of the king of Portugall, otherwise they are taken and made good prises. The marchandise that they lade these ships withall commeth from Cambaietta a port in the kingdome of Cambaia, which they bring from thence in small barks, because there can no great shippes come thither, by reason of the sholdnesse of the water thereabouts, and these sholds are an hundred or fourescore miles about in a straight or gulfe, which they call Macareo, which is as much to say, as a race of a tide, because the waters there run out of that place without measure, so that there is no place like to it, unlesse it be in the kingdome of Pegu, where there is another Macareo, where the waters run out with more force then these doe. The principall city in Cambaia is called baietta, it is a very great city and very populous, and for a city of the Gentiles it is very well made and builded with faire houses and large streets, with a faire place in it with many shippes, and in shew like to Cairo, but not so great: also Cambaietta is situate on the seas side, and is a very faire city. The time that I was there, the city was in great calamity & scarsenesse, so that I have seene the take their the countrey that were Gentiles men of children, their sonnes and their daughters, and have desired the Portugals to buy them, and I have seenc them sold for eight or ten larines a piece, which may be of our money x.s. or xiii.s. iiii.d. For all this, if I had not seene it, I could not have beleeved that there should be such a trade at Cambaietta as there is: for in the time of every new Moone and every full Moone, the 374 small barks (innumerable) come in and out, for at those times of the Moone the tides and waters are higher then at other times they be. These barkes be laden with all sorts of spices, with silke of China, with Sandols, with Elephants teeth, Velvets of Vercini, great quantity of Pannina, which commeth from Mecca, Chickinos which be pieces of golde woorth seven shillings a piece sterling, with money, and with divers sorts of other marchandize. Also these barks lade out, as it were, an infinite quantity of cloth made of Bumbast of all sorts, as white stamped and painted, with great quantity of Indico, dried ginger & conserved, Myrabolans drie and condite, Boraso in paste, great store of sugar, great quantity of Cotton, abundance of Opium, Assa Fetida, Puchio, with many other sorts of drugges, turbants made in Dui, great stones like to Corneolaes, Granats, Agats, Diaspry, Calcidonii, Hematists, and some kinde of naturall Diamonds. There is in the city of Cambaietta an order, but no man is bound to keepe it, but they that will; but all Portugall marchants keepe it, the which is this. There are in this city certain Brokers which are Gentiles and of great authority, and have every one of them fifteene or twenty servants, and the Marchants that use that countrey have their Brokers, with which they be served: and they that have not bene there are informed by their friends of the order, and of what broker they shall be served. Now every fifteene dayes (as abovesayd) that the fleet of small shippes entreth into the port, the Brokers come to the water side, and these Marchants assoone as they are come on land, do give the cargason of all their goods to that Broker that they will have to do their businesse for them, with the marks of all the fardles and packs they have : and the marchant having taken on land all his furniture for his house, because it that travell to is needfull that the Marchants that trade to the Indies thelndiesmust cary provision of housholde with them, because that in c*ry *&**? proevery place where they come they must have a new Vs}*? °f^us house, the Broker that hath received his cargason, com- them. the [II. i. 217.] j^arc^ mandeth his servants to carry the Marchants furniture for his house home, and load it on some cart, and carry it into the city, where the Brokers have divers empty houses meet for the lodging of Marchants, furnished onely with bedsteds, tables, chaires, and empty jarres for water: then the Broker sayth to the Marchant, Goe and repose your selfe, and take your rest in the city. The Broker tarrieth at the water side with the cargason, and causeth all his goods to be discharged out of the ship, and payeth the custome, and causeth it to be brought into the house where the marchant lieth, the Marchant not knowing any thing thereof, neither custome, nor charges. These goods being brought to this passe into the house of the Marchant, the Broker demandeth of the Marchant if he have any desire to sell his goods or marchandise, at the prises that such wares are worth at that present time ? And if he hath a desire to sell his goods presently, then at that instant the Broker selleth them away. After this the Broker sayth to the Marchant, you have so much of every sort of marchandise neat and cleare of every charge, and so much ready money. And if the Marchant will imploy his money in other commodities, then the Broker telleth him that such and such commodities will cost so much, put aboord without any maner of charges. The Marchant understanding the effect, maketh his account; and if he thinke to buy or sell at the prices currant, he giveth order to make his marchandise away: and if he hath commodity for 20000 dukets, all shalbe bartred or solde away in fifteene dayes without any care or trouble: and when as the Marchant thinketh that he cannot sell his goods at the prise currant, he may tary as long as he will, but they cannot be solde by any man but by that Broker that hath taken them on land and payed the custome: and perchance tarying sometimes for sale of their commodity, they make good profit, and sometimes losse: but those marchandise that come not ordinarily every fifteene dayes, in tarying for the sale of them, there is great profit. The barks O. Magazine and Armoury D. Poop E. Steerage with * Compass F. Stern Gallery Q. Pilot's or Master's Cabin H. Windlass K. Capstan • r 1 ri ° ir r G and rovers on that lade in Cambaietta go for Diu to ade the ships that go from thence for the streights of Mecca and Ormus, and some go to Chaul and Goa: and these ships be very wel appointed, or els are guarded by the Armada of the Portugals, for that there are many Corsaries or Pyrats Great store of which goe coursing alongst that coast, robbing and spoil- men, °fwarre i ing: ana tor reare or these tneeves there is no sate t^e coast of sailing in those seas, but with ships very well appointed Cambria. and armed, or els with the fleet of the Portugals, as is In fine, the kingdome of Cambaia is a place aforesayd. of great trade, and hath much doings and traffique with all men, although hitherto it hath bene in the hands of tyrants, because that at 75 yeeres of age the true king being at the assault of Diu, was there slaine; whose name Sultan Badu. At that time foure or five captaines of the army divided the kingdome amongst themselves, and every one of them shewed in his countrey what tyranny he could : but twelve yeeres ago the great Mogol a Moore king of Agra and Delly, forty dayes journy within the land of Amadavar, became the governour of all the kingdome of Cambaia without any resistance, because he being of great power and force, devising which way to enter the land with his people, there was not any man that would make him any resistance, although they were tyrants and a beastly people, they were soone brought under obedience. During the time I dwelt in A marvellous Cambaietta I saw very marvellous things: an infinite number of artificers that made bracelets called Mannii, or bracelets of elephants teeth, of divers colours, for the women of the Gentiles, which have their armes full decked with them. And in this occupation there are spent every yeere many thousands of crownes: the reason whereof is this, that when there dieth any whatsoever of their kindred, then in signe and token of mourn- ing and sorrow, they breake all their bracelets from their armes, and presently they go and buy new againe, because that they had rather be without their meat then without their bracelets. there were find dell&ht Daman. Basan. Tana. FAving passed Diu, I came to the second city that . the Portugals have, called Daman, situate in the territory of Cambaia, distant from Diu an hundred and [II. i. 218.J twenty miles : it is no towne of merchandise, save Rice and corne, and hath many villages under it, where in time of peace the Portugals take their pleasure, but in time of warre the enemies have the spoile of them ; in such wise that the Portugals have little benefit by them. Next unto Daman you shall have Basan, which is a filthy place in respect of Daman : in this place is Rice, Corne, and Timber to make shippes and gallies. And a small distance beyond Basan is a little Hand called Tana, a place very populous with Portugals, Moores, Tana an Hand whereof ancj Gentiles: these have nothing but Rice, there are VK™ many makers of Armesine, and weavers of girdles of 1 wooll and bumbast blacke and redde like to Moochanes. Of the cities of Chaul, and of the Palmer tree. zvrttetn, tag, A 1. 1 1 1 11 * k• 1 • 1 /- 1 B1 >Eyond this Hand you shall finde Chaul in the firme * land; and they are two cities, one of the Portugals, and the other of the Moores: that city which the Portugals have is situate lower then the other, and governeth the mouth of the harbour, and is very strongly walled : and as it were a mile and an halfe distant from this is the In city of Moores, governed by their king Zamalluco. the time of warres there cannot any great ships come to the city of the Moores, because the Portugals with their ordinance will sincke them, for that they must perforce passe by the castles of the Portugals: both the cities are ports of the sea, and are great cities, and have unto them great traffique and trade of merchandise, of all sorts of spices, drugges, silke, cloth of silke, Sandols, Marsine, Versine, Porcelane of China, Velvets and Scarlets that come from Portugall, and from Meca: with many other sortes of merchandise. There come every yeere from Cochin, and from Cananor tenne or fifteene great shippes laden with great Nuts cured, and with Sugar made of the selfe same Nuts called Giagra: the tree whereon these Nuts doe grow is called the Palmer tree: and thorowout all the Indies, and especially from this place to Goa there is great abundance of them, and it is like to the In the whole world there is not a tree Date tree. more profitable and of more goodnesse then this tree is, neither doe men reape so much benefit of any other tree as they do of this, there is not any part of it but serveth for some use, and none of it is woorthy to be burnt. With the timber of this tree they make shippes without the mixture of any other tree, and with the leaves thereof they make sailes, and with the fruit thereof, which be a kinde of Nuts, they make wine, and of the wine they make Sugar and Placetto, which wine they gather in the spring of the yeere : out of the middle of the tree where continually there goeth or runneth out white liquour like unto water, in that time of the yeere they put a vessell under every tree, and every evening and morning they take it away full, and then distilling it with fire it maketh a very strong liquour : and then they put it into buts, with a quantity of Zibibbo, white or blacke and in short time it is made a perfect wine. After this they make of the Nuts great store of oile: of the tree they make great quantity of boordes and quarters for buildings. Of the barke of this tree they make cables, ropes, and other furniture for shippes, and, as they say, these ropes be better then they that are made of He^npe. They make of the bowes, bedsteds, after the Indies fashion, and Scavasches for merchandise. The leaves they cut very small, and weave them, and so make sailes of them, for all maner of shipping, or els very fine mats. And then the first rinde of the Nut they stampe, and make thereof perfect Ockam to calke shippes, grQat and small : and of the hard barke thereof they make spoones and other vessels for meat, in such wise that there is no part thereof throwen away or cast to the fire. When these Mats be greene they are full of an excellent sweet water to drinke : and if a man be thirsty, with the liquour of one of the Mats he may satisfie himselfe : and as this Nut ripeneth, the liquor thereof turneth all to kernell. There goeth out of Chaul for Mallaca, for the Indies, for Macao, for Portugall, for the coasts of Melinde, for Ormus, as it were an infinite number and quantity of goods and merchandise that come out of the kingdome of Cambaia, as cloth of bumbast white, painted, printed, great quantity of Indico, Opium, Cotton, Silke of every sort, great store of Boraso in Paste, great store of Fetida, great store of yron, corne, and other merchandise. The Moore king Zamalluco is of great power, as one that at need may command, & hath in his camp, two hundred thousand Great ordi- men of warre, and hath great store of artillery, some of nance made in them made in pieces, which for their greatnesse can not PLTvUeCabk.et b ee c a r r i ed to a nd f ro 5 yet although they bee made in pieces, they are so commodious that they worke with them marvellous well, whose shotte is of stone, and there hath bene of that shot sent unto the king of Portugall for the rarenes of the thing. The city where the king Zamalluco hath his being, is within the land of Chaul seven or eight dayes journey, which city is called Abneger. Threescore and tenne miles from Chaul, towards the Indies, is the port of Dabul, an haven of the king Zamalluco : from thence to Goa is an hundred and fifty miles. [II. i. 219.] Thechiefe / ^ l Oa is the principall city that the Portugals have in place the For- VJ the Indies, wherein the Viceroy with his royall Goa. J m Court is resident, and is in an Hand which may be in circuit five and twenty or thirty miles : and the city with the boroughs is reasonable bigge, and for a citie of the Indies it is reasonable faire, but the Hand is farre more fairer : for it is as it were full of goodly gardens, replenished with divers trees and with the Palmer trees as is aforesayd. This city is of great trafique for all sorts of marchandise which they trade withall in those parts : and the fleet which commeth every yeere from Portugall, which are five or sixe great shippes that come directly for Goa, arrive there ordinarily the sixth or tenth of September, and there they remaine forty or fifty dayes, and from thence they goe to Cochin, where they lade for Portugall, and often times they lade one shippe at Goa and the other at Cochin for Portugall. Cochin is distant from Goa three hundred miles. The city of Goa is situate in the kingdome of Dialcan a king of the Moores, whose chiefe city is up in the countrey eight dayes journey, and is called Bisapor : this king is of great power, for when I was in Goa in the yeere of our Lord 1570, this king came to give assault to Goa, being encamped neere unto it by a river side with an army of two hundred thousand men of warre, and he lay at this siege foureteene moneths : in which time there was peace concluded, and as report went amongst his people, there was great calamity and mortality which bred amongst them in the time of Winter, and also killed very many elephants. Then in the yeere of our Lord 1567, I went from Goa to Bezeneger the chiefe city of the kingdome of Narsinga eight dayes journey from Goa, within the land, in the company of two other merchants which carried with them three hundred Arabian horses to that king : because the horses of that countrey are of a small stature, and they pay well for the Arabian horses : and it is requisite that the merchants sell them well, for that they stand them in great charges to bring them out of Persia to Ormus, and from Ormus to Goa, where the ship that bringeth twenty horses and upwards payeth no custome, neither ship nor goods whatsoever ; whereas if they bring no horses, they pay 8 per cento of all their goods : and at the going out of Goa the horses pay custome, two and forty pagodies for every horse, which pagody may be of sterling money sixe shillings eight pence, they be pieces of golde of that value. So that the Arabian horses are A very good of great value in those countreys, as 300, 400, 500 sale far hones, duckets a horse, and to 1000 duckets a horse. A most unkind y wicked treason against their prince : this they have for giving credit to stran* gers, rather then to their owne native people. Bezeneger. THe city of Bezeneger was sacked in the yeere 1565, by foure kings of the Moores, which were of great power and might : the names of these foure kings were these following, the first was called Dialcan, the second Zamaluc, the third Cotamaluc, and the fourth Viridy : and yet these foure kings were not able to overcome this city and the king of Bezeneger, but by treason. This king of Bezeneger was a Gentile, and had, amongst all other of his captaines, two which were notable, and they were Moores : and these two captaines had either of them in charge threescore and ten or fourescore thousand men. These two captaines being of one religion with the foure kings which were Moores, wrought meanes with them to betray their owne king into their hands. The king of Bezeneger esteemed not the force of the foure kings his enemies, but went out of his city to wage battell with them in the fieldes ; and when the armies were joyned, the battell lasted but a while not the space of foure houres, because the two traitourous captaines, in the chiefest of the fight, with their companies turned their faces against their king, and made such disorder in his army, that as astonied they set themselves to flight. Thirty yeeres was this kingdome governed by three brethren which were tyrants, the which keeping the rightfull king in prison, it was their use every yeere once to shew him they at their pleasures ruled as they listed. These brethren were three captaines belonging to the father of the king they kept in prison, which when he died, left his sonne very yong, and then they tooke the government to themselves. The chiefest of these three was called Ramaragio, and sate in the royall throne, and was called the king : the second was called Temiragio, and he tooke the government on him : the third was called Bengatre, and he was 382 captaine generall of the army. These three brethren were in this battell, in the which the chiefest and the last were never heard of quicke nor dead. Onely Temiragio fled in the battel, having lost one of his eyes : when the newes came to the city of the overthrow in the battell, the wives and children of these three tyrants, with their lawfull king (kept prisoner) fled away, spoiled as they were, & the foure kings of the Moores entred The sacking of the city Bezeneger with great triumph, & there they the ctt^ remained sixe moneths, searching under houses & in all places for money & other things that were hidden, and to because they were not able to maintaine such a kingtheir owne dome as that was, so farre distant from countrey. their owne kingdomes, [II. i. 220.J they departed then When the kings were departed from Bezeneger, this Temiragio returned to the city, and then beganne for to repopulate it, and sent word to Goa to the Merchants, if they had any horses, to bring them to him, and he would pay well for them, and for this cause the aforesayd two Merchants that I went in company withall, carried those horses that they had to Bezeneger. Also this Tyrant made an order or lawe, that if any <d-n excellent Merchant had any of the horses that were taken in the WMo>t0 aforesayd battell or warres, although they were of his %n owne marke, that he would give as much for them as they would : and beside he gave generall safe conduct to all that should bring them. When by this meanes he saw that there were great store of horses brought thither unto him, hee gave the Merchants faire wordes, untill such time as he saw they could bring no more. Then he licenced the Merchants to depart, without giving them any thing for their horses, which when the poore men saw, they were desperate, and as it were mad with sorrow and griefe. I rested in Bezeneger seven moneths, although in one moneth I might have discharged all my businesse, for it was necessary to rest there untill the wayes were cleere of theeves, which at that time ranged up and downe. And in the time I rested there, I saw manystrange and beastly deeds done by the Gentiles. Firsts when there is any Noble man or woman dead, thejr burne their bodies : and if a married man die, his wife must burne herselfe alive, for the love of her husband, and with the body of her husband : so that when any man dieth, his wife will take a moneths leave, two or three, or as shee will, to burne her selfe in, and that day being come, wherein shee ought to be burnt, that morning shee goeth out of her house very earely, either on horsebacke or on an eliphant, or else is borne by eight men on a smal stage : in one of these orders she goeth, being apparelled like to a Bride, carried round about the City, with her haire downe about her shoulders,, garnished with jewels and flowers, according to the estate of the party, and they goe with as great joy as Brides doe in Venice to their nuptials : shee carrieth in her left hand a looking glasse, and in her right hand an arrow, and singeth thorow the City as she passeth,., and sayth, that she goeth to sleepe with her deere spowse and husband. She is accompanied with her kindred - and friends untill it be one or two of the clocke in the afternoone, then they goe out of the City, and going along the rivers side called Nigondin, which runneth under the walles of the City, untill they come unto a. A discription place where they use to make this burning of women, of the burning being widdowes, there is prepared in this place a great $ace' square cave, with a little pinnacle hard by it, foure or five steppes up : the foresayd cave is full of dried wood. The woman being come thither, accompanied with a great number of people which come to see the thing, Feasting and then they make ready a great banquet, and she that dancing when g^ ^ burned eateth with as great ioy and dadnesse, they should moume. P 1 • 1 • lt: w e r^ her wedding d a y: and the feast being .1 as t h o ugh ended, then they goe to dancing and singing a certeine time, according as she will. After this, the woman of them to make the fire her owne accord, commandeth , ,. 1 1 J r j in the square cave where the drie wood is, and when it is kindled, they come and certifie her thereof, then presently she leaveth the feast, and taketh the neerest kinseman of her husband by the hand, and they both goe together to the banke of the foresayd river, where shee putteth off all her jewels and all her clothes, and giveth them to her parents or kinsefolke, and covering herselfe with a cloth, because she will not be seene of the people being naked, she throweth herselfe into the river, saying: O wretches, wash away your sinnes. Comming out of the water, she rowleth herselfe into a yellow cloth of foureteene braces long : and againe she taketh her husbands kinseman by the hand, and they go both together up to the pinnacle of the square cave wherein the fire is made. When she is on the pinnacle, shee talketh and reasoneth with the people, recommending unto them her children and kindred. Before the pinnacle they use to set a mat, because they shall not see the fiercenesse of the fire, yet there are many that will have them plucked away, shewing therein an heart not fearefull, and that they are not affrayd of that sight. When this silly woman hath reasoned with the people a good while to her content, there is another woman that taketh a pot with oile, and sprinckleth it over her head, and with the same she anoynteth all her body, and afterwards throweth the pot into the fornace, and both the woman and the pot goe together into the fire, and presently the people that are round about the fornace throw after her into the cave great pieces of wood, so by this meanes, with the fire and with the blowes that she hath with the wood throwen after her, she is quickly dead, and after this there groweth such sorrow and such lamentation among the people, that all their mirth is turned into howling and weeping, in Mourning such wise, that a man could scarse beare the hearing when the\ I have seene many burnt in this maner, because s ou UJ0 of it. my house was neere to the gate where they goe out to the place of burning : and when there dieth any 385 2B great man, his wife with all his slaves with whom hee [II. i. 221,] hath had carnall copulation, burne themselves together with him. Also in this kingdome I have seene amongst the base sort of people this use and order, that the man being dead, hee is carried to the place where they will make his sepulchre, and setting him as it were upright, then commeth his wife before him on her knees, casting her armes about his necke, with imbracing and clasping him, untill such time as the Masons have made a wall round about them, and when the wall is as high as their neckes, there commeth a man behinde the woman and strangleth her : then when she is dead, the workemen finish the wall over their heads, and so they lie buried both together. Besides these, there are an infinite number of beastly qualities amongst them, of which I Thecausewhy h a ve no desire to write. / e women 0 c a u se w ^y so ottrne themselves. . .. *. t I was desirous to know the these women would so wilfully burne themselves against nature and law, and it was tola mee that 1 • 1 1 this law was of an ancient time, to make provision against the slaughters which women made of their husbands. For in those dayes before this law was made, the women for every little displeasure that their husbands had done unto them, would presently poison their husbands, and take other men, and now by reason of this law they are more faithfull unto their husbands, and count their lives as deare as their owne, because that after his death her owne followeth presently. In the yeere of our Lord God 1567, for the ill successe that the people of Bezeneger had, in that their City was sacked by the foure kings, the king with his Court went to dwell in a castle eight dayes journey up sixe dayes journey from Bezeneger, is the place where they get Diamants : I was not there, but it was tolde me that it is a great place, compassed with a wall, and that they sell the earth within the wall, for so much a squadron, and the limits are set how deepe or how low they shall digge. Those Diamants that are of a certaine 386 Penegonde. sise and bigger then that sise, are all for the king, it is many yeeres agone, since they got any there, for the troubles that have beene in that kingdome. The first cause of this trouble was, because the sonne of this Temeragio had put to death the lawfull king which he had in prison, for which cause the Barons and Noblemen in that kingdome would not acknowledge him to be their King, and by this meanes there are many kings, and great division in that kingdome, and the city of Bezeneger is not altogether destroyed, yet the houses stand still, but empty, and there is dwelling in them nothing, as is reported, but Tygers and other wilde beasts. The circuit of this city is foure & twentie miles about, and within the walles are certeine mountaines. The houses stand walled with earth, and plaine, all saving the three palaces of the three tyrant brethren, and the Pagodes which are idole houses : these are made with lime and I have seene many kings Courts, and fine marble. yet have I seene none in greatnesse like to this of Bezeneger, I say, for the order of his palace, for it hath nine gates or ports. First when you goe into the place where the king did lodge, there are five great ports or gates : these are kept with Captaines and souldiers : then within these there are foure lesser gates : which are kept with Porters. Without the first gate there is a little porch, where there is a Captaine with five and twentie souldiers, that keepeth watch and ward night and day : and within that another with the like guard, wherethorow they come to a very faire Court, and at the end of that Court there is another porch as the first, with the like guard, and within that another Court. And in this wise are the first five gates guarded and kept with those Captaines : and then the lesser gates within are kept with a guard of Porters : which gates stand open the greatest part of the night, because the custome of the Gentiles is to doe their businesse, and make their feasts in the night, rather then by day. The city is very safe from theeves, for the Portugall merchants sleepe in the streets, or under Men ride on as we use to carry barrowes. A nd bullocks, and bullocks, one of them ^moTthe Way. I b o u g ht me to Ancola on to ride on, a nd to depart, with fifteene dayes c o m m i ng two palanchines or little t h ey porches, for the great heat which is there, and y et t he e nd of t wo never had any h a r me in the night. At m o n e t h s, I determined to go for Goa in the c o m p a ny of two other P o r t u g a ll M a r c h a n t s, which were m a k i ng ready litters, the way, with eight which are very c o m m o d i o us for Falchines which are m en hired to cary t he palanchines, eight for a palanchine, foure at a time : t h ey carry them two t he o t h er to carry m y y i c t u a l s a n d provision, for in t h at c o u n t r ey they ride on bullocks with pannels, as we t e r me t h e m, girts and bridles, and they have a very g o od c o m m o d i o us pace. F r om Bezeneger to Goa in S u m m er it is eight dayes j o u r n e y, but in the midst of W i n t e r, in t he m o n e th of J u l y, we went and were the sea coast, so in eight dayes I had lost my two b u l l o c k s: for he that carried my victuals, was weake and could not goe, the other when I came u n to a river where was a little bridge to passe over, I p ut my bullocke to swimming, and in the middest of t he river there was a little finding Hand, u n to pasture, there he remained still, and in no wise we could come leave him, and at that time there was m u ch raine, and I was forced to go seven dayes a foot with great paines: and by great chance I m et with Falchines by t he way, w h om I hired to carry my clothes and victuals. We had great trouble that every day wee were taken prisoners, by reason of the great dissension in that k i n g d o m e: and every m o r n i ng at o ur d e p a r t u re we m u st pay reseat foure or five pagies a m a n. A nd another trouble wee had as bad as this, that w h en as wee came into a new g o v e r n o u rs countrey, as every day we did, although they were al tributary to t he k i ng of Bezeneger, yet every one of them stamped a several coine of Copper, so this day w o u ld not serve the n e x t: at length, by the helpe of G o d, we came 388 the which my bullocke went, and to h i m: and so perforce, I was forced j o u r n e y, for the m o n ey that we in our t o o ke that to the apparell that they use in Bezeneger is The apparell safe to Ancola, which is a country of the queene of Gargopam, tributary to the king of Bezeneger. The The marchanmarchandise that went every yere from Goa to Bezeneger f^ffj^ were Arabian Horses, Velvets, Damasks, and Sattens, Bezeneger Armesine of Portugall, and pieces of China, Saffron, and every yere. Skarlets: and from Bezeneger they had in Turky for their commodities, jewels, and Pagodies which be ducats of golde: Velvet, Satten, Damaske, Scarlet, or white Bumbast °fthosePeoPle' cloth, according to the estate of the person with long hats on their heads, called Colae, made of Velvet, Satten, Damaske, or Scarlet, girding themselves in stead of girdles with some fine white bombast cloth: they have breeches after the order of the Turks: they weare on their feet plaine high things called of them Aspergh, and at their eares they have hanging great plenty of golde. Returning to my voyage, when we were together in Ancola, one of my companions that had nothing to lose, tooke a guide, and went to Goa, whither they goe in foure dayes, the other Portugall. not being disposed to go, taried in Ancola for that Winter. The Winter in Their Winter those parts of the Indies beginneth the fifteenth of May, and lasteth unto the end of October: and as we were in Ancola, there came another Marchant of horses in a two Portugall souldiers which came palanchine, and letters, which were from Zeilan, and two cariers of Christians borne in the Indies ; all these consorted to goe to Goa together, and I determined to goe with them, and caused a pallanchine to be made for me very poorely of Canes ; and in one of them Canes I hid privily all the jewels I had, and according to the order, I tooke eight Falchines to cary me: and one day about eleven of the clocke wee set forwards on our journey, and about two of the clocke in the afternoone, as we passed a mountaine which divideth the territory of Ancola and Dialcan, I being a little behinde my company, was assaulted by eight theeves, foure of them had swordes and targets, and the other foure had bowes and arrowes. 389 When the Falchines that carried me understood the noise of the assault, they let the pallanchine and me fall to the ground, and ranne away and left me alone, with my clothes wrapped about me: presently the theeves were on my necke and rifeling me, they stripped me starke naked, and I fained my selfe sicke, because I would not leave the pallanchine, and I had made me a little bedde of my clothes ; the theeves sought it very narrowly and subtilly, and found two pursses that I had, well bound up together, wherein I had put my Copper money which I had changed for foure pagodies in Ancola. The theeves thinking it had beene so many duckats of golde, searched no further: then they threw all my clothes in a bush, and hied them away, and as God would have it, at their departure there fell from them an handkercher, and when I saw it, I rose from my pallanchine or couch, and tooke it up, and wrapped it together within my pallanchine. Then these my Falchines were of so good condition, that they returned to seeke mee, whereas I thought I should not have found so much goodnesse in them : because they were payed their mony aforehand, as is the use, I had thought to have seene them no more. Before their comming I was determined to plucke the Cane wherein my jewels were hidden, out of my coutch, and to have madd me a walking staffe to carry in my hand to Goa, thinking that I should have gone thither on foot, but by the faithfulness of my Falchines, I was rid of that trouble, and so in foure dayes they carried me to Goa> in which time I made hard fare, for the theeves left me neither money, golde, nor silver, and that which I did eat was given me of my men for Gods sake: and after at my comming to Goa I payed them for every thing royally that I had of them. From Goa I departed for Cochin, which is a voyage of three hundred miles, and betweene these two cities are many holdes of the PortuFoure small gals, as Onor, Mangalor, Barzelor, and Cananor. The fortes of the Holde or Fort that you shall have from Goa to Cochin ortugas. t h at beiongej-k to t he p o r t u g a i S) ;s c^\\^ Onor, which is in the kingdome of the queene of Battacella, which is tributary to the king of Bezeneger: there is no trade there, but onely a charge with the Captaine and company he keepeth there. And passing this place, you shall come to another small castle of the Portugals called Mangalor, and there is very small trade but onely for a little Rice: and from thence you goe to a little fort called Barzelor, there they have good store of Rice which is carried to Goa: and from thence you shall goe to a city called Cananor, which is a harquebush shot distant from the chiefest city that ye king of Cananor hath in his kingdome being a king of the Gentiles: and he & his are very naughty & malicious people, alwayes having delight to be in warres with the Portugales, and [II. i. 223.] when they are in peace, it is for their interest to let their merchandize passe: there goeth out of this kingdom of Cananor, all the Cardamomum, great store of Pepper, Ginger, Honie, ships laden with great Nuts, great quantitie of Archa, which is a fruit of the bignesse of Nutmegs, which fruite they eate in all those partes of the Indies and beyond the Indies, with the leafe of an Herbe which they call Bettell, the which is like unto our Ivie leafe, BetuU'ua but a litle lesser and thinner: they eate it made in ^* • !?7 l l- 1 - i 11 i • J 1 r r^- herbe in that plaisters with the lime made or Oistershels, and thorow countrey. the Indies they spend great quantitie of money in this composition, and it is used daily, which thing I would not have beleeved, if I had not seene it. The customers get great profite by these Herbes, for that they have custome for them. When this people eate and chawe this in their mouthes, it maketh their spittle to bee red like unto blood, and they say, that it maketh a man to have a very good stomacke and a sweete breath, but sure in my judgement they eate it rather to fulfill their filthie lustes, and of a knaverie, for this Herbe is moyst and hote, & maketh a very strong expulsion. From Cananor you go to Cranganor, which is another smal Fort of the Portugales in the land of the king of Cranganor, which is importance, and of an hundreth and twentie miles, full of thieves, being under the king of Calicut, a king also Enimies to the of the Gentiles, and a great enemie to the Portugales, kingofPortu- WJ1JC]1 when hee is alwayes in warres, hee and his ga ' countrey is the nest and resting for stranger theeves, and those bee called Moores of Carposa, because they weare on their heads long red hats, and these thieves part the spoyles that they take on the Sea with the king of Calicut, for hee giveth leave unto all that will goe a roving, liberally to goe, in such wise, that all along that coast there is such a number of thieves, that there is no sailing in those Seas but with great ships and very well armed, or els they must go in company with the army of the Portugals. From Cranganor to Cochin is 15 miles. Cochin. the kingdome of Portugale, and Within Cochin / ^ O c h in is, next unto Goa, the chiefest place that the is the kingdom \^j Portugales have in the Indies, and there is great trade of Pepper. Qf Spices, drugges, and all other sortes of merchandize for there within the land is the kingdome of Pepper, which Pepper the Portugales lade in their shippes by bulke, and not in sackes: The Pepper the Pepper that goeth for Portugale is not so good as that the Por^ fatf. viKv&i goeth for Mecca, because that in times past tugals bring, ts not so good as t " e oncers or the king or Jrortugale made a contract that which with the king of Cochin, in the name of the king of goeth for Portugale, for the prizes of Pepper, and by reason of Mecca, which a p r r e e m e nt betweene them at that time made, the ts brought 1 • 1 hither by ye P r i ce c an neither rise nor rail, which is a very lowe and streights. t j l at & > 1 r -n r 11 1 • . « ~ 1 • ii . base price, and for this cause the villaines bring it to the Portugales, greene and full of filthe. The Moores of Mecca that give a better price, have it cleane and' drie, and better conditioned. All the Spices and drugs that are brought to Mecca, are stollen from thence as Contrabanda. Cochin is two cities, one of the Portugales, and another of the king of Cochin : that of the Portugales is situate neerest unto the Sea, and that of the king of Cochin is a mile and a halfe up higher in the land, but they are both set on the bankes of one river which is very great and of a good depth of water which river commeth out of the mountaines of the king of the Pepper, which is a king of the Gentiles, in whose kingdome are many Christians of saint Thomas order: the king of Cochin is also a king of the Gentiles and a great faithfull friend to the king of Portugale, and to those Portugales which are married, and are Citizens in the Citie Cochin of the Portugales. And by this name of Portugales throughout all the Indies, they call all the Christians that come out of the West, whether they bee Italians, Frenchmen, or Almaines, and all they that marrie in Cochin do get an office according to the trade he is of: this they have by the great privileges which the Citizens have of that city, because there are two principal commodities that they deale withal in that Great priviplace, which are these. The great store of Silke that commeth from China, and the great store of Sugar QocMn have which commeth from Bengala : the married Citizens pay not any custome for these two commodities: for all other commodities they pay 4. per cento custome to the king of Cochin, rating their goods at their owne pleasure. Those which are not married and strangers, pay in Cochin to the king of Portugale eight per cento I was in Cochin when the of all maner of merchandise. Viceroy of the king of Portugale wrought what hee coulde to breake the privilege of the Citizens, and to make them to pay custome as other did: at which time the Citizens were glad to waigh their Pepper in the night that they laded the ships withall that went to Portugale and stole the custome in the night. The king of Cochin having understanding of this, would not suffer any more Pepper to bee weighed. Then presently after this, the marchants were licensed to doe as they did before, and there was no more speach of this matter, nor any wrong done. This king of Cochin [II. i. 224.] is of a small power in respect of the other kings of 393 the Indies, for hee can make but seventie thousand men of armes in his campe: hee hath a great number of Gentlemen which hee calleth Amochi, and some are called Nairi: these two sorts of men esteeme not their lives any thing, so that it may be for the honour of their king, they will thrust themselves forward in every danger, although they know they shall die. These men goe naked from the girdle upwardes, with a clothe rolled about their thighs, going barefooted, and having their haire very long and rolled up together on the toppe of their heads, and alwayes they carrie their Bucklers or Targets with them and their swordes naked, these Nairi have their wives common amongst themselves, and when any of them goe into the house of any of these women, hee leaveth his sworde and target at the doore, and the time that hee is there, there dare not any bee so hardie as to come into that house. The kings inherite the kingdome after their children" shall not father, because they hold this opinion, that perchance they were not begotten of the king their father, but of some other man, therefore they accept for their king, one of the sonnes of the kings sisters, or of some other woman of the blood roial, for that they be sure they are of the blood roiall. The Nairi and their wives use for a braverie to A very strange thing m ake great holes in their eares, and so bigge and wide, ^fl ^ ^at lt 1S incredible, holding this opinion, that the greater the holes bee, the more noble they esteeme themselves. I had leave of one of them to measure the circumference of one of them with a threed, and within that circumference I put my arme up to the shoulder, clothed as it was, so that in effect they are monstrous great. Thus they doe make them when they be litle, for then they open the eare, & hang a piece of gold or lead thereat, & within the opening, in the hole they put a certaine leafe that they have for that purpose, which maketh the hole so great. They lade ships in Cochin for Portugale and for Ormus, but they that goe for Ormus carrie no Pepper but by Contrabanda, as for Sinamome they easilie get leave to carrie that away, for all other Spices and drugs they may liberally carie them to Ormus or Cambaia, and so all other merchandize which come from other places, but out of the kingdom into of Cochin properly they cary away with Portugale great abundance of Pepper, great quantitie of Ginger dried and conserved, wild Sinamom, good quantitie of Arecca, great store of Cordage of Cairo, made of the barke of the tree of the great Nut, and better then that of Hempe, of which they carrie great store into Portugale. them The shippes every yeere depart from Cochin to goe Note the defor Portugall, on the fift day of December, or the fift %j*ni£t'*e day of January. Nowe to follow my voyage for the 'cocki™™ Indies: from Cochin I went to Coulam, distant from Cochin seventie and two miles, which Coulam is a small Fort of the king of Portugales, situate in the kingdom of Coulam, which is a king of the Gentiles, and of small trade: at that place they lade onely halfe a ship of Pepper, and then she goeth to Cochin to take in the rest, and from thence to Cao Comori is seventie and two miles, and there endeth the coast of the Indies: and alongst this coast, neere to the water side, and also to Cao Comori, downe to the lowe land of Chialo, which is about two hundred miles, the people there are as it were all turned to the Christian faith: there are also Churches of the Friers of S. Pauls order, which Friers doe very much good in those places in turning the people, and in converting them, and take great paines in instructing them in the law of Christ. The fishing for Pearles. THe Sea that lieth betweene the coast which de- The order how scendeth from Cao Comori, to the lowe land of they fish for Chilao, and the Hand Zeilan, they call the fishing ofpearks' Pearles, which fishing they make every yeere, beginning in March or Aprill, and it lasteth fiftie dayes, but they doe not fishe every yeere in one place, but one yeere in one place, and another yeere in another place of the same sea. When the time of this fishing draweth neere, then they send very good Divers, that goe to discover where the greatest heapes of bisters bee under water, and right agaynst that place where greatest store of Oisters bee, there they make or plant a village with houses and a Bazaro, all of stone, which standeth as long as the fishing time lasteth, and it is furnished with all things necessarie, and nowe and then it is neere unto places that are inhabited, and other times farre off, according to the place where they fishe. The Fishermen are all Christians of the countrey, and who so will may goe to fishing, paying a certaine dutie to the king of Portugall, and to the Churches of the Friers of Saint Paule, which are in that coast. All the while that they are fishing, there are three or foure Fustes armed to It was my chance defend the Fishermen from Rovers. to bee there one time in my passage, and I saw the [II. i. 225.] order that they used in fishing, which is this. There are three or foure Barkes that make consort together, which are like to our litle Pilot boates, and a litle lesse, there goe seven or eight men in a boate: and I have seene in a morning a great number of them goe out, and anker in fifteene or eighteene fadome of water, which is the Ordinarie depth of all that coast. When they are at anker, they cast a rope into the Sea, and at the ende of the rope, they make fast a great stone, and then there is readie a man that hath his nose and his eares well stopped, and annointed with oyle, and a basket about his necke, or under his left arme, then hee goeth downe by the rope to the bottome of the Sea, and as fast as he can hee filleth the basket, and When it is full, he shaketh the rope, and his fellowes that are in the Barke hale him up with the basket: and in such wise they goe one by one untill they have laden their barke with oysters, and at evening they come to the village, and then every company maketh their mountaine or heape of oysters one distant from another, in such wise that you shall see a great long rowe of mountaines or heapes of oysters, and they are not touched untill such time as the fishing bee ended, and at the ende of the fishing every companie sitteth round about their mountaine or heape of oysters, and fall to opening of them, which they may easilie doe because they bee dead, drie and brittle: and if every oyster had pearles in them, it would bee a very good purchase, but there are very many that have no pearles in them: when the fishing is ended, then they see whether it bee a good gathering or a badde: there are certaine expert in the pearles These pearles whom they call Chitini, which set and make the price are Prised *c~ r n J ,. , . . . ,r, cording to the ^&i r -n 1 • 1 11 1 A • or pearles according to their carracts, beautie, and good- caracts which nesse, making foure sortes of them. The first sort they weigh, bee the round pearles, and they be called Aia of Portu- every wract gale, because the Portugales doe buy them. The second ts \' fames^ & these men sorte which are not round, are called Aia or Bengala. that prise them The third sort which are not so good as the second, have an inthey call Aia of Canara, that is to say, the kingdome strument of of Bezeneger. The fourth and last sort, which are the gff^J* least and worst sort, are called Aia of Cambaia. Thus wfl-lcjl be made the price being set, there are merchants of every countrey by degrees for which are readie with their handes, to sort ye^ their money in so that in a fewe dayes all is bought up at the prises Perks w'lthal1set according pearles. to the goodnesse and caracts of the and 1 In this Sea of the fishing of pearles is an Hand called Manar, which is inhabited by Christians of the countrey which first were Gentiles, and have a small hold of the Portugales being situate over agaynst Zeilan: and betweene these two Hands there is a chanell, but not very big, and hath but a small depth therein: by reason whereof there cannot any great shippe passe that way, but small ships, and with the increase of the water which is at the change or the full of the Moone, and yet for all this they must unlade them and put their goods into small vessels to lighten them before they can passe that way for feare of Sholdes that lie in the chanell, and after lade them into their shippes to goe for the Indies, and this doe all small shippes that passe that way, but those shippes that goe for the Indies Eastwardes, passe by the coast of Coromandel, on the other side by the land of Chilao which is betweene the firme land and the Hand Manor: and going from the Indies to the coast of Coromandel, they loose some shippes, but they bee emptie, because that the shippes that passe that way discharge their goods at an Hand called Peripatane, and there land their goods into small flat bottomed boates which drawe litle water, and are called Tane, and can run over every Shold without either danger or losse of any thing, for that they tarrie in Peripatane untill such time as it bee faire weather. Before they depart to passe the Sholdes, the small shippes and flat bottomed boates goe together in companie, and when they have sailed sixe and thirtie miles, they arrive at the place where the Sholdes are, and at that place the windes blowe so forciblie, that they are forced to goe thorowe, not having any other refuge to save themselves. The flat bottomed boates goe safe thorow, where as the small shippes if they misse the aforesayd chanell, sticke fast on the Sholdes, and by this meanes many are lost: and comming backe from the Indies, they goe not that way, but passe by the chanell of Manar as is abovesayd, whose chanell is Oazie, and if the shippes sticke fast, it is great chance if there be any danger at all. The reason why this chanell is not more sure to goe thither, is, because the windes that raigne or blowe betweene Zeilan and Manar, make the chanell so shalow with water, that almost there is not any passage. From Cao Comori to the Hand of Zeilan is 120. miles overthwart. Zeilan. ZEilan is an Hand, in my judgement, a great deale bigger then Cyprus: on that side towards the Indies lying Westward is the citie called Columba, which is a hold of the Portugales, but without walles or enimies. It hath towards the Sea a free port, the lawfull king of [II. i. 226.] that Hand is in Columbo, and is turned Christian and maintained by the king of Portugall, being deprived of his kingdome. The king of the Gentiles, to whom this kingdome did belong, was called Madoni, which had two sonnes, the first named Barbinas the prince; and the second Ragine. This king by the pollicie of his yoonger sonne, was deprived of his kingdome, who because hee had entised and done that which pleased the armie and souldiours, in despight of his father and brother being prince, usurped the kingdome, and became a great warriour. First, this Hand had three kings; the king of Cotta with his conquered prisoners: the king of Candia, which is a part of that Hand, and is so called by the name of Candia, which had a reasonable power, and was a great friend to the Portugals, which sayd that hee lived secretly a Christian; the third was the king of Gianifampatan. In thirteene yeeres that this Ragine governed this Hand, he became a great tyrant. • r ^ 1 1 1 1 1 ^ 11 1 • make ropes In this Hand there groweth fine Sinamom, great store of Pepper, great store of Nuttes and Arochoe: there they make great store of Cairo to make Cordage: it ^atr0 ts a bringeth foorth great store of Christall Cats eyes, or stu{e that the^ Ochi de Gati, and they say that they finde there some w ^ ^ Rubies, but I have sold Rubies well there that I brought which is the with me from Pegu. I was desirous to see how they harke °fa gather the Sinamom, or take it from the tree that it iree' groweth on, and so much the rather, because the time that I was there, was the season which they gather it in, which was in the moneth of Aprill, at which time the Portugals were in armes, and in the field, with the king of the countrey; yet I to satisfie my desire, although in great danger, tooke a guide with mee and went into a wood three miles from the Citie, in which wood was great store of Sinamome trees growing together among other wilde trees; and this Sinamome tree is a small tree, and not very high, and hath leaves like to our Baie tree. The cutting^ In the moneth of March or Aprill, when the sappe goeth gathering of Up to ^g toppe of the tree, then they take the Sinamom Smamm. from tree round about in length from knot to knot, or from joint to joint, above and belowe, and then easilie with T h ey Qut ^ t f ee j n ^ b a f ke of w i g e> ^ ^ Ararethinge. their handes they take it away, laying it in the Sunne to drie, and in this wise it is gathered, and yet for all this the tree dieth not, but agaynst the next yeere it will have a new barke, and that which is gathered every yeere is the best Sinamome: for that which groweth two or three yeeres is great, and not so good as the other is; and in these woods groweth much Pepper. Negapatan. FRom the Hand of Zeilan men use to goe with small shippes to Negapatan, within the firme land, and seventie two miles off is a very great Citie, and very populous of Portugals and Christians of the countrey, and part Gentiles: it is a countrey of small trade, neither have they any trade there, save a good quantitie of Rice, and cloth of Bumbast which they carie into divers partes: it was a very plentifull countrey of victuals, but now it hath a great deale lesse; and that abundance of victuals caused many Portugales to goe thither and build houses, and dwell there with small charge. This Citie belongeth to a noble man of the kingdome of Bezeneger being a Gentile, neverthelesse the Portugales and other Christians are well intreated there, and have their Churches there with a monasterie of Saint Francis order, with great devotion and very well accommodated, with houses round about: yet for all this, they are amongst tyrants, which alwayes at their pleasure may doe them some harme, as it happened in the yeere of our Lord God one thousand five hundred, sixtie and five: for I remember very well, how that the Nayer, that is to say, the lord of the citie, sent to the citizens to demaund of them certaine Arabian horses, and they having denied them unto him, and gainesayd his demaund, it came to passe that this lord had a desire to see the Sea, which when the poore citizens understood, they doubted some evill, to heare a thing which was not woont to bee, they thought that this'man would come A foolishfeare to sacke the Citie, and presently they embarked them- °/Porfuialsselves the best they could with their mooveables, mar- chandize, jewels, money, and all that they had, and caused the shippes to put from the shore. When this was done, as their evill chance would have it, the next night following, there came such a great storme that it put all the shippes on land perforce, and brake them to pieces, and all the goods that came on land and were saved, were taken from them by the souldiours and armie of this lord which came downe with him to see the Sea, and were attendant at the Sea side, not thinking that any such thing would have happened. Saint Thomas or San Tome. [n. i. 227.] FRom Negapatan following my voyage towards the East an hundred and fiftie miles, I found the house of blessed Saint Thomas, which is a Church of great s- Tkom^s his devotion, and greatly regarded of the Gentiles for the sePulchregreat miracles they have heard to have bene done by that blessed Apostle: neere unto this Church the Portugals have builded them a Citie in the countrey subject to the king of Bezeneger, which citie although it bee not very great, yet in my judgement it is the fairest in all that part of the Indies: and it hath very faire houses and faire gardens in vacant places very well accommodated: it hath streetes large and streight, with many Churches of great devotion, their houses be set close one unto another, with little doores, every house hath his defence, so that by that meanes it is of force sufficient to defend ye Portugals against the people of that countrey. The their Portugals gardens and houses that are within the citie: the customes belong to the king of Bezeneger, which are very small and easie, for that it is a countrey of great riches 401 there have no other possession but 2 c and great trade: there come every yeere two or three great ships very rich, besides many other small ships: one of the two great ships goeth for Pegu, and the other A painted for Malacca, laden with fine Bumbast cloth of every sort, k™dofckth painted, which is a rare thing, because those kinde of clothes shew as they were gilded with divers colours, and of divers colours which the more they be washed, the livelier the colours will those people de- shew. Also there is other cloth of Bumbast which is light much in, w o v en with divers colours, and is of great value: also 7himlfgreat price. t h e 7 m a ke in S a nt T o me g r e at s t o re of r ed Yarne, which they die with a roote called Saia, and this colour will never waste, but the more it is washed, the more redder it will shew : they lade this yarne the greatest part of it for Pegu, because that there they worke and weave it to make cloth according to their owne fashion, and with lesser charges. It is a marvelous thing to them which have not seene the lading and unlading of men and merchandize in S. Tome as they do : it is a place so dangerous, that a man cannot bee served with small barkes, neither can they doe their businesse with the boates of the shippes, because they would be beaten in a thousand pieces, but they make certaine barkes (of purpose) high, which they call Masadie, they be made of litle boards ; one board being sowed to another with small cordes, and in this order are they made. And* when they are thus made, and the owners will embarke any thing in them, either men or goods, they lade them on land, and when they are laden, the Barke-men thrust the boate with her lading into the streame, and with great speed they make haste all that they are able to rowe out against the huge waves of the sea that are on that shore, untill that they carie them to the ships : and in like maner they lade these Masadies at the shippes with merchandise and men. When they come neere the shore, the Barke-men leap out of the Barke into the Sea to keepe the Barke right that she cast not thwart the shore, and being kept right, the Suffe of the Sea setteth her lading dry on land without any hurt or danger, and sometimes there are some of them that are overthrowen, but there can be no great losse, because they lade but a litle at a time. All the marchandize they lade outwards, they emball it well with Oxe hides, so that if it take wet, it can have no great harme. fa f/f/^ they In my voyage, returning in the yeere of our Lord God one thousand, five hundred, sixtie and sixe, I went from Goa unto Malacca, in a shippe or Gallion of the king of Portugal, which went unto Banda for to lade In the Hand oj to Malacca are one Nutmegs & Maces : from Goa thousand eight hundred miles, we passed without the Hand Zeilan, and went through the chanell of Nicubar, grow. or els through the chanell of Sombrero, which is by the time middle of the Hand of Sumatra, called in olde Taprobana : and from Nicubar to Pegu is as it were a rowe or chaine of an infinite number of Hands, of which many are inhabited with wilde people, and they call those Hands the Hands of Andemaon, and they call their people /* the llands savage or wilde, because they eate one another : also °fAndemaon these Hands have warre one with another, for they have another small Barkes, and with them they take one another, and so eate one another : and if by evil chance any ship be lost on those Hands, as many have bene, there is not one man of those ships lost there that escapeth uneaten or unslaine. These people have not any acquaintance with any other people^ neither have they trade with any, but live onely of such fruites as those Hands yeeld : and if any ship come neere unto that place or coast as they passe that way, as in my voyage it happened as I came from Malacca through the chanell of Sombrero, there came two of their Barkes neere unto our ship laden with fruite, as with Mouces which wee call Adams apples, with fresh Nuts, and with a fruite called Inani, which fruite is like to our Turneps, but is very sweete and good to eate : they would not come into the shippe for any thing that wee could doe : neither would they take trucke for any money for their fruite, but they would these olde shirtes or pieces of olde linnen breeches, ragges they let downe with a rope into their Barke unto [II. i. 228.] them, and looke what they thought those things to bee woorth, so much fruite they would make fast to the rope and let us hale it in : and it was told me that at sometimes a man shall have for an old shirt a good piece of Amber. Sumatra. ' T ^ H is Hand of Sumatra is a great Hand and devided JL and governed by many kings, and devided into many chanels, where through there is passage : upon the headland towardes the West is the kingdom of Assi governed by a Moore king: this king is of great force and strength, as he that beside his great kingdom, hath The commodi- many Foists and Gallies. In his kingdom groweth ties that grow g r e at store of Pepper, Ginger, Benjamin : he is an utter VASH enemy to the Portugals, and hath divers times bene at Malacca to fight against it, and hath done great harme to the boroughes thereof, but the citie alway withstood him valiantly, and with their ordinance did great spoile to his campe. At the citie of Malacca. length I came to T he Citie Malacca. The great ^ Ti yfAlacca is a Citie of marveilous great trade of all trade that is at 1VX kind of marchandize, which come from divers 11 Malacca 1 • «i 1 1 1 1 • 1 partes, because that all the shippes that saile in these seas, both great and small, are bound to touch at Malacca to paie their custome there, although they unlade nothing at all, as we doe at Elsinor: and if by night they escape away, and pay not their custome, then they fall into a greater danger after : for if they come into the Indies and have not the seale of Malacca, they pay double custome. I have not passed further then Malacca towards the East, but that which I wil speake of here is by good information of them that have bene there. The sailing from Malacca is not common for all men, as to China and Japan, and so 404 the East , r 1 . . 1 • 1 1 ^kde the Cloves, to Banda to lade Nutmegs and Maces. ™ , ,. forwards to go who will, but onely for the king of Portugall and his nobles, with leave granted unto them of the king to make such voiages, or to the jurisdiction of the captaine of Malacca, where he expecteth to know what voiages they make from Malacca thither, & these are the kings voiages, that every yere there departeth from Malacca 2. gallions of the kings, one of them goeth to ye Moluccos to lade Cloves, and the AttheMohcother goeth & r™ Inese two gallions are laden tor the king, neither doe they carie any particular mans goods, saving the portage of the Mariners and souldiers, and for this cause they are not voiages for marchants, because that going thither, they shal not have where to lade their goods of returne; and besides this, the captaine will not cary any marchant for either of these two places. There goe small shippes of the Moores thither, which come from the coast of Java, and change or guild their commodities in the kingdom of Assa, and these be the Maces, Cloves, and The kingdome Nutmegs, which go for the streights of Mecca. The qf^ssa. voiages that the king of Portugall granteth to his nobles are these, of China and Japan, from China to Japan, and from Japan to China, and from China to the Indies, and the voyage of Bengala, Maluco, and Sonda, with the lading of fine cloth, and every sort of Bumbast cloth. Sonda is an Hand of the Moores neere to the coast of Java, and there they lade Pepper for China. The ship The ship of that goeth every yeere from the Indies to China, is called drugs^° the ship of Drugs, because she carieth divers drugs of p^LJ^ Cambaia, but the greatest part of her lading is silver. From Malacca to China is eighteene hundred miles: and from China to Japan goeth every yeere a shippe of great importance laden with Silke, which for returne of their Silke bringeth barres of silver which they trucke in China. The distance betweene China and Japan is foure and twentie hundred miles, and in this way there are divers Hands not very bigge, in which the Friers of saint Paul, by the helpe of God, make many Christians Hands not dis- there like to themselves. From these Hands hitherwards covered. t.j ie p i a ce j s n o t yet discovered for the great sholdnesse of Sandes that they find. The Portugals have made a small citie neere unto the coast of China called Macao, whose church and houses are of wood, and it hath a bishoprike, but the customs belong to the king of China, and they goe and pay the same at a citie called Canton, which is a citie of great importance and very beautifull two dayes journey and a halfe from Macao. T he people of China are Gentiles, and are so jealous and fearefull, that they would not have a stranger to put his foote within their land: so that when the Portugals go thither to pay their custome, and to buy their marchandize, they will not consent that they shall lie or lodge within the citie, but send them foorth into the suburbes. The Chinaisunder countrey of China is neere the kingdom of great Tartaria, the govern- a n ( j j s a y er g r e a t countrey of the Gentiles and of great mentofthe great Tartar, importance, which may be judged by the rich and pre• A A U ^U * U A u* u u . [II. i. 229.] cious marchandize that come from thence, then which I beleeve there are not better nor in greater quantitie in the whole world besides. First, great store of golde, which they carie to the Indies, made in plates like to little shippes, and in value three and twentie caracts a peece, very great aboundance of fine silke, cloth of damaske and taffata, great quantitie of muske, great quantitie of Occam in barres, great quantitie of quicksilver and of Cinaper, great store of Camfora, an infinite quantitie of Porcellane, made in vessels of diverse sortes, great quantitie of painted cloth and squares, infinite store of the rootes of China: and every yeere there commeth from China to the Indies, two or three great shippes, laden with most rich and precious marchandise. The Rubarbe commeth from thence over lande, by the way of Persia, because that every yeere there goeth a great Carovan from Persia to thither sixe moneths. The in g o i n g is clroZnfrom C h i n a> w h i ch Persia to China. Carovan arriveth at a Citie called Lanchin, the place where the king is resident with his Court. I spake with a Persian that was three yeeres in that citie of Lanchin, and he tolde me that it was a great Citie and of great importance. The voiages of Malacca which are in the jurisdiction of the Captaine of the castle, are these: Every yeere he sendeth a small shippe to Timor to lade white Sandols, for all the best commeth from this Hand: there commeth some also from Solor, but that is not so good: also he sendeth another small ship every yere to Cauchin China, to lade there wood of Aloes, for that all the wood of Aloes commeth from this place, which is in the firme land neere unto China, and in that kingdome I could not knowe how that wood groweth by any meanes. For that the people of the countrey will not suffer the Portugales to come within the land, but onely for wood and water, and as for all other things that they wanted, as victuals or marchandise, the people bring that a boord the ship in small barkes, so that every day there is a mart kept in the ship, untill such time as she A market kept be laden: also there goeth another ship for the said a^dofthe Captaine of Malacca to Sion, to lade Verzino: all these voiages are for the Captaine of the castle of Malacca, and when he is not disposed to make these voiages, he selleth them to another. The citie of Sion, or Siam. Sion was the imperiall seat, and a great Citie, but in the yeere of our Lord God one thousand five hundred sixtie and seven, it was taken by the king of Pegu, which king made a voyage or came by lande foure moneths journey with an armie of men through his lande, and the number of his armie was a million and A prince of foure hundreth thousand men of warre : when hee came ^ ^ /^ to the Citie, he gave assault to it, and besieged it one power. and twentie monethes before he could winne it, with great losse »of his people, this I know, for that I was in Pegu sixe moneths after his departure, and sawe when that his officers that were in Pegu, sent five hundreth thousand men of warre to furnish the places of them THE ENGLISH VOYAGES that were slaine and lost in that assault: yet for all this, if there had not beene treason against the citie, it had not beene lost: for on a night there was one of the gates set open, through the which with great trouble the king gate into the citie, and became governour of the Emperour sawe that he was Sion: and when betrayed, and the citie, he that his enemie was in poysoned himselfe: and his wives and children, friends and noblemen, that were not slaine in the first affront of the entrance into the citie, were all caried captives into Pegu, where I was at the comming home of the king with his triumphs and victorie, which comming home & returning from the warres was a goodly sight to behold, to see the Elephants come home in a square, laden with golde, silver, jewels, and with Noble men and women that were taken prisoners in that citie. Now to returne to my voyage: I departed from Malacca in a great shippe which went for Saint Tome, being a Citie situate on the coast of Coromandel: and because the Captaine of the castles of Malacca had underwith a great armie and power of men against them, therefore upon this he would not give licence that any shippes should depart: Wherefore in this ship wee departed from thence in the night, without making any provision of our water : and wee were in that shippe foure hundreth and odde men : we departed from thence with intention to goe to an Hand to take in water, but the windes were so contrary, that they would not suffer us to fetch it, so that by this meanes wee were two and fortie dayes in the sea as it were lost, and we were driven too and fro, so that the first lande that we discovered, was beyonde Saint Tome, more then five hundreth miles which were the mountaines of Zerzerline, neere unto the k . i n g d o me of Orisa, and so wee came to Orisa with many sicke, and more that were dead for want of water: and they that were sicke in foure dayes dyed: and I for the space of a yeere after had my throat so sore and hoarse, 408 that I could never satisfie my thirst in drinking of water : I judge the reason of my hoarsenesse to bee with soppes that I wet in vineger and oyle, wherewith I susteyned my selfe many dayes. There was not any want of bread nor of wine: but the wines of that countrey are so hot [II. i. 230.] that being drunke without water they will kill a man : neither are they able to drinke them : when we beganne to want water, I sawe certaine Moores that were officers in the ship, that solde a small dish full for a duckat, after this I sawe one that would have given a barre of Pepper, which is two quintalles and a halfe, for a litle measure of water, and he could not have it. Truely I beleeve that I had died with my slave, whom then I had to serve mee, which cost mee verie deare : but to provide for the daunger at hand, I solde my slave for halfe that he was worth, because that I would save his drinke that he drunke, to serve my owne purpose, and to save my life. Of the kingdome of Orisa, and the river Ganges. ORisa was a faire kingdome and trustie, through the which a man might have gone with golde in his hande without any daunger at all, as long as the lawefull King reigned which was a Gentile, who continued in the citie called Catecha, which was within the land sixe dayes journey. This king loved strangers marveilous well, especially marchants which had traffique in and out of his kingdome, in such wise that hee would take no custome of them, neither any other grievous thing. Onely the shippe that came thither payde a small thing according to her portage, and every yeere in the port of Orisa were laden five and twentie or thirtie ships TAe commodigreat and small, with ryce and divers sortes of fine white U bumbaste cloth, oyle of Zerzeline which they make of a " seed, and it is very good to eate and to fry fish withal, great store of butter, Lacca, long pepper, Ginger, Mirabolans dry and condite, great store of cloth of herbes, caff^ which is a kinde of silke which groweth amongst the doth. of Q^s g°°Ut woods without any labour of man, and when the bole thereof is growen round as bigge as an Orenge, then they take care onely to gather them. About sixteene yeeres past, this king with his kingdome were destroyed by the king of Patane, which was also king of the greatest part of Bengala, and when he had got the kingdome, he set custome there twenty pro cento, as Marchants paide in his kingdome: but this tyrant enjoyed his kingdome but a small time, but was conquered by another tyrant, which was the great Mogol king of Agra, Delly, and of all Cambaia, without any resistance. I departed from Orisa to Bengala, to the harbour Piqueno, which is distant from Orisa towardes the East a hundred and seventie miles. They goe as it were rowing alongst the coast fiftie and foure miles, and then we enter into the The river of riVer Ganges: from the mouth of this river, to a citie Ganges. 'ca]jecl Satagan, where the marchants gather themselves together with their trade, are a hundred miles, which they rowe in eighteene houres with the increase of the water: in which river it floweth and ebbeth as it doth in the Thamis, and when the ebbing water is come, they are not able to rowe against it, by reason of the swiftnesse of the water, yet their barkes be light and armed with oares, like to Foistes, yet they cannot prevaile against that streame, but for refuge must make them fast to the banke of the river untill the next flowing water, and they call these barkes Bazaras and Patvas: they rowe as well as a Galliot, or as well as ever I have seene any. A good tides rowing before you come to Satagan, you shall have a place which is called Buttor, and from thence upwards the ships doe not goe, because that upwardes the river is very shallowe, and litle water. Every yeere at Buttor they make and unmake a Village, with houses and shoppes made of strawe, and with all things necessarie to their uses, and this village standeth as long as the ships ride there, and till they depart for the Indies, and when they are departed, every man goeth to his plot of houses, and there setteth fire on them, which thing made me to marvaile. For as I passed up to Satagan, I sawe this village standing with a great number of people, with an infinite number of ships and Bazars, and at my returne comming downe with my Captaine of the last ship, for whom I tarried, I was al amazed to see such a place so soone razed and burnt, & nothing left but the signe of the burnt houses. The small ships go to Satagan, and there they lade. Of the citie of Satagan. IN the port of Satagan every yeere lade thirtie or five and thirtie ships great and small, with rice, cloth of Bombast of diverse sortes, Lacca, great abundance of T}e commo^ are sugar, Mirabolans dried and preserved, long pepper, oyle )e\ a-tn of Zerzeline, and many other sorts of marchandise. The §atagan. citie of Satagan is a reasonable faire citie for a citie of the Moores, abounding with all things, and was governed by the king of Patane, and now is subject to the great Mogol. I was in this kingdome foure moneths, whereas many marchants did buy or fraight boates for their benefites, and with these barkes they goe up and downe the river of Ganges to faires, buying their commoditie [II i. 231.] with a great advantage, because that every day in the weeke they have a faire, now in one place, and now in another, and I also hired a barke and went up and downe the river and did my businesse, and so in the night I saw many strange things. The kingdome of Bengala in times past hath bene as it were in the power of Moores, neverthelesse there is great store of Gentiles among them ; alwayes whereas I have spoken of Gentiles, is to be understood Idolaters, and wheras I speak of Moores I meane Mahomets sect. Those people Moores are oj especially that be within the land doe greatly worship . * the river or Ganges : for when any is sicke, he is brought out of the countrey to the banke of the river, and there they make him a small cottage of strawe, and every day they wet him with that water, whereof there are many that die, and when they are dead, they make 411 5^t\ t 1^r • Mahomet. • 1 r^ 1 I r • r . J ^ a nd be t a ke ^^ t h ey t h en h a l fe A ceremony of a heape of stickes and boughes and lay the dead bodie the gentiles thereon, and putting fire thereunto, they let the bodie j t when they are ^^ f o s t e d) off from the fire, and make an emptie jarre fast about his necke, and so throw him into the river. These things every night as I passed up and downe the river I saw for the space of two moneths, as I passed to the fayres to buy my commodities with the marchants. And this is the cause that the Portugales will not drinke of the water of the river Ganges, yet to the sight it is more perfect and clearer then the water of Nilus is. From the port Piqueno I went to Cochin, and from Cochin to Malacca, from whence I departed for Pegu being eight hundred miles distant. That voyage is woont to be made in five and twentie or thirtie dayes, but we were foure moneths, and at the ende of three moneths our ship was without victuals. The Pilot told us that wee were by his altitude not farre from a citie called Tanasary, in the kingdome of Pegu, and these his words were not true, but we were (as it were) in the middle of many Hands, and many uninhabited rockes, and there were also some Portugales that affirmed that they knew the land, and knewe also where the citie of Tanasari was. This citie of right belongeth to the kingdome of Sion, which is situate on a great rivers side, which commeth out of the kingdome of Sion : and where this river runneth into the sea, there is a village called Mirgim, Marchandise j n whose harbour every yeere there lade some ships with camming f?om y e r z ; n aj Nypa, and Benjamin, a few cloves, nutmegs and maces which come from the coast of Sion, but the greatest marchandise there is Verzin and Nypa, which is an excellent wine, which is made of the floure of a tree called Nyper. Whose liquour they distill, and so make an excellent drinke cleare as christall, good to the mouth, and better to the stomake, and it hath an excellent gentle vertue, that if one were rotten with the french pockes, drinking good store of this, he shall be whole againe, and I have seene it proved, because that when I was in Cochin, there was a friend of mine, whose nose beganne to drop away with that disease, and he was counselled of the doctors of phisicke, that he should goe to Tanasary at the time of the new wines, and that he should drinke of the nyper wine, night Ntyer wine fdi0™rethe and day, as much as he could before it was distilled, which at that time is most delicate, but after that it is disease. distilled, it is more strong, and if you drinke much of it, it will fume into the head with drunkennesse. This man went thither, and did so, and I have seene him after with a good colour and sound. This wine is very much esteemed in the Indies, and for that it is brought so farre off, it is very deare : in Pegu ordinarily it is good cheape, because it is neerer to the place where they make it, and there is every yeere great quantitie made thereof. And returning to my purpose, I say, being amongst these rockes, and farre from the land which is over against Tanasary, with great scarcitie of victuals, and that by the saying of the Pylot and two Portugales, holding then firme that wee were in front of the aforesayd harbour, we determined to goe thither with our boat and fetch victuals, and that the shippe should stay for us in a place assigned. We were twentie and eight persons in the boat that went for victuals, and on a day about twelve of the clocke we went from the ship, assuring our selves to bee in the harbour before night in the aforesaid port, wee rowed all that day, and a great part of the next night, and all the next day without finding harbour, or any signe of good landing, and this came to passe through the evill counsell of the two Portugales that were with us. For we had overshot the harbour and left it behind us, in such wise that we had lost the lande inhabited, together with the shippe, and we eight and twentie men had no maner of victuall with us in the boate, but it was the Lords will that one of the Mariners had brought a litle rice with him in the boate to barter away for nourishment ^ ^ h d pe ^ of G od Q ^ it was not so much but Great ex- tremitieatsea. ^ some other thing, and that three or foure men would have eaten it at a meale : I tooke the government of this Ryce, promising that by ^^ for us until it pleased God to send us to some place that was inhabited : & when I slept I put the ryce into my bosome because they should not rob it from me : we were nine daies rowing alongst the coast, without finding any thing but countreys uninhabited, & desert Hands, where if we had found but grasse it would have [II. i. 232.] seemed sugar unto us, but wee could not finde any, yet we found a fewe leaves of a tree, and they were so hard that we could not chewe them, we had water and wood sufficient, and as wee rowed, we could goe but by flowing water, for when it was ebbing water, wee made fast our boat to the banke of one of those Ilandes, and in these nine dayes that we rowed, we found a cave or nest of Tortoises egges, wherein were one hundred fortie and foure egges, the which was a great helpe unto us : these egges are as bigge as a hennes egge, and have no shell about them but a tender skinne, every day we sodde a kettle full of those egges, with an handfull of rice in the broth thereof: it pleased God that at the ende of nine dayes we discovered certaine fisher men, a fishing with small barkes, and we rowed towardes them, with a good cheare, for I thinke there were never men more glad then we were, for wee were so sore afflicted with penurie, that we could scarce stande on our legges. Yet according to the order that we set for our ryce, when we sawe those fisher men, there d a y e s - The first village that *n t ^ e gulfe of Tavay, under the king of Pegu, whereas we found great store of victuals : then for two or three dayes after our arrivall there, we would eate but litle meate any of us, and yet for all this, we were at the point of death the most part of us. From the kingdome of Pegu, are Tavay in laded our bote with victuals seventie two miles. We 414 Jie'kinUnofr W aS l e ft s u f f i c i e nt we c a me f Wg to Martavan, to w as foure which were aboundantly sufficient for sixe moneths, from whence we departed for the port and Citie of Martavan, where in short time we arrived, but we found not our ship there as we had thought we should, from whence presently we made out two barkes to goe to looke for her. And they found her in great calamitie, and neede of water, being at an anker with a contrary winde, which came very ill to passe, because that she wanted her boat a moneth, which should have made her provision of wood and water, the shippe also by the grace of God arrived safely in the aforesaid port of Martavan. T he Citie of Martavan. fi^ WE found in the Citie of Martavan ninetie Portu- Martavan a gales of Merchants and other base men, which had fallen at difference with the Retor or governour of the citie, and all for this cause, that certaine vagabondes of the Portugales had slaine five falchines of the king of Pegu, which chaunced about a moneth after the king of Pegu was gone with a million and foure hundred thousand men to conquere the kingdome of Sion. They 4 custom that have for custome in this Countrey and kingdome, the ^Je when the king being wheresoever his pleasure is to bee out of king is in the his kingdome, that every fifteene dayes from Pegu a Carovan of Falchines, with every one a basket on his head full of some fruites or other delicates of refreshings, and with cleane clothes : it chaunced that this Carovan passing by Martavan, and resting themselves there a night, there happened betweene the Portugales and them wordes of despight, and from wordes to blowes, and because it was thought that the Portugales had the worse, the night following, when the Falchines were a sleepe with their companie, the Portugales went and cut off five of their heads. Now ^lawinPegu there is a lawe in Pegu, that whosoever killeth a man, ^ he shall buy the shed blood with his money, according to the estate of the person that is slaine, but these 415 there goeth warns. Falchines being the servants of the king, the Retors durst not doe any thing in the matter, without the consent of the king, because it was necessarie that the king should knowe of such a matter. When the king had knowledge thereof, he gave commaundement that the malefactors should be kept untill his comming home, and then he would duely minister justice, but the Captaine of the Portugales would not deliver those men, but rather set himselfe with all the rest in armes, and went every day through the Citie marching with his Drumme and ensignes displayd. For at that time the Citie was emptie of men, by reason they were gone all to the warres and in businesse of the king : in the middest of this rumour wee came thither, and I thought Great pride of \t a strange thing to see the Portugales use such inthePortugales, s oi e n ci e j n another mans Citie. And I stoode in doubt of that which came to passe, and would not unlade my goods because that they were more sure in the shippe then on the land, the greatest part of the lading was the owners of the shippe, who was in Malacca, yet there were diverse marchants there, but their goods were of small importance, all those marchants tolde me that they would not unlade any of their goods there, unlesse I would unlade first, yet after they left my counsell and followed their owne, and put their goods a lande and lost every whit. The Rector with the customer sent for mee, and demaunded why I put not my goods a lande, and payed my custome as other men did ? To whom I answered, that I was a marchant that was newly come thither, and seeing such disorder amongst the Portugales,, I doubted the losse of my goods which cost me very deare, with the sweate of my face, and for this cause I [II. i. 233.] was determined not to put my goods on lande, untill such time as his honour would assure me in the name of the king, that I should have no losse, and although there came harme to the Portugales, that neither I nor my goods should have any hurt, because I had neither part nor any difference with them in this tumult: my reason sounded well in the Retors eares, and so presently he sent for the Bargits, which are as Counsellers of the Citie, and there they promised mee on the kings head or in the behalfe of the king, that neither I nor my goods should have any harme, but that we should be safe and sure : of. which promise there were made publike notes. And then I sent for my goods and had them on land, and payde my custome, which is in that countrey ten in the hundreth of the same goods, and for my more securitie I tooke a house right against the Retors house. The Captaine of the Portugales, and all the Portugall marchants were put out of the Citie, and I with twentie and two poore men which were officers in the shippe, had my dwelling in the Citie. After this, the Gentiles devised to be revenged of the Portugales ; but they would not put it in execution untill such time as our small shippe had discharged all her goods, and then the next night following came from Pegu foure thousand souldiers with some Elephants of warre ; and A revenge on before Retor sent, and gave commaundement to all Portugales that were in the Citie, when they heard any rumour or noyse, that for any thing they should not goe out of their houses, as they tendered their owne health. Then foure houres within night I heard a great rumour and noyse of men of warre, with Elephants which threw downe the doores of the ware-houses of the Portugales, and their houses of wood and strawe, in the which tumult there were some Portugales wounded, and one of them slaine ; and others without making proofe of their manhoode, which the day before did so bragge, at that time put themselves to flight most shamefully, and saved themselves a boord of litle shippes, that were at an anker in the harbour, and some that were in their beds fled away naked, and that night they caried away all the Portugalles goods out of the suburbes into the Citie, and those Portugales that had their goods in the this the Portugales that were suburbes also. After they made any tumult in the citie, the thePortuSalesthat V 4 J7 to the summe of sixteene fledde into the shippes to save themselves, tooke a newe courage to themselves, and came on lande and set fire on the houses in the suburbes, which houses being made of boorde and strawe, and the winde blowing fresh, in small time were burnt and consumed, with which fire halfe the Citie had like to have beene burnt; when the Portugales had done this, they were without all hope to recover any part of their goods againe, which goods might amount thousand duckats, which, if they had not set fire to the towne, they might have had againe without any losse at all. Then the Portugales understanding that this thing was not done by the consent of the king, but by his Lieutenant and the Retor of the citie were very ill content, knowing that they had made a great fault, yet the next morning following, the Portugales beganne to bende and shoot their ordinance against the Citie, which batterie of theirs continued foure days, but all was in vaine, for the shotte never hit the Citie, but lighted on the top of a small hill neere unto it, so that the citie had no harme. When the Retor perceived that the Portugales made battery against the Citie, hee tooke one and twentie Portugales that were there in the Citie, and sent them foure miles into the Countrey, there to tarry untill such time as the other Portugales were departed, that made the batterie, who after their departure let them goe at their owne libertie without any harme done unto them. I my selfe was alwayes in my house with a good guard appointed me by the Retor, that no man should doe me injurie, nor harme me nor my goods ; in such wise that hee perfourmed all that he had promised me in the name of the king, but he would not let me depart before the comming of the king, which was greatly to my hinderance, because I was twenty and one moneths sequestred, that I could not buy nor sell any kinde of marchandize. Those commodities that I brought thither, were peper, sandols, and Porcellan of China : so when the king was come home, I made my supplication unto him, and I was licenced to depart when I would. i 1 j 1 11 the i A /r that at From Martavan I departed to goe to the chiefest Citie in the kingdome of Pegu, which is also called after the name of the kingdome, which voyage is made by sea in three or foure daies ; they may goe also by lande, but it is better for him that hath marchandize to goe by sea and lesser charge. And in this voyage you shall have a Macareo, which is one of the most marveilous things in the world that nature hath wrought, and I never saw any thing so hard to be beleeved as this, to wit, the great increasing & diminishing of the water -A thing most there at one push or instant, and the horrible earthquake marveilous> and great noyse that the said Macareo maketh where comm{ngof a it commeth. We departed from Martavan in barkes, tide the earth which are like to our Pylot boates, with the increase should quake. of the water, and they goe as swift as an arrowe out of a bow, so long as the tide runneth with them, and when the water is at the highest, then they drawe themselves out of the Chanell towardes some banke, and there to anker, and when the water is diminished, then they rest on dry land: and when the [II. i. 234.] barkes rest dry, they are as high from the bottome of the Chanell, as any house top is high from the ground. They let their barkes lie so high for this respect, that if there should any shippe rest or ride in the Chanell, with such force commeth in the water, that it would J.^ts tide ts overthrowe shippe or barke: yet for all this, that the \n*driver If barkes be so farre out of the Channell, and though Severne. the water hath lost her greatest strength and furie before it come so high, yet they make fast their prowe to the streme, and oftentimes it maketh them very fearefull, and if the anker did not holde her prow up by strength, shee would be overthrowen and lost with men and goods. When the water beginneth to increase, it maketh such a noyse and so great that you would thinke it an earthquake, and presently at the first it maketh three waves. So that the first washeth over the barke, from stemme 419 make their just course as ours This Macareo is a tide or a currant, Houses made of canes <5 covered with leaves of trees. Godon is a place or house for marchants to lay their goods in. the new dtie of Pegu. THE ENGLISH VOYAGES to sterne, the second is not so furious as the first, and fa^ thirde rayseth the Anker, and then for the space of gjxe ko u r es ^ j jg j-^g water encreaseth, they rowe with such swiftnesse that you would thinke they did fly : in these tydes there must be lost no jot of time, for if you arrive not at the stagions before the tyde be spent, you must turne backe from whence you came. For there is no staying at any place, but at these stagions, and there is more daunger at one of these places then at another, as they be higher and lower one then another. When as you returne from Pegu to Martavan, they goe but halfe the tide at a time, because they will lay their barkes up aloft on the bankes, for the reason aforesayd. I could never gather any reason of the noyse that this water maketh in the increase of the tide, and in deminishing of the water. There is another Macareo in Cambaya, but that is nothing in comparison of this. -g^ ^ two cities, the olde and the newe, in the olde citie are the Marchant strangers, and marchantes of the Countrey, for there are the greatest doings and the greatest trade. This citie is not very great, but it hath very great suburbes. Their houses be made with canes, and covered with leaves, or with strawe, but the marchants have all o ne house or Magason, which house they call Godon which is made of brickes, and there they put all their goods of any valure, to save them from the often mischances that there happen to houses made of such stuffe. jn ^ place with all his barons and nobles, and other gentlemen; and in the time that I was there, they finished the buildheipe of QO(J we c a me safe to Pegu, which are jg tjie paua ce of the king, and his abiding n ew c^ ^ ^ n ew C^e: lt 1S a & ^ > y p ^ * ^a tj anc* f °u re square, walled round about and with ditches that compasse the wals about with water, in which diches are many crocodils, it hath no drawe bridges, yet it hath twentie gates, five for every square on the waUes, there are many places made for centinels to watch, made of wood and covered or guilt with gold, the streetes thereof are the fayrest that I have seene, they are as streight as a line from one gate to another, and standing at the one gate you may discover to the other, and they are as broad as 10 or 12 men may ride a breast in them : and those streetes that be thwart are faire and large, these streetes, both on the one side and on the other, are planted at the doores of the houses, with nut trees of India, which make a very commodious shadowe, the houses be made of wood and covered with a kind of tiles in forme of cups, very necessary for their use, the kings palace is in the middle of the citie, made in forme A rich and of a walled castle, with ditches full of water round about stateb Palaceit, the lodgings within are made of wood all over gilded, with fine pinacles, and very costly worke, covered with plates of golde. Truely it may be a kings house: within the gate there is a faire large court, from the one side to the other, wherein there are made places for the strongest and stoutest Eliphants appointed for the service of the kings person, and amongst all other Eliphants, he hath foure that be white, a thing so rare that a man shall Foure white ^ ants* hardly finde another king that hath any such, and if this king knowe any other that hath white Eliphantes, he sendeth for them as for a gift. The time that I was there, there were two brought out of a farre Countrey, and that cost me something the sight of them, for they commaund the marchants to goe to see them, and then they must give somewhat" to the men that bring them: duckat which the brokers of the marchants give for every man halfe may be three a duckat, which they call a Tansa, which amounteth to s^tlltnSs & a great summe, for the number of merchants that are in Jome Pencethat citie ; and when they have payde the aforesayde Tansa, they make chuse whether they will see them at that time or no, because that when they are in the kings stall, every man may see them that will: but at that time they must goe and see them, for it is the kings pleasure it should be so. This King amongst all other his titles, is called the King of the white Eliphants, and it is reported that if this king knewe any other king that had any of these 421 white Eliphantes, and would not send them unto him, that he would hazard his whole kingdome to conquer them, he esteemeth these white Eliphants very deerely, and they are had in great regard, and kept with very meete service, every one of them is in a house, all guilded over, and they have their meate given them in vessels of silver and golde, there is one blacke Eliphant the greatest that hath bene seene, and he is kept according to his bignesse, he is nine cubites high, which is a marveilous It is reported that this king hath foure thousand [II. i. 235.] thing. A warlike Elephants of warre, and all have their teeth, and they use to p^ on th ei r two uppermost teeth sharpe pikes of yron, pohcie. and make them fast with rings, because these beastes fight, and make battell with their teeth; hee hath also very many yong Eliphants that have not their teeth » , r ° An excellent sprowted foorth: also this king hath a brave devise in devise to hunt hunting to take these Eliphants when hee will, two miles and take wilde r Eliphants. from the Citie. He hath bunded a raire pallace all guilded, and within it a faire Court, and within it and rounde about there are made an infinite number of places for men to stande to see this hunting: neere unto this Pallace is a mighty great wood, through the which the hunts-men of the king ride continually on the backs of the feminine Eliphants, teaching them in this businesse. Every hunter carieth out with him five or sixe of these feminines, and they say that they anoynt the secret place with a certaine composition that they have, that when the wilde Eliphant doeth smell thereunto, they followe the feminines and cannot leave them: when the huntsmen have made provision, & the Eliphant is so entangled, they guide the feminines towards the Pallace which is called Tambell, and this Pallace hath a doore which doth open and shut with engines, before which doore there is a long streight way with trees on both the sides, which covereth the way in such wise as it is like darkenesse in a corner: the wilde Eliphant when he commeth to this way, thinketh that he is in the woods. At end of this darke way there is a great field, when the hunters have , . . , , r gotten this praye, when they first come to this field, they send presently to give knowledge thereof to the Citie, and with all speed there go out fiftie or sixtie men on horsebacke, and doe beset the fielde rounde about: in the great fielde then the females which are taught in this businesse goe directly to the mouth of the darke way, and when as the wilde Eliphant is entred in there, the hunters shoute and make a great noyse, asmuch as is possible, to make the wilde Eliphant enter in at the gate of that Pallace, which is then open, and assoone as hee is in, the gate is shut without any noyse, and so the hunters with the female Eliphants and the wilde one are all in the Court together, and then within a small time the females withdraw themselves away one by one out of the Court, leaving the wilde Eliphant alone: and when 4n excellent he perceiveth that he is left alone, he is so madde that P"**< °f *** r ,. for two or three houres to see him, it is the greatest pleasure in the world: he weepeth, hee flingeth, hee runneth, he justleth, hee thrusteth under the places where the people stand to see him, thinking to kil some of them, but the posts and timber is so strong and great, that hee cannot hurt any body, yet hee oftentimes breaketh his teeth in the grates; at length when hee is weary and hath laboured his body that hee is all wet with sweat, then he plucketh in his truncke into his mouth, and then hee throweth out so much water out of his belly, that he sprinckleth it over the heades of the lookers on, to the uttermost of them, although it bee very high: and then when they see him very weary, there goe certaine officers into the Court with long sharpe canes These canes in their hands, and prick him that they make him to goe are ^e *° . into one of the houses that is made alongst the Court J^chthe^azll for the same purpose: as there are many which are made jOco de tore. long and narrow, that when the Eliphant is in, he cannot turne himself to go backe againe. And it is requisite that these men should be very wary and swift, for although their canes be long, yet the Eliphant would kill them if they were not swift to save themselves: at length when 423 thing that a beat so wilde should in so short time be made tame. The greatest strength that the king of Pegu hath. A goodly order in a barbarous people. The order of their weapons and number of his men. [II. i. 236.] THE ENGLISH VOYAGES they have gotten him into one of those houses, they stand over him in a loft and get ropes under his belly and about his necke, and about his legges, and binde him fast, and so let him stand foure or five dayes, and give him neither meate nor drinke. At the ende of these foure or five dayes, they unloose him and put one of the females unto him, and give them meate and drinke, and in eight dayes he is become tame. In my judgment there is not a beast so intellective as are these Eliphants, nor of more understanding in al the world : for he wil do all things that his keeper saith, so that he lacketh nothing but humaine speech. It is reported that the greatest strength that the king of Pegu hath is in these Eliphants, for when they goe to battell, they set on their backes a Castle of wood bound thereto, with bands under their bellies: and in every Castle foure men very commodiously set to fight with hargubushes, with bowes and arrowes, with darts and pikes, and other launcing weapons: and they say that the skinne of this Eliphant is so hard, that an harquebusse will not pierce it, unlesse it bee in the eye, temples, or some other tender place of his body. And besides this, they are of great strength, and have a very excellent order in their battel, as I have seene at their feastes which they make in the yeere, in which feastes the king maketh triumphes, which is a rare thing and worthy memorie, that in so barbarous a people there should be such goodly orders as they have in their armies, which be distinct in squares of Eliphants, of horsemen, of harquebushers and pikemen, that truly the number of them are infinite: but their armour and weapons are very nought and weake as well the one as the other: they have very bad pikes, their swords are worse made, like long knives without points, his harquebushes are most excellent, and alway in his warres he hath eightie thousand harquebushes, and the number of them encreaseth dayly. Because the king will have them shoote every day at the Plancke, and so by continuall exercise they become most excellent shot: also hee hath great Ordinance made of very good mettall; to conclude there is not a King on the earth that hath more power or strength then this king of Pegu, because hee hath twentie and sixe crowned kings at his com- 2^- Crowned maunde. He can make in his Campe a million and an & at^ts halfe of men of warre in the fielde against his enemies. *p'tfteene \un. The state of his kingdome and maintenance of his dreth thousand army, is a thing incredible to consider, & the victuals m*n 'm ot*e that should maintaine such a number of people in the Camfewarres: but he that knoweth the nature and qualitie of that people, will easily beleeve it. I have seene with mine eyes, that those people and souldiers have eaten of all sorts of wild beasts that are on the earth, whether it bee very filthie or otherwise all serveth for their mouthes : yea, I have seene them eate Scorpions and Eating of serSerpents, also they feed of all kinde of herbes and grasse. Pents- So that if such a great armie want not water and salt, they wil maintaine themselves a long time in a bush with rootes, flowers and leaves of trees, they cary rice with them for their voyage, & that serveth them in stead of comfits, it is so daintie unto them. This king of Pegu hath not any army or power by sea, but in the land, for people, dominions, golde and silver, he farre exceeds the power of the great Turke in treasure and strength. This king hath divers Magasons ful of treasure, as gold, & silver, and every day he encreaseth it more and more, and it is never diminished. Also hee is Lord of the Mines of Rubies, Safires & Spinels. Neere unto his royal pallace there is an inestimable The riches of treasure whereof hee maketh no accompt, for that standeth in such a place that every one may see it, and the place where this treasure is, is a great Court walled round about with walls of stone, with two gates which •stand open every day. And within this place or Court are foure gilded houses covered with lead, & in every one of these are certaine heathenish idoles of a very In the first house there is a stature of the great valure. it ™~ & °J ' image of a man of gold very great, & on his head a crowne of gold beset with most rare Rubies and Safires, and round about him are 4. litle children of gold. In the second house there is the stature of a man of silver, that is set as it were sitting on heapes of money : whose stature in height, as hee sitteth, is so high, that his highnesse exceedes the height of any one roofe of an house ; I measured his feete, and found that they were as long as all my body was in height, with a crowne on his head like to the first. And in the thirde house, there is a stature of brasse of the same bignesse, with a like crowne on his head. In the 4. and last house there is a stature of a man as big as the other, which is made of Gansa, which is the metall they make their money of, & this metall is made of copper & leade mingled together. This stature also hath a crowne on his head like the first : this treasure being of such a value as it is, standeth in an open place that every man at his pleasure may go & see it : for the keepers therof never forbid any man the sight thereof. I say as I have said before, that this king every yere in his feastes triumpheth: & because it is worthy of the noting, I thinke it meet to w r i te ^ g ^f which is as foloweth. The king rideth 1 * 1 on a triumphant cart or wagon all gilded, which is drawen by 16. goodly horses : and this cart is very high with a goodly canopy over it, behind the cart goe 20. of his Lordes & nobles, with every one a rope in his hand made fast to the cart for to hold it upright that it fal not. The king sitteth in the middle of the cart; & upon the same cart about the king stande 4. of his nobles most favored of him, and before this cart wherein the king is, goeth all his army as aforesaid, and in the middle of his army goeth all his nobilitie, round about the cart, there are in his dominions, a marveilous thing it is to see so many people, such riches & such good order in a people so barbarous as they be. This king of Pegu hath one principal wife which is kept in a Seralio, he hath 300 concubines, of whom it is reported that he hath 426 *i 1 1 u , . The great pompe of the 90. children. This king sitteth every day in person to heare the suites of his subjects, but he nor they never speake one to another, but by supplications made in this order. The king sitteth up aloft in a great hall, on The order of a tribunall seat, and lower under him sit all his Barons Justtceround about, then those that demaund audience enter into a great Court before the king, and there set them downe on the ground 40. paces distant from the kings person, and amongst those people there is no difference No <hfference °{^^j^nR in matters of audience before the king, but all alike, and there they sit with their supplications in their hands, -in CQntroverwhich are made of long leaves of a tree, these leaves sies or in are 3. quarters of a yard long, & two fingers broad, which justice. are written with a sharpe iron made for yfc purpose, & in those leaves are their supplications written, & with their supplications, they have in their hands a present or gift, according to the waightines of their matter. Then come ye secretaries downe to read these supplications, taking them & reading them before the king, & if the king think it good to do to them that favour or justice that they demaund, then he commandeth to take the presents out of their hands: but if he thinke their demand be not just or according to right, he commandeth them away without taking of their gifts or presents. In the Indies there is not any marchandise that is good to bring to Pegu, unlesse it bee at some times by chance to bring Opium of Cambaia, and if he bring money he shall lose by it. Now the commodities that come from S. Tome are the onely marchandize for that place, which [II. i. 257.] is the great quantity of cloth made there, which they T}e di use in Pegu ; which cloth is made of bombast woven ^ and painted, so that the more that kinde of cloth is washed, the more livelie they shewe their colours, which is a rare thing, and there is made such accompt of this kinde of cloth which is of so great importance, that a small bale of it will cost a thousand or two thousand duckets. Also from S. Tome they layd great store of red yarne, of bombast died with a roote which they call Saia, as aforesayd, which colour will never out. With which marchandise every yeere there goeth a great shippe the twelfth, it Note the de- from S. Tome to Pegu, of great importance, and they torture of the u s u ally depart from S. Tome to Pegu the 11. or 12. of is a TmfTpegu. September, & if she stay until great hap if she returne not without making of her voiage. Their use was to depart the sixt of September, and then they made sure voyages, and now because there is a great labour about that kind of cloth to bring it to perfection, and that it be well dried, as also the greedinesse of the Captaine that would make an extraordinary gaine of his fraight, thinking to have the wind alwayes to serve their turne, they stay so long, that at sometimes the winde turneth. For in those parts the windes blow firmely for certaine times, with the which they goe to Pegu with the winde in poope, and if they arrive not there before the winde change, and get ground to anker, perforce they must returne backe againe: for that the gales of the winde blowe there for three or foure moneths together in one place with great force. But if they get the coast & anker there, then with great labour they may save their voyage. Also there goeth another great shippe from Bengala every yeere, laden with fine cloth of bombast of all sorts, which arriveth in the harbour of Pegu, when the ship that commeth from S. Tome departeth. The harbour where these two ships arrive is called Cosmin. From Malaca to Martavan, ^Ut Commodities which is a port in Pegu, there come many small ships, brought into a n (j gr e a tj ia cjen w i th pepper, Sandolo, Porcellan of China, Camfora, Bruneo and other marchandise. The ships that come from Mecca enter into the port of Pegu and Cirion, and those shippes bring cloth of Wooll, Scarlets, a nd The Chikinos Velvets, Opium, and Chickinos, by the which they lose, ^Idwrtif sterling 7. shillings. t h eF brin& t h em b e c a u se that is good for Pegu : but they esteeme not the losse of tlley have no other thing them, for that they make such great gaine of their commodities that they cary from thence out of that king- dome. Also the king of Assi his ships come thither into the same port laden with peper ; from the coast of S. Tome of Bengala out of the Sea of Bara to Pegu are three hundreth miles, and they go it up the river in foure daies, with the encreasing water, or with the flood, to a City called Cosmin, and there they discharge their ships, whither the Customers of Pegu come to take the note and markes of all the goods of every man, & take the charge of the goods on them, and convey them to Pegu, into the kings house, wherin they make the custome of taken the marchandize. When the Customers have the charge of the goods & put them into barks, the Retor of the City giveth licence to the Marchants to take barke, and goe up to Pegu with their marchandize; and so three or foure of them take a barke and goe up to Pegu in company. God deliver every man that hee give Great rigour not a wrong note, and entrie, or thinke to steale any fir the stealing custome : for if they do, for the least trifle that is, he is ^ utterly undone, for the king doeth take it for a most great affront to bee deceived of his custome ; and therefore they make diligent searches, three times at the lading and unlading of the goods, and at the taking of them In Pegu this search they make when they goe a land. out of the ship for Diamonds, Pearles, and fine cloth which taketh little roome : for because that all the jewels that come into Pegu, and are not found of that countrey, pay custome, but Rubies, Safyres and Spinels pay no custome in nor out: because they are found growing in that Countrey. I have spoken before, how that all Marchants that meane to goe thorow the Indies, must cary al maner of houshold stuffe with them which is necessary for a house, because that there is not any lodging nor Innes nor hostes, nor chamber roome in that Countrey, but the first thing a man doth when he commeth to any City is to hier a house, either by the yeere or by the moneth, or as he meanes to stay in those parts. In Pegu their order is to hire their houses for sixe moneths. Nowe from Cosmin to the Citie of Pegu Deling is a small litter caried with men as is aforesaid. Description of the fruitfulnesse of that soy/e. they goe in sixe houres with the flood, and if it be ebbing water, then they make fast their boate to the river side, and there tary until the water flow againe. It is a very commodious and pleasant voyage, having on both sides of the rivers many great vilages, which they call Cities: in the which hennes, pigeons, egges, milke, rice, and other things be very good cheape. It is all plaine, and a goodly Countrey, and in eight dayes you may make your voyage up to Macceo, distant from Pegu twelve miles, & there they discharge their goods, & lade them in Carts or waines drawen with oxen, and the Marchants are caried in a closet which they call Deling, in the which a man shall be very well accommodated, with cushions under his head, and covered for the defence of the Sunne and raine, and there he may sleepe if he have wil thereunto : and his foure Falchines cary him running away, changing two at one time and two at another. The custome of Pegu and fraight thither, may amount unto twentie or twentie two per cento, and 23. according as he hath more or lesse stolen from him that day they custome the goods. It is requithat a man have his eyes watchfull, and to be site to have many friendes, for when they [II. i. 238.] carefull, and custome in the great hall of the king, there come many gentlemen accompanied with a number of their slaves, and these gentlemen have no shame that their slaves rob strangers: whether it be cloth in shewing of it or any other thing, they laugh at it. And although the Marchants helpe one another to keepe watch, & looke to their goods, they cannot looke therto so narrowly but one or other wil rob something, either more or lesse, according as their marchandise is more or lesse: and yet on this day there is a worse thing then this: although you have set so many eyes to looke there for your benefit, that you escape unrobbed of the slaves, a man cannot choose but that he must be robbed of the officers of the custome house. For paying the custome with the same goods oftentimes they take the best that you have, & not by rate of every sort as they ought to do, by which meanes a man payeth more then his dutie. At length when the goods be dispatched out of the custome house in this order, the Marchant causeth them to be caried to his house, and may do with them at his pleasure. There are in Pegu 8. brokers of the kings, which are called Tareghe, who are bound to sell all the marchandize which come to Pegu, at the common or the currant price: then if the marchants wil sell their goods at that price, they sel them away, and the brokers have two in the hundreth of every sort of marchandise, and they are bound to make good the debts of those goods, because they be sold by their hands or meanes, & on their wordes, and oftentimes the marchant knoweth not to whom he giveth his goods, yet he cannot lose any thing thereby, for that the broker is bound in any wise to pay him, and if the marchant sel his goods without the consent of the broker, yet neverthelesse he must pay him two per cento, and be in danger of his money: but this is very seldom seene, because the wife, children, and slaves of the debtor are bound to the creditor, and when his time is expired and paiment not made, the creditor may take the debtor and cary him home to his house, and shut him up in a Magasin, whereby presently he hath his money, and not being able to pay the creditor, he may take the wife, children, and slaves of d lawefir the debtor, and sel them, for so is the lawe of that king- Banckrut>tsdome. The currant money that is in this city, and throughout all this kingdom is called Gansa or Ganza, which is made of Copper and leade: It is not the money Every man of the king, but every man may stamp it that wil, because ma^ stamPe it hath his just partition or value: but they make many ^ mme^ of them false, by putting overmuch lead into them, and those will not passe, neither will any take them. With this money Ganza, you may buy golde or silver, Rubies and Muske, and other things. For there is no other money currant amongst them. And Golde, silver and other marchandize are at one time dearer then another, as all other things be. This Ganza goeth by weight of Byze, & this name of Byza goeth for ye accompt of the weight, and commonly a Byza of a Ganza is worth (after our accompt) halfe a ducat, litle more or lesse: and albeit that Gold and silver is more or lesse in price, yet the Byza never changeth: every Byza maketh a hundreth Ganza of weight, and so the number of the money is Byza. He that goeth to Pegu to buy Jewels, if he wil do well, it behoveth him to be a whole yere there to do his busi, . J . . 3 ~ . How a man nesse. For if so be that he would return with the ship j^ c a n n o t do any thing so conveniently for may dispose j^ c a r r j e [n , & . himselfe for ,, the trade In ^ e brevitie or the time, because that when they custome their goods in Pegu that come from S. T o me Pegu. ships, it is as it were about Christmas: and when they have customed their goods, then must they sell them for their credits sake for a moneth or two : and then at the beginning of March the ships depart. The Marchants that come from S. Tome take for the paiment of their goods, gold, and silver, which is never wanting in their J • , Goodinstruc- there. And 8. or 10. dayes before their departure they tl0m' are all satisfied: also they may have Rubies in paiment, but they make no accompt of them: and they that will winter there for another yere, it is needfull that they be advertized, that in the sale of their goods, they specifie in their bargaine, the terme of two or 3. moneths paiment, & that their paiment shalbe in so many Ganza, and neither golde nor silver: because that with the Ganza they may buy & sel every thing with great advantage. And how needful is it to be advertized, when they wil recover their paiments, in what order they shal receive their Ganza ? Because he that is not experienced may do himselfe great wrong in the weight of the Gansa, as also in the falsenesse of them: in the weight he may be greatly deceived, because that from place to place it doth rise and fall greatly: and therefore when any wil receive money or make paiment, he must take a publique wayer of money, a day or two before he go about his businesse, and give him in paiment for his labour two Byzaes a moneth, and for this he is bound to make good all your money, & to maintaine it for good, for that hee receiveth it and seales the bags with his seale: and when hee hath received any store, then hee causeth it to bee brought into the Magason of the Marchant, that is the owner of it. that goe out of TheMarchanS ^ e ^ trouble. The Marchandizes That money is very weightie, for fourtie Byza is a strong Porters burden; and also where the Marchant hath any payment to be made for those goods which he buyeth, the Common wayer of money that receiveth his money must make the payment thereof. So that by this meanes, the Marchant with the charges of two Byzes a [II. i. 239.] moneth, receiveth and payeth out his money without losse or Pegu are Gold, Silver, Rubies, Saphyres, Spinelles, great store of Benjamin, long peper, Leade, Lacca, rice, wine, some sugar, yet there might be great store of sugar made in the Countrey, for that they have aboundance of Canes, but they give them to Eliphants to eate, and the people consume great store of them for food, and many more doe they consume in vaine things, as these following. In that kingdome they spend many of these Sugar canes in making of houses and tents which they call Varely for their idoles, which they call Pagodes, whereof there are great aboundance, great and smal, and these houses are made in forme of little hilles, like to Sugar loaves or to Bells, and some of these houses are as high as a reasonable steeple, at the foote they are very large, some of them be in circuit a quarter of a mile. The saide houses within are full of earth, and walled round about with brickes and dirt in steade of lime, and without forme, from the top to the foote they make a covering for them with Sugar canes, and plaister it with lime all over, for otherwise they would bee spoyled, by the great aboundance of in those Countreys. Also they consume about these Varely or idol houses raine that falleth v 433 Idol houses great store of leafe-gold, for that they overlay all the covered with tops of the houses with gold, and some of them are ^ * Rubies exceed- the hands of these foure men passe all the Rubies: for ing cheape m ^^ s u ch q U a n t} t; ej th at t hey knowe not what to h a ye covered with golde from the top to the foote: in covering whereof there is great store of gold spent, for that every 10. yeeres they new overlay them with gold, from the top to the foote, so that with this vanitie they spend great aboundance of golde. For every 10. yeres the raine doeth consume the gold from these houses. And by this meanes they make golde dearer in Pegu then it would bee, if they consumed not so much in this vanitie. Also it is a thing to bee noted in the buying of jewels in Pegu, that he that hath no knowledge shall have as good jewels, and as good cheap, as he that hath bene practized there a long time, which is a good order, and it is in this wise. There are in Pegu foure men of good reputation, which are called Tareghe, or brokers of Jewels. These foure men have all the Jewels or Rubies in their handes, and the Marchant that wil buy commeth to one of these Tareghe and telleth him, that he hath so much money to imploy in Rubies. For through doe with them, but sell them at most vile and base prices. When the Marchant hath broken his mind to one of these brokers or Tareghe, they cary him home to one of their Shops, although he hath no knowledge in Jewels : and when the Jewellers perceive that hee will employ a good round summe, they will make a bargaine, and if not, they let him alone. The use generally of this Citie is this; that when any Marchant hath bought any great quantitie of Rubies, and hath agreed for them, hee carieth them home to his house, let them be of what value they will, he shall have space to looke on them and peruse them two or three dayes : and if he hath no knowledge in them, he shall alwayes have many Marchants in that Citie that have very good knowledge in Jewels ; with whom he may alwayes conferre and take counsell, and may shew them unto whom he will; and if he finde that hee hath not employed his money well, hee may returne his Jewels backe to them whom hee had them of, without any losse at all. Which thing is such a shame to the Tareghe to have his Jewels returne, that he had rather beare a blow on the face then that it should be thought that he solde them so deere to have them returned. For these men have alwayes great care that they affoord good peniworths, especially to those that they have no knowledge. This woulde not loose their credite : and when those Marchants that have knowledge in Jewels buy any, if they buy them deere, it is their own faults and not the brokers : yet it is good to have knowledge in Jewels, by reason that it may somewhat ease the price. There An honest care is also a very good order which they have in buying °fheathen of Jewels, which is this ; There are many Marchants **®e' that stand by at the making of the bargaine, and because they shall not understand howe the Jewels be solde, the Broker and the Marchants have their hands under a cloth, and by touching of fingers and nipping Bargaines the joynts they know what is done, what is bidden, mad*.™ththe they doe, because 1 11 ni 11 - ii nipping of 1 and what is asked. So that the standers by knowe fingersUndera not what is demaunded for them, although it be for a cloth. thousand or 10. thousand duckets. For every joynt and every finger hath his signification. For if the Marchants that stande by should understand the bargaine, it would breede great controversie amongst them. And at my being in Pegu in the moneth of August, in Anno 1569. having gotten well by my endevour, I was desirous to see mine owne Countrey, and I thought it good to goe by the way of S. Tome, but then I should tary until March. In which journey I was counsailed, yea, and fully resolved to go by the way of Bengala, with a shippe there ready to depart for that voyage. And then wee departed from Pegu to Chatigan a great harbour or port, from whence there goe smal ships to Cochin, is an extraordinary storme at Sea, [II. i. 240.] The Toufon commeth but every 10. or 12. yeeres. THE ENGLISH VOYAGES before the fleete depart for Portugal!, in which ships I was fully determined to goe to Lisbon, and so to Venice. When I had thus resolved my selfe, I went a boord of the shippe of Bengala, at which time it was the yeere of Touffon : concerning which Touffon ye are to understand, that in the East Indies often times, there are not stormes as in other countreys ; but every 10. or 12. yeeres there are such tempests and stormes, that it is a thing incredible, but to those that have seene it, neither do they know certainly what yeere they wil come. Unfortunate are they that are at sea in that yere and time of the Touffon, because few there are that escape In this yere it was our chance to be at that danger. sea with the like storme, but it happened well unto us, for that our ship was newly over-plancked, and had not any thing in her save victuall and balasts, Silver and golde, which from Pegu they cary to Bengala, and no other kinde of Marchandise. This Touffon or cruel storme endured three dayes and three nights : in which time it caried away our sailes, yards, and rudder ; and because the shippe laboured in the Sea, wee cut our mast over boord: which when we had done she laboured a great deale more then before, in such wise, that she was almost full with water that came over the highest part of her and so went downe : and for the space of three dayes and three nights sixtie men did nothing but hale water out of her in this wise, twentie men in one place, and twentie men in another place, and twentie in a thirde place : and for all this storme, the shippe was so good, that shee tooke not one jot of water below through her sides, but all ran downe through the hatches, so that those sixtie men did nothing but cast the Sea into the Sea. And thus driving too and fro as the winde and Sea would, we were in a darke night about foure of the clocke cast on a sholde : yet when it was day, we could neither see land on one side nor the divine power, there came a great wave of the Sea, which drave us beyonde the should. And when wee felt the shippe aflote, we rose up as men revived, because A manifest the Sea was calme and smooth water, and then sounding *°^ °fj£* we found twelve fadome water, and within a while after p^g wee had but sixe fadome, and then presently we came those Counto anker with a small anker that was left us at the #w- sterne, for all our other were lost in the storme : and by and by the shippe strooke a ground, and then wee did prop her that she should not overthrow. \n When it was day the shippe was all dry, and wee found her a good mile from the Sea on drie land. This Touffbn being ended, we discovered an Island not farre This Island is from us, and we went from the shippe on the sands to calledSond™asee what Island it was : and wee found it a place inhabited, and, to my judgement, the fertilest Island in all the world, the which is divided into two parts by a chanell which passeth betweene it, & with great trouble we brought our ship into the same chanel, which parteth the Island at flowing water, and there we determined to stay 40. dayes to refresh us. And when the people of the Island saw the ship, and that we were comming a land : presently they made a place of bazar or a market, with shops right over against the ship with all maner of provision of victuals to eate, which they brought downe in great abundance, and sold it so good cheape, that we were amazed at the cheapenesse thereof. the provision of the ship, for halfe a Larine a piece, which Larine may be 12. shillings sixe pence, being very good and fat; and 4. wilde hogges ready dressed for a Larine ; great fat hennes for a Bizze a piece, which is at the most a pennie : and the people told us that we were deceived the halfe of our money, because we bought things so deare. Also a sacke of fine rice for a thing of nothing, and consequently all other for humaine sustenance were there in such aboundance, that it is a thing incredible but to them that have seene it. 437 I bought many salted kine there, for bd Th TSr Sondiva is the This Island is called Sondiva belonging to the kingfruitfullest dome of Bengala, distant 120. miles from Chatigan, to g g, hih l l M w h i ch P l a ce w ee w e re b o u n d - T he P e oP le a re Moores, and the king a very good man of a Moore king, for if he had bin a tyrant as others be, he might havethe Portugall captaine of robbed us of all, because Chatigan was in armes against the Retor of that place,, & every day there were some slaine, at which newes. we rested there with no smal feare, keeping good watch and ward aboord every night as the use is, but the; governour of the towne did comfort us, and bad us that we should feare nothing, but that we should repose our selves securely without any danger, although the Portugales of Chatigan had slaine the governour of that City, and said that we were not culpable in that fact: and moreover he did us every day what pleasure hecould, which was a thing contrary to our expectations, the people of Chatigan were considering that they & both subjects to one king. We departed from Sondiva,, . to Chatigan the great port of Bengala, at the t_ J Chatigan is a & c a me port in Ben- gala whither the Portugales taken a truce with the governours of the towne, with this. go with their condition ships. t i me when the Portugales had made peace and the chiefe Captaine of the Portugales. that - n^ s a me 1 J ^ J i i with his ship should depart without any lading: for there were then at that time 18. ships of Portugalea great and small. This Captaine being a Gentleman and of good courage, was notwithstanding contented ta depart to his greatest hinderance, rather then hee would seeke to hinder so many of his friends as were there, as also because the time of the yeere was spent to go to the Indies. The night before he departed, every ship that had any lading therein, put it aboord of the Captaine to ease his charge and to recompence his to helpe the king of Rachim The King of courtesies. Rachim, or s a i de t he b e h a l fe of h is kmg, that hee had heard of tTghZur to Bengala. t*le courage and valure of him, desiring him gently that [II. i. 241.J he would vouchsafe to come with the ship into his port^ In this time there came a messenger from this Portugal Captaine, who to in and comming thither he should be very wel intreated. This Portugal went thither and was very well satisfied of this King. This King of Rachim hath his seate in the middle coast betweene Bengala and Pegu, and the greatest enemie he hath is the king of Pegu : which king of Pegu deviseth night and day how to make this king of Rachim his subject, but by no meanes hee is able to doe it : because the king of Pegu hath no power nor armie by Sea. And this king of * Rachim may Or, Aracam. arme two hundreth Galleyes or Fusts by Sea, and by land he hath certaine sluses with the which when the king of Pegu pretendeth any harme towards him, hee may at his pleasure drowne a great part of the Countrey. So that by this meanes hee cutteth off the way whereby the king of Pegu should come with his power to hurt him. 11 1 • 1 T 1 • From the great port of Chatigan they cary for the T}e Indies great store of rice, very great quantitie of Bom- ^J bast cloth of every sort, Suger, corne, and money, with t0 other marchandize. And by reason of the warres in Chatigan, the Portugall ships taried there so long, that they arrived not at Cochin so soone as they were wont to doe other yeeres. For which cause the fleete that was The Portugal at Cochin was departed for Portugal before they arrived shit5 de/"rt there, and I being in one or the small shippes before the gan out or the fleete, in discovering of Cochin, we also discovered the harbor of last shippe of the Fleete that went from Cochin to Portu- Cochin. gall, where shee made saile, for which I was marvellously discomforted, because that all the yeere following, there was no going for Portugale, and when we arrived at Cochin I was fully determined to goe for Venice by the way of Ormus, and at that time the Citie of Goa was Goa was bebesieged by the people of Dialcan, but the Citizens forced * not this assault, because they supposed that it would not continue long. For all this I embarked my selfe in a Galley that went for Goa, meaning there to shippe my selfe for Ormus : but when we came to Goa, the Viceroy 439 toward Portur 1 1 • r i would not suffer any Portugal to depart, by reason of the warres. And being in Goa but a small time, I fell sicke of an infirmitie that helde mee foure moneths : which with phisicke and diet cost me eight hundreth duckets, and there I was constrained to sell a smal quantitie of Rubies to sustaine my neede: and I solde that for five hundreth duckets, that was worth a thousand. And when I beganne to waxe well of my disease, I had but little of that money left, every thing was so scarse: For every chicken (and yet not good) cost mee seven or eight Livers, which is sixe shillings, or sixe shillings eight pence. Beside this great charges, the Apothecaries with their medicines were no small charge to me. At the ende of sixe moneths they raised the siege, and then I beganne to worke, for Jewels were risen in their prices: for, whereas before I sold a few of refused Rubies, I determined then to sell the rest of all my Jewels that I had there, and to make an other voyage to Pegu. And for because that at my departure from Opium, and there I bought 60. percels of Opium, which cost me two thousand & a hundreth duckets, every ducket at foure shillings two pence. Moreover I bought three bales of Bombast cloth, which cost me eight hundred duckats, which was a good commoditie for Pegu: when I had bought these things, the Viceroy commanded that the custome of the Opium should be paide in Goa, and paying custome there I might cary it whither I would. I shipped my 3. bales of cloth at Chaul in a shippe that went for Cochin, and I went to Goa to pay the aforesaid custome for my Opium, and from Goa I departed to Cochin in a ship that was for the voyage of Pegu, and went to winter then at S. Tome. When I came to Cochin, I understood that the ship that had my three bales of cloth was cast away and lost, so that I lost my 800. Serafins or duckats : and departing from Cochin to goe for S. Tome, in casting about for 440 Opium a good Pegu, Opium was in great request, I went then to Camthe Island of Zeilan the Pilote was deceived, for that the Cape of the Island of Zeilan lieth farre out into the sea, and the Pilot thinking that he might have passed hard aboord the Cape, and paying roomer in the night; when it was morning we were farre within the Cape, and past all remedy to go out, by reason the winds blew so fiercely against us. So that by this meanes we lost our voyage for that yere, and we went to Manar with the ship to winter there, the ship having lost her mastes, and with great diligence we hardly saved her, with great losses to the Captaine of the ship, because he was forced to fraight another ship in S. Tome for Pegu with great losses and interest, and I with my friends agreed together in Manar to take a bark to cary us to S. Tome; which thing we did with al the rest of the marchants ; and ariving at S. Tome I had news through or by the way of Bengala, that in Pegu Opium was very deare, and I knew that in S. Tome there was no Opium but mine to go for Pegu that yere, so that I was holden of al the marchants there to be very rich : and so it would have proved, if my adverse fortune had not bin contrary to my hope, which was this. At that time there went a great ship from Cambaya, to the king of Assi, with great quantitie of Opium, & there to lade peper: in which voyage there came such a storme, that the ship was forced with wether to goe roomer 800. miles, and [II. i. 242.] by this meanes came to Pegu, whereas they arived a day before mee ; so that Opium which was before very deare, was now at a base price : so that which was sold for fiftie Bizze before, was solde for 2. Bizze & an halfe, there was such quantitie came in that ship ; so that I was glad to stay two yeres in Pegu unlesse I would have given away my commoditie : and at the end of two yeres of my 2100. duckets which I bestowed in Cambaya, I made but a thousand duckets. Then I departed againe from Pegu to goe for the Indies and for Ormus with great quantitie of Lacca, and from Ormus I returned into the Indies for Chaul, and from Chaul to Cochin, and from Cochin to Pegu. Once more I lost occasion to make me riche, for whereas I might have brought good store of Opium againe, I brought but a little, being fearefull of my other voyage before. this small quantitie I made good profite. And now againe I determined to go for my Countrey, and departing from Pegu, I tarried and wintered in Cochin, and then I left the Indies and came for Ormus. In I thinke it very necessary before I ende my voyage, to reason somewhat, and to shewe what fruits the Indies do yeeld and bring forth. First, in the Indies and other East parts of India there is Peper and ginger, which groweth in all parts of India. And in some parts of the Indies, the greatest quantitie of peper groweth amongst wilde bushes, without any maner of labour : saving, that when it is ripe they goe and gather it. The tree that the peper groweth on is like to our Ivie, which runneth up to the tops of trees wheresoever it groweth : and if it should not take holde of some tree, it would lie flat and rot on the ground. This peper tree hath his floure and berry like in all parts to our Ivie berry, and those berries be graines of peper : so that when they gather them they be greene, and then they lay them in the Sunne, and they become blacke. The Ginger groweth in this wise : the land is tilled and sowen, and the herbe is like to Panizzo, and the roote is the ginger. These two spices grow in divers places. The Cloves come all from the Moluccas, which Moluccas are two Islands, not very great, and the tree that they grow on is like to our Lawrell tree. The Nutmegs and Maces, which grow both together, are brought from the Island of Banda, whose tree is like to our walnut tree, but not so big. All the good white Sandol is brought from the Island of Timor. Canfora being compound commeth all from China, and all that which groweth in canes commeth from Borneo, & I thinke that this Canfora commeth 442 Peper tree. Ginger. Cloves. 'Nutmegs and Maces. White Sandal into these parts : for that in India they consume not great store, and that is very deare. The good Lignum Lignum Aloes. Aloes commeth from Cauchinchina. The Benjamin commeth from the kingdome of Assi Benjamin. and Sion. Long peper groweth in Bengala, Pegu, and Java. Longpeper. Muske commeth from Tartaria, which they make in This Muske this order, as by good information I have bene told. There is a certaine beast in Tartaria, which is wilde and as big as a wolfe, which beast they take alive, & beat the good muske him to death with small staves y* his blood may be and beat the spread pieces, & take out all the bones, & beat the flesh with the blood in a morter very smal, and dry it, and make purses to put it in of the skin, and these be the cods of muske. through his whole body, then they cut it in ^ ' { / J^ ^ J ^^ tay out haife ^^oflu Truely I know not whereof the Amber is made, and there are divers opinions of it, but this is most certaine, it throwne on land, and found upon the sea bankes. is cast out of the Sea, and The Rubies, Saphyres, and the Spinels be gotten in Rubies, Sathree sorts of them. Ptnes- the kingdome of Pegu. The Diamants come from PhVes>and divers places; and I know but That sort of Diamants that is called Chiappe, commeth from Bezeneger. Those that be pointed naturally come the land of Delly, and from Diamants of Java are more waightie then the other. I could never understand from whence they that are called Balassi come. Java, but from the The Balassi they fish in divers places, as before in this Srowe tn 1 Zeilan. J Pearles 1 1 • booke is showne. From Cambaza commeth the Spodiom which congeleth P in certaine canes, whereof I found many in Pegu, when Mehnfoin I made my house there, because that (as I have said Ethiopia, in there of woven canes the land of before) they make their houses like to mats. From Chaul they trade alongst the coast Cafraria>the of Melinde in Ethiopia, within the land of Cafraria : on gfhat tfotorthat coast are many good harbors kept by the Moores. tugals have. Thither the Portugals bring a kinde of Bombast cloth of a low price, and great store of Paternosters or beads made of paltrie glasse, which they make in Chaul according to the use of the Countrey : and from thence they cary Elephants teeth for India, slaves called Cafari, and some Amber and Gold. On this coast the king of Portugall hath his castle called Mozambique, which is of as great importance as any castle that hee hath in all his Indies under his protection, and the Captaine of this castle hath certaine voyages to this Cafraria, to which places no Marchants may goe, but by the Agent of this Captaine : and' they use to goe in small shippes, and In this Buying and trade with the Cafars, and their trade in buying and selling without seHingr is without any speach one to the other. Smother* *° w*se t'ie P°rtugals bring their goods by litle and litle [II. i. 243.] alongst the Sea coast, and lay them downe : and so depart, and the Cafar Marchants come and see the goods, & there they put downe as much gold as they thinke the goods are worth, and so goe their way and leave their golde and the goods together, then commeth the Portugal, and finding the golde to his content, hee taketh it and goeth his way into his ship, and then commeth the Cafar and taketh the goods and carieth them away : and if he finde the golde there still, it is a signe that the Portugals are not contented, and if the Cafar thinke he hath put too little, he addeth more, as he thinketh the thing is worth : and the Portugales must not stand with them too strickt ; for if they doe, then they will have no more trade with them : For they disdaine to be refused, when they thinke that they have offered ynough, for they be a peevish people, and have Golden trades dealt so of a long time : and by this trade the Portugals that the For- change their commodities into gold, and cary it to the tugas ave. ca s tie of Mozambique, which is in an Island not farre distant from the firme land of Cafraria on the coast of Ethiopia, and is distant from India 2800. miles. Now to returne to my voyage, when I came to Ormus, I found there Master Francis Berettin of Venice, and we fraighted a bark together to goe for Basora for 70. duckets, and with us there went other Marchants, which did ease our fraight, and very commodiously wee came to Basora and there we stayed 40. dayes for providing a Carovan of barks to go to Babylon, because they use not to goe two or 3. barkes at once, but 25. or 30. because in the night they cannot go, but must make them fast .to the banks of the river, and then we must make a very good & strong guard, and be wel provided of armor, for respect & safegard of our goods, because the number of theeves is great that come to spoile and rob the marchants. And when we depart for Babylon we goe a litle with our saile, and the voyage is 38. or 40. dayes long, but we were 50. dayes on it. When we came to Babylon we stayed there 4. moneths, until the Carovan was ready to go over the wildernes, or desert for Alepo ; in this citie we were 6. Marchants that accompanied together, five Venetians and a Portugal; whose names were as followeth, Messer Florinasa with one of his kinsmen, Messer Andrea de Polo, the Portugal & M. Francis Berettin and I, and so wee furnished our An order how selves with victuals and beanes for our horses for 40. t0 Prov™e *° dayes ; and wee bought horses and mules, for that they gj)e°sert from bee very good cheape there, I my selfe bought a horse Babylon to there for 11. akens, and solde him after in Alepo for Alepo. 30. duckets. Also we bought a Tent which did us very great pleasure : we had also amongst us 32. Camels laden with marchandise : for the which we paid 2. duckets for every camels lading, and for every 10. camels they made n, for so is their use and custome. We take also with us 3. men to serve us in the voyage, which are used to goe in those voyages for five D d. a man, and are bound to serve us to Alepo : so that we passed very well without any trouble : when the camels cried out to rest, our pavilion was the first that was erected. The Carovan maketh but small journeis about 20. miles a day, & they set forwards every morning before day two houres, and about two in the afternoone they sit downe. We had great good hap in our voyage, for that it rained : For which cause we never wanted water, but every day found good water, so that we could not take any hurt for want of water. Yet we caried a camel laden alwayes with water for every good respect that might chance in the desert, so that wee .had no want neither of one thing, nor other that was to bee had in the countrey. For wee came very well furnished of every thing, and every day we eat fresh mutton, because there came many those shepheards with us with their flocks, who kept sheepe that we bought in Babylon, and every marchant marked his sheepe with his owne marke, and we gave the shepheards a Medin, which is two pence of our money, for the keeping and feeding our sheep on the way, and for killing of them. And beside the Medin they have the heads, the skinnes, and the intrals of every sheepe they kil. We sixe bought 20. sheepe, and when we came to Alepo we had 7. alive of them. And in the Carovan they use this ofder, that the marchants doe lende flesh one to another, because they will not cary raw flesh with them, but pleasure one another by lending one one day, and another another day. From Babylon to Alepo is 40. dayes journey, of the which they make 36. dayes over the wildernes, in which 36. Dayes ^6. dayes they neither see house, trees, nor people that Jthewtide*rnes inhabite it, but onely a plaine, and no signe of any way they sit downe all in the world. The Pilots go before, and the Carovan the followeth after. And when Carovan unladeth and sitteth downe, for they know the stations where the wells are. I say, in 36. dayes we passe over the wildernesse. For when wee depart from Babylon two dayes we passe by villages inhabited until we have passed the river Euphrates. And then within two dayes of Alepo we have villages inhabited. In this Carovan there goeth alway a Captaine that doth to"provide fir J u s t i ce u n to a11 m en the going to Jerusalem. Tripoli, whereas Master Florin, and Master Andrea Polo, : a nd e v e r y n ight they keepe watch about the Carovan, and comming to Alepo we went to , i ] • -i 1 * -i nice 1581. and I, with a Frier, went and hired a barke to goe with us to Jerusalem. Departing from Tripolie, we arrived at Jaffa : from which place in a day and halfe we went to Jerusalem, and we gave order to our barke to tary for us untill our returne. Wee stayed in Jerusalem 14. dayes, to visite those holy places : from whence we returned to Jaffa, and from Jaffa to Tripolie, and there wee shipped our selves in a ship of Venice called the [II. i. 244.] Bagazzana : And by the helpe of the divine power, we The author retu™etht°Ve- arrived safely in Venice the fift of November 1581. If , there be any that hath any desire to goe into those partes of India, let him not be astonied at the troubles that I have passed : because I was intangled in many things : for that I went very poore from Venice with 1200. duckets imployed in marchandize, and when I came to Tripolie, I fell sicke in the house of Master Regaly Oratio, and this man sent away my goods with a small Carovan that went from Tripolie to Alepo, and the Carovan was robd, and all my goods lost saving foure chests of glasses which cost me 200. duckets, of which glasses I found many broken: because the theeves thinking it had bene other marchandize, brake them up, and seeing they were glasses they let them all alone. And with this onely stocke I adventured to goe into the Indies: And thus with change and rechange, and by diligence in my voyage, God did blesse and helpe I will not be un- ^ verJ £P°d mee, so that I got a good stocke. mindfull to put them in remembrance, that have a desire °! e? f. atJ ey tn Mose to goe into those parts, how they shall keepe their goods, Countreys for and give them to their heires at the time of their death, the recovering and howe this may be done very securely. cities that the Portugales have in the Indies, there is the dead% a house called the schoole of Sancta misericordia comissaria : the governours whereof, if you give them for their paines, will take a coppy of your will and Testament, which you must alwayes cary about you ; and chiefly when you go into the Indies. In the countrey of the Moores and Gentiles, in those voyages alwayes there 447 In all the °fthe £Pods °f 1 n 1 have 1 1 • goeth a Captaine to administer Justice to all Christians of the Portugales. Also this captaine hath authoritie to recover the goods of those Marchants that by chance die in those voyages, and they that have not made their Wills and registred them in the aforesaide schooles, the Captaines wil consume their goods in such wise, that litle or nothing will be left for their heires and friends. Also there goeth in these same voyages some marchants that are commissaries of the schoole of Sancta misericordia, that if any Marchant die and have his Will made* and hath given order that the schoole of Misericordia shall have his goods and sell them, then they sende the money by exchange to the schoole of Misericordia in Lisbone, with that copie of his Testament, then from Lisbon they give intelligence thereof, into what part of Christendome soever it be, and the heires of such a one comming thither, with testimoniall that they be heires, they shall receive there the value of his goods: in such wise that they shall not loose any thing. But they that die in the kingdome of Pegu loose the thirde part of their goods by ancient custome of the Countrey, that if any Christian dieth in the kingdome of Pegu, the king and his officers rest heires of a thirde of his goods, and there hath never bene any deceit or fraude used in this matter. I have knowen many rich men that have dwelled in Pegu, and in their age they have desired to go into their owne Countrey to die there,, and have departed with al their goods and substance without let or trouble. Order of Tegu n w e l1 t he N o b le man > as j n pegu the fashion of their apparel is all one, as t he s i m p!e: the onely difference is in the finenes of the cloth, which is cloth of Bombast one finer then another, and they weare their apparell in this wise : First, a white Bombast cloth which serveth for a shirt, then they gird another painted bombast cloth of foureteene brases, which they binde up betwixt their legges, and on their heads they weare a small tock of three braces, made in guize of a myter, 1 1 1 r 1 ir 11 and some goc without tocks, and cary (as it were) a hive on their heades, which doeth not passe the lower part of his eare, when it is lifted up : they goe all bare footed, but the Noble men never goe on foote, but are caried by men in a seate with great reputation, with a hat made of the leaves of a tree to keepe him from the raine and Sunne, or otherwise they ride on horsebacke with their feete bare in the stirops. All sorts of women The order of whatsoever they be, weare a smocke downe to the girdle, the wo™e,ns 1 ana from the girdle downewards to the toote they weare p* a cloth of three brases, open before; so straite that they cannot goe, but they must shewe their secret as it were aloft, and in their going they faine to hide it they cannot by reason of the with straitnes of their cloth. They say that this use was invented by a Queene to be an occasion that the sight thereof might remove from men the vices against nature, which they are greatly given unto : which sight should cause the women goe bare footed, their armes laden with hoopes of golde and Jewels : And their fingers full of precious rings, with their haire rolled up about their heads.. Many of them weare a cloth about their shoulders in stead of a cloake. to regard women the more. Also their hand, but them apparel in Now to finish that which I have begunne to write, I say, that those parts of the Indies are very good, because that a man that hath litle, shall make a great deale thereof; alwayes they must governe themselves that they be taken for honest men. For why ? to such there shal never want helpe to doe wel, but he that is vicious, let him tary at home and not go thither, because he shall alwayes be a begger, and die a poore man. 449 [Letters