adde the securitie of passage, with other privileges most necessary to use the trade with your men, your majestie shall doe that which belongeth to a most honorable & liberal prince, and deserve so much of us, as by no continuance or length of time shalbe forgotten. Which request of ours we do most instantly desire to be taken in good part of your majestie, and so great a benefit towards us & our men, we shall endevor by diligence to requite when time shal serve thereunto. The God Almighty long preserve your Imperial majestie. A letter of M. John Newbery, written from Alepo, to M. Richard Hakluit of Oxford, the 28. of May, Anno 1583. ight welbeloved, and my assured good friend, I heartily commend me unto you, hoping of your good health, &c. After we set saile from Gravesend, which was the 13. day of February last, wee remained upon our coast untill the 11. day of March, and that day we set saile from Falmouth, and never ankered till wee arrived in the road of Tripolie in Syria,, which was the last day of Aprill last past, where wee [II. i. 246.] stayed 14. dayes : and the twentie of this present we came hither to Alepo, and with Gods helpe, within five or sixe dayes goe from hence towards the Indies. Since my comming to Tripolis I have made very earnest inquirie both there and here, for the booke of Cosmo- Ahil{ata ln graphie of Abilfada Ismael, but by no meanes can heare iL °*~ °^ *t# Some say that possibly it may be had in Persia, but notwithstanding I will not faile tp make inquirie for it, both in Babylon, and in Balsara, and if I can finde it in any of these places, I wil send it you from thence. The letter which you delivered me for to copy out, that came from M. Thomas Stevens in Goa, as also the note you gave mee of Francis Fernandes the Portugal, I brought thence with me among other writings unawares, the which I have sent you here inclosed. Here is great preparation for the warres in Persia, and from hence is gone the Bassa of a towne called Rahemet, and shortly after goeth the Bassa of Tripolis, and the Bassa of Damasco, but they have not all with them above 6000. men from hence, and they goe to a towne called Asmerome, which is three dayes journey from Trapezunde, where they shal meete with divers captaines and souldiers that come from Constantinople and other places thereabout, which goe altogether into Persia. This yeere many men goe into the warres, and so hath there every yeere since the beginning thereof, which is eight yeeres or thereabouts, but very fewe of them returne againe. Notwithstanding, they get of the Persians, and make castles and holds in their countrey. I pray you make my hearty commendations to master Peter Guillame, and master Philip Jones, and to M. Walter Warner, and to all the rest of our friends. Master Fitch hath him heartily commended unto you: and so I commit you to the tuition of the Almightie, who blesse and keepe you, and send us a joy full meeting. From Alepo, the 28. of May 1583. Your loving friend to command in all that I may. John Newberie. Another letter of the said M. Newberie, written to Master Leonard Poore of London, from Alepo. [light welbeloved, my very heartie commendations unto you, and the rest of my friends remembred. My last I sent you was the 25. of February last, from Dele out of the Downes, after which time with contrary windes wee remained upon our owne coast, untill the 11. day of March, and then wee set saile from March n. Falmouth, and the thirteenth day the winde came contrary with a very great storme, which continued eight dayes, and in this great storme wee had some of our goods wette, but God bee thanked no great hurt done. After which time we sailed with a faire wind within the Streights, and so remained at Sea, and ankered at no