The letters of the Prince of Moldavia to the Queene. Letters of the Chanceler of Poland to the Queene. The returne of Master William Harborne from Constantinople over land to London, 1588. Departed from Constantinople with 30. persons of my suit and family the 3. of August. Passing through the Countries of Thracia, now called Romania the great, Valachia & Moldavia, where ariving the 5. of September I was according to the Grand Signior his commandement very courteously interteined by Peter his positive prince, a Greeke by profession, with whom was concluded that her Majesties subjects there trafiquing should pay but three upon the hundreth, which as well his owne Subjects as all other nations answere: whose letters to her Majestie be extant. Whence I proceeded into Poland, where the high Chanceler sent for mee the 27. of the same moneth. And intertainment after most honorable imparted with me in secret maner the late passed and present occurrents of that kingdome, & also he writ to her Majestic Thence I hasted unto Elbing, where the 12. of October I was most friendly welcomed by the Senate of that City, whom I finde and judge to be faithfully devoted to her Majesties service, whose letters likewise unto the same were presented me. No lesse at Dantzik the 27. of that moneth I was courteously received by one of the Buroughmasters accompanied with two others of the Senate, & a Civil doctor their Secretarie. After going through the land of Pomer I rested one day at Stetin, where, for that ye duke was absent, nothing ensued. At Rostoke I passed through the Citie without any stay, and at Wismar received like friendly greeting as in the other places: but at Lubeck, for that I came late and departed early in the morning, I was not visited. At Hamburg the 19. of November, and at Stoad the ninth of December in like maner I was saluted by a Boroughmaster and the Secretarie, and in all these places they presented mee sundry sorts of their best wine and fresh fish, every of them with a long discourse, congratulating, in the names of their whole Senate, her Majesties victory over the Spaniard, and my safe returne, concluding with offer of their ready service to her future disposing. Yet the Dantziks after my departure thence caused the Marchants to pay custome for the goods they brought with them in my company, which none other towne neither Infidels nor Christians on ye way ever demanded. And notwithstanding the premisses, I was most certainly informed of sundry of our nation there resident that most of the [II. i. 290.] Hanse-towns upon the sea coasts, especially Dantzik, Lubeck, and Hamborough have laden and were shipping for Spaine, great provision of corne, cables, ropes, powder, saltpeter, hargubusses, armour, leade, copper, and all other munition serving for the warre. Whereupon I gather their fained courtesie proceeded rather for feare then of any good affection unto her Majesties service, Elbing and Stoad onely excepted, which of duetie for their commoditie I esteemed well affected. iron, The privilege of Peter the Prince of Moldavia graunted to the English Marchants. Etrus Dei gratia princeps Valachiae & Moldaviae; praesentibus, significamus universis & singulis quorum interest ac intererit, quod cum magnifico domino Guilielmo Hareborne oratore Serenissimae ac potentissimae dominae, dominae Elizabethae Dei gratia Anglias, Franciae, ac Hiberniae Reginae apud Serenissimum ac potentissimum Turcarum Imperatorem hanc constitutionem fecerimus: Nimirum ut dehinc suae Serenitatis subditis, omnibusque mercatoribus integrum sit hie in provincia nostra commorandi, conversandi, piercandi, vendendi, contrahendique, imo omnia exercendi, quae mercaturae ac vitae humanae societas ususque requirit, sine ulla alicujus contradictione,