A voiage made out of England unto Guinea and Benin in Affrike, at the charges of certaine marchants Adventurers of the Citie of London, in the yeere of our Lord 1553* Was desired by certaine of my friends to make some mention of this Voiage, that some memorie thereof might remaine to our posteritie, if either iniquitie of time consuming all things, or ignorance creeping in by barbarousnesse and contempt of knowledge should hereafter bury in oblivion so woorthie attempts, so much the greatlier to bee esteemed, as before never enterprised by Englishmen, or at the least so frequented, as at this present they are,, and may bee, to the great commoditie of our marchants,, if the same be not hindered by the ambition of such, as for the conquering of fortie or fiftie miles here and there, and erecting of certaine fortresses, thinke to be Lordes of halfe the world, envying that other should enjoy the commodities, which themselves cannot wholy possesse. And although such as have bene at charges in the discovering and conquering of such landes ought by good reason to have certaine privileges, preheminences, and tributes for the same, yet (to speake under correction) it may seeme somewhat rigorous, and agaynst good reason and conscience, or rather agaynst the charitie that ought to be among Christian men, that such as invade the dominions of other should not permit other friendly to use the trade of marchandise in places neerer, or seldome frequented of them, whereby their trade is not hindered in such places, where they themselves have at their owne election appointed the Martes of their traffike. But forasmuch as at this present it is not my intent to accuse or defend, approove or improove, I will cease to speake any further hereof, and proceed to the description of the first voyage, as briefly and faithfully as I 141 was advertised of the same, by the information of such credible persons, as made diligent inquisition to know the trueth thereof, as much as shall be requisite, omitting to speake of many particular things, not greatly necessarie to be knowen: which neverthelesse, with also the fully exact course of declared in the second voiage. And if herein favour or friendship shall perhaps cause some to thinke that some have bene sharply touched, let them lay apart favour and friendship, and give place to trueth, that honest men may receive prayse for well doing, and lewd persons reproch, as the just stipend of their evill desertes, whereby other may be deterred to doe the like, and vertuous men encouraged to proceed in honest attempts. But that these voyages may be more plainly understood of all men, I have thought good for this purpose, before I intreat hereof, to make a briefe description of Africa, being that great part of the world, on whose West side beginneth the coast of Guinea at Cabo Verde, about twelve degrees in latitude, on this side the Equinoctial! line, and two degrees in longitude from the measuring line, so running from the North to the South, and by East in some places, within 5, 4, and 3 degrees and a halfe unto the Equinoctiall, and so foorth in maner directly East and by North, for the space of 36 degrees or thereabout, in longitude from the West to the East, as shall more plainly appeare in the description of the second voyage. [II. ii. 10.] A briefe description of Afrike gathered by Richard Eden. lesse are ||N Africa the kingdom of Tunis and Constantina, which is at u n c j er Tunis, and also the region of |«»«»| tjljg ^ay Tunis. Bugia, Tripoli, and Ezzah. This part of Afrike is Bugia. v e r y barren by reason of the great deserts, as the Tripoli. Numidia. deserts of Numidia and Barca. The principall ports these kingdoms: the of the kingdome of Tunis are these: Goletta, Bizerta, Potofarnia, Bona, and Stora. The chiefe cities of Tunis are Constantina and Bona, with divers other. Under this kingdom are many Hands, as Zerbi, Lam- I^nds of padola, Pantalarea, Limoso, Beit, Gamelaro, and Malta, T?ms' the great master of where at Rhodes. Under the South of this kingdom are great deserts of Lybia. All the nations in this Africa The deserts of the lesse are of the sect of Mahomet, and a rusticall people, living scattred in villages. The best of this part of Afrike Mediterraneum. is Barbaria lying on the coast of the sea Barbarie. this present the the y ta' is Mauritania (now called Barbaria) is divided into two Mauritania. parts, as Mauritania Tingitana, and Caesariensis. Mauritania Tingitana is now called the kingdom of Fes, and The kingdom the kingdom of Marocco. The principall citie of Fes °f? es & is called Fessa: and the chiefe citie of Marocco is named Marocco. Mauritania Caesariensis is at this day called the kingdom of Tremisen, with also the citie called Tremisen or Tremisen. Telensin. This region is full of deserts, and reacheth to the Sea Mediterraneum, to the citie of Oram, with the Oram. port of Mersalquiber. The kingdom of Fes reacheth Mersalquiber. unto the Ocean Sea, from Argilla: and the port of the sayd kingdom Sala. the West to the citie of is called Sala. The kingdom of Marocco is also extended above the Ocean Sea, unto the citie of Azamor and Azafi, which Jzamor. are upon the Ocean Sea, toward the West of the sayd kingdom. Nere Mauritania Tingitana (that is to say, by the two kingdoms of Fes, and Marocco) are in the Sea, the Hands of Canarie, called in old time, The fortunate The Hands of Hands. Toward the South of this region is the kingdom Canariaof Guinea, with Senega, Jalofo, Gambra, and many other Guinea. regions of the Blacke Moores, called Aethiopians or Aethioftans. Negros, all which are watered with the river Negro called in old time Niger. In the sayd regions are no cities, but onely certaine lowe cottages made of boughes Fes. Tremisen. Guinea. Africa ye great. Africa the /esse. Carthage. Prester John. Cape de Bona Speranza. Alcair. [II. ii. i i .] THE ENGLISH VOYAGES of trees, plastered with chalke, and covered with strawe. In these regions are also very great deserts. The kingdom of Marocco hath under it these seven kingdoms: Hea, Sus, Guzula, the territorie of Marrocco, Duccala, Hazchora, and Tedle. The kingdom of Fes hath as many: as Fes, Temesne, Azgar, Elabath, Errif, Garet, and Elcair. The kingdom of Tremisen hath these regions: Tremisen, Tenez, and Elgazair, all which are Machometists. But all the regions of Guinea are pure Gentiles, and idolatrous, without profession of any religion, or other knowledge of God, then by the law of nature. Africa the great is one of the three parts of the world, knowen in old time, and severed from Asia, on the East by the river Nilus, on the West from Europe by the pillars of Hercules. The hither part is now called Barbarie, and the people Moores. The inner part is called Lybia and Aethiopia. Afrike the lesse is in this wise bounded. On the West it hath Numidia; On the East Cyrenaica: On the North, the sea called Mediterraneum. the noble city of Carthage. this countrey was In In the East side of Afrike beneath the red sea, dwelleth the great and mighty Emperour and Christian king Prester John, well knowen to the Portugales in their voyages to Calicut. His dominions reach very farre on every side: and hath under him many other Kings both Christian and heathen that pay him tribute. This mightie prince is called David the Emperour of Aethiopia. Some write that the king of Portugall sendeth him yeerely eight ships laden with marchandize. His kingdom confineth with the red Sea, and reacheth far into Afrike toward Aegypt and Barbarie. Southward it confineth with the Sea toward the Cape de Bona Speranza: and on the other side with the sea of sand, called Mare de Sabione, a very dangerous sea lying between ye great citie of Alcair, or Cairo in Aegypt, and the country of the which way are many unhabitable Aethiopia: In deserts, continuing for the space of five dayes journey. And they affirme, that if the sayd Christian Emperor were not hindered by those deserts (in the which is great lacke of victuals, & especially of water) he would or now have invaded the kingdom of Egypt, and the citie of Alcair. The chiefe city of Ethiopia, where this great emperor is resident, is called Amacaiz, being a faire citie, Amacaiz, whose inhabitants are of the colour of an Olive. There are also many other cities, as the city of Sava upon the river of Nilus, where the Emperour is accustomed to remaine in the Sommer season. There is likewise a great city named Barbaregaf, and Ascon, from whence From whence. it is said that the Queene of Saba came to Hierusalem ^ p ^^ ^ to heare the wisedom of Salomon. This citie is but litle, yet very faire, and one of the chiefe cities in Ethiope. In this province are many exceeding high mountains, upon the which is said to be the earthly paradise: and some The ea^thh say that there are the trees of the Sunne and Moone, ^he trees of whereof the antiquitie maketh mention: yet that none tfo $unne and can passe thither by reason of great deserts of an hundred the Moone. daies journey. Also beyond these mountains is the Cape of Bona Speranza. And to have said thus much of Afrike it may suffice. The first voiage to Guinea and Benin. JN the yeere of our Lord 1553. the twelfth day of August, sailed from Portsmouth two goodly ships, the Primerose and the Lion, with a pinnas called the Moone, being all well furnished aswell with men of the lustiest sort, to the number of seven score, as also with ordinance and victuals requisite to such a voiage: having also two captaines, the one a stranger called Anthonie Anes Pin- Pfateado. teado, a Portugall, borne in a towne named The Port of Portugall, a wise, discreet, and sober man, who for his cunning in sailing, being as well an expert Pilot as a politike captaine, was sometime in great favour with 145 vi Guinea. T HE E N G L I SH V O Y A G ES the king of Portugall, and to whom the coasts of Brasile and Guinea were committed to be kept from the Frenchmen, to whom he was a terrour on the Sea in those parts, and was furthermore a gentleman of the king his masters house. But as fortune in maner never favoureth but flattereth, never promiseth but deceiveth, never raiseth but casteth downe againe: and as great wealth & favour have alwaies companions, emulation and envie, he was after many adversities & quarels made against him, to come into England: where in this golden inforced voyage he was evil matched with an unequal companion, and unlike match of most sundry qualities & conditions, with vertues few or none adorned. Thus departed these first noble ships under saile on their voyage: But captaine Windam putting forth of his ship at Portsmouth a kinsman of one of the head marchants, and shewing herein a muster of the tragicall partes hee had conceived in his braine, and with such small beginnings nourished so monstrous a birth, that more happy, yea and blessed was that yong man being left behind, then if he had bene taken with them, as some do wish he had done the like by theirs. Thus sailed they on their voyage, untill they The Hands of came to the Hand of Madera, where they tooke certaine wines for the store of their ships, and paid for Madera. them as they agreed of the price. • At these Hands they met with a great Galion of the king of Portugall, full of men and ordinance: yet such as could not have prevailed if it had attempted to withstand or resist our ships, for the which cause it was set foorth, not onely to let and interrupt these our shippes of their purposed voiage, but al other that should attempt the like: yet chiefly to frustrate our voiage. For the king of Portugall was sinisterly informed, that our ships were armed to his in The castle of castle of Mina in those parties, whereas nothing; lesse Mina- & was ment. After m the Hand of that our ships departed Madera forward on their voiage, began this worthy captaine Pinteados sorow, as a man tormented with the 146 company of a terrible Hydra, who hitherto flattred with him, & made him a faire countenance and shew of love. Then did he take upon him to command all alone, setting nought both by captain Pinteado, and the rest of the marchants factors, sometimes with opprobrious words, and somtimes with threatnings most shamfully abusing them, taking from Pinteado the service of the boies and certain mariners that were assigned him by the order and direction of the worshipful merchants, and leaving him as a common mariner, which is the greatest despite and grief that can be to a Portugale or Spaniard, to be diminished of their honor, which they esteem above all riches. Thus sailing forward on their voiage, they came to the Hands of Canarie, continuing their course The Hands of from thence until they arrived at the Hand of S. Nicholas, £ f^ where they victualled themselves with fresh meat, of s the flesh of wild goats, whereof is great plenty in that Hand, & in maner of nothing els. From hence folowing on their course and tarying here & there at the desert Hands in the way, because they would not come too timely to the countrey of Guinea for the heat, and tarying somwhat too long (for what can be well ministred in a common wealth, where inequalitie with tyrannie wil rule alone) they came at the length to the first land of the country of Guinea, where they fel with the great river of The river of Sesto, where they might for their marchandizes have laden fii*0'.. their ships with the graines of that countrey, which is Qr'J^es a very hote fruit, and much like unto a fig as it groweth on the tree. For as the figs are full of small seeds, so is the said fruit full of graines, which are loose within the cod, having in the mids thereof a hole on every side. This kind of spice is much used in cold countries, & may there be sold for great advantage, for exchange of other wares. But our men, by the perswasion or rather inforcement of this tragicall captaine, not regarding and setting light by that commoditie, in comparison of ye fine gold The thirst of they thirsted, sailed an hundred leagues further, until & they came to the golden land: where not attempting to The quantitie of gold. Furie admitteth no counsel The Rossia. Rotting heat. Benin. Francisco. Nich. Lambart. THE ENGLISH VOYAGES come neere the castle pertaining to the king of Portugall, which was within the river of Mina, they made sale of their ware only on this side & beyond it, for the gold of that country, to the quantitie of an hundred and fiftie pounds weight, there being in case that they might have dispatched all their ware for gold, if the untame braine of Windam had, or could have given eare to the counsell and experience of Pinteado. For when that Windam not satisfied with the gold which he had, and more might have had if he had taried about the Mina, commanding the said Pinteado (for so he tooke upon him) to lead the ships to Benin, being under the Equinoctial line, and an hundred and fifty leagues beyond the Mina, where he looked to have their ships laden with pepper: and being counselled of the said Pinteado, considering the late time of the yeere, for that time to go no further, but to make sale of their wares such as they had for gold, wherby they might have bene great gainers: Windam not assenting the sayd hereunto, fell into a sudden rage, reviling Pinteado, calling him Jew, with other opprobrious words, saying, This whoreson Jew hath promised to bring us to such places as are not, or as he cannot bring us unto: but if he do not, I will cut off his eares and naile them to the maste. Pinteado gave the foresaid counsell to go no further for the safegard of the men and their lives, which they should put in danger if they came too late, for the Rossia which is their Winter, not for cold, but for smothering heate, with close and cloudie aire and storming weather, of such putrifying qualitie, that it rotted the coates of their backs: or els for comming to soone for the scorching heat of the sunne, which caused them to linger in the way. But of force and not of will brought he the ships before the river of Benin, where riding at an Anker, they sent their pinnas up into the river 50 or 60 leagues, from whence certaine of the marchants with captaine Pinteado, Francisco a Portugale, Nicholas Lambart gentleman, and other marchants were conducted to the court where the king remained, ten leagues from the river side, whither when they came, they were brought with a great company to the presence of the king, who The king of being a blacke Moore (although not so blacke as the rest) Bettln his sate in a great huge hall, long and wide, the wals made of C0UrU earth without windowes, the roofe of thin boords, open in sundry places, like unto lovers to let in the aire. And here to speake of the great reverence they give to Reverence totheir king, it is such, that if we would give as much to wardthekln& our Savior Christ, we should remoove from our heads many plagues which we daily deserve for our contempt and impietie. So it is therfore, that when his noble men are in his presence, they never looke him in the face, but sit cowring, as we upon our knees, so they upon their buttocks, with their elbowes upon their knees, and their hands before their faces, not looking up until the king command them. And when they are comming toward the king, as far as they do see him, they do shew such reverence, sitting on the ground with their faces covered as before. Likewise when they depart from him, they turn not their backs toward him, but goe creeping backward with like reverence. And now to speake somewhat of the communication that was between the king and our men, you shall first understand that he himselfe could speake the Portugall tongue, which he had learned of a child. Therefore after The communihe had commanded our men to stand up, and demanded cati™bei™en r the kin? of r • - i i , . or them the cause or their comming into that countrey, Benin and our they answered by Pinteado, that they were marchants men. travelling into those parties for the commodities of his countrey, for exchange of wares which they had brought from their countries, being such as should be no lesse commodious for him and his people. The king then having of old lying in a certaine store-house 30 or 40 kintals of Pepper (every kintall being an hundred weight) Pepper. willed them to looke upon the same, and againe to bring him a sight of such merchandizes as they had brought with them. And thereupon sent with the captaine and the marchants certaine of his men to conduct them to the waters side, with other to bring the ware from the pinnas The kings gen- to the court. Who when they were returned and the tknes towards w a r es seen ^ t he k I n g g r ew to t h[s encje with the merchants to provide in 30 dayes the lading of al their ships with our men. in case their merchandizes would not pepper. And extend to the value of so much pepper, he promised to credite them to their next returne, and thereupon sent the country round about to gather pepper, causing the same to be brought to the court: So that within the space of 30 dayes they had gathered fourescore tunne of pepper. [II. ii. 13.] In the meane season our men partly having no rule of themselves, but eating without measure of the fruits of the countrey, and drinking the wine of the Palme trees that droppeth in the night from the cut of the branches of the same, and in such extreme heate running continually into the water, not used before to such sudden and vehement alterations (then the which nothing is more dangerous) were thereby brought into swellings and agues: insomuch that the later time of the yeere comming on, caused them to die sometimes three & some- times 4 or 5 in a day. Then Windam perceiving the time of the 30 daies to be expired, and his men dying so fast, sent to the court in post to Captaine Pinteado, & the rest to come away and to tary no longer. But Pinteado with the rest, wrote backe to him againe, certifying him of the great quantity of pepper they had alreadie gathered & looked daily for much more: desiring him furthermore to remember the great praise and name they should win, if they came home prosperously, and what shame of the contrary. With which answere Windam not satisfied, and many of their men dying dayly, willed and commaunded them againe either to come away forthwith, or els threatened to leave them behinde. When Pinteado heard this answere, thinking to perswade him with reason, hee tooke his way from the court toward the ships, being • i 1 ll ii i • i manners. In the meane season Windam all raging, brake up Pinteados Cabin, brake open his chestes, spoiled such provision of cold stilled waters and suckets as he had provided for his health, and left him nothing, neither of his instruments to saile by, nor yet of his apparell: and in the meane time falling sicke, himselfe died also. The death of Whose death Pinteado comming aboord, lamented as Wlndam' much as if he had bene the deerest friend he had in the world. But certaine of the mariners and other officers Pinteado evlil did spit in his face, some calling him Jewe, saying that he used,°fthe i -ii had brought them thither to kill them: and some drawing their swords at him, making a shew to slay him. Then he perceiving that they would needs away, desired them to tary that he might fetch the rest of the marchants that were left at the court, but they would not grant this request. Then desired he them to give him the ship-boate, with as much of an old saile as might serve for the same, promising them therwith to bring Nicholas This Lamiferi Lambert and the rest into England, but all was in vaine. X*r^Jw Then wrote he a letter to the court to the marchants, whose father informing them of all the matter, and promising them had bin Lord if God would lend him life to returne with all haste to Motor of fetch them. And thus was Pinteado kept ashipboord London~ against his will, thrust among the boyes of the ship, not used like a man, nor yet like an honest boy, but glad to find favour at the cookes hand. Then departed they, leaving one of their ships behind, them, which they sunke for lacke of men to cary her. After this, within 6 or 7 dayes sayling, dyed also Pinteado for very pensivenesse TJ?e death °f & thought that stroke him to the heart. A man worthy Pintead*to serve any prince, and most vilely used. And of sevenscore men came home to Plimmouth scarcely forty, and of them many died. And that no man should suspect these words which I have saide in commendation of Pinteado, to be spoken upon favour otherwise then trueth, I have thought good to adde hereunto the copie of the letters which the king of Portugall and the infant time as upon the king his masters displeasure (and not for any other crime or offence, as may appeare by the said letters) he was only for povertie inforced to come Pinteadofirst ; n to England, where he first perswaded our marchants to fme7todtheZ- attempt the said voyages to Guinea. But as the king age of Guinea, of Portugall repented him that he had so too late punished Pinteado, upon malicious informations of such as envied the mans good fortune: even so may it hereby appeare that in some cases even Lions themselves may either be hindered by the contempt, or aided by the help of the poore mise, according unto the fable of Esope. The copie of Anthonie Anes Pinteado his letters patents, whereby the king of Portugall made him knight of his house, after all his troubles and imprisonment, which, by wrong information made to the king, he had susteined of long time, being at the last delivered, his cause knowen and manifested to the king by a gray Frier the kings Confessor. The king doe give you to understand lord Francis Desseaso, one of my counsell and overseer of my house, that in consideration of the good service which Anthony Anes Pinteado, the sonne of John Anes, dwelling in the towne called the Port, hath done unto me, my will and pleasure is, to make him knight of my house, allowing to him in pension seven hundred reis Seven hundredl-n- are monethly, and every day one alcayre of barly, as long as ten shillings. £ .Alcayre is halfeabushell. ordinance of my house. Providing alwaies that he shall he keepeth a horse, & to be paid according 1 o to the . , *' J' J J , , , , , receive but one marriage gift. And this also in such condition, that the time which is accepted in our ordinance, forbidding such men to marry for getting such children as might succeede them in this allowance, which is 6 yeres after the making of this patent, shalbe first expired before he do marry. 1 therfore command you the to cause in the booke called to be entred Matricula of our houshold, under the title of knights. And when it is so entred, let the clarke of the Matricula, [II. ii. 14.] for the certeintie therof, write on the backside of this Alvala, or patent, the number of the leafe wherein this our grant is entred. Which done, let him returne this writing unto the said Anthonie Anes Pinteado for his warrant. I Diego Henriques have written this in Almarin the two and twentie day of September, in the yeere of our Lord 1551. And this benevolence the king gave unto Anthonie Anes Pinteado, the five and twentie day of July this present yeere. Rey. The Secretaries declaration written under the kings grant. YOur Majestie hath vouchsafed, in respect and consideration of the good service of Anthony Anes Pinteado, dwelling in the port, and sonne of John Anes, to make him knight of your house, with ordinarie allowance, of seven hundred reis pension by the moneth, and one alcaire of barley by the day, as long as he the keepeth a horse: and to be paide according to ordinance of your house, with condition that hee shall have but one marriage gift: and that not within the space of sixe yeres after the making of these letters Patents. The Secretaries note. Entred in the booke of the Matricula. Fol. 683. Francisco de Siquera. The copie of the letter of Don Lewes the infant, to the king of Portugall, sent and brother into England to Anthonie Anes Pinteado. ANthony Anes Pinteado, I the infant brother to the king, have me heartily commended unto you. Peter Gonsalves is gone to seeke you, desiring to bring you home again into your countrey. And for that purpose king, that therby you may freely and without all feare come home. And although the weather be foule and stormie, yet faile not to come: for in the time that his Majestie hath given you, you may doe many things to your fcbntentation and gratifying the king, whereof I would be right glad: and to bring the same to passe, I will do all that lieth in me for your profite. But forasmuch as Peter Gonsalves will make further declaration hereof unto you, I say no more at this present. Written in Lisbone, the eight day of December. Anno 1552. The infant Don Lewes. ALI these foresaid writings I saw under seale, in the house of my friend Nicholas Liese, with whom to Pinteado left them, at his unfortunate departing Guinea. But, notwithstanding all these friendly letters and faire promises, Pinteado durst not attempt to goe home, neither to keepe companie with the Portugals his countrey men, without the- presence of other: forasmuch as he had secrete admonitions that they intended to slay him, if time and place might have served their wicked intent. The second voyage to Guinea set out by Sir George Barne, Sir John Yorke, Thomas Lok, Anthonie Hickman and Edward Castelin, in the yere 1554. The Captaine whereof was M. John Lok. S in the first voiage I have declared rather the order of the history, then the course of the navigation, whereof at that time I could have no perfect information: so in the description of this second voyage, my chiefe intent hath beene to shew the course of the same, according to the observation and ordinarie custome of the mariners, and as I received it at the handes of an expert Pilot, being