which ambassage the king of England seemed to be very well pleased, and they were received of him with very great honour, and he condescended unto all that the ambassadours required of him, at whose hands they received authenticall writings of the diligence which they had performed, with publication thereof by the heralds: and also provisoes of those confirmations which were necessary. And having dispatched all things well, and with the kings good will, they returned home into their countrey. [II. ii. 3.] A briefe note concerning an ancient trade of the English Marchants the Canarie-ilands, to gathered out of an olde ligier booke of M. Nicolas Thorne the elder a worshipfull marchant of the city of Bristoll. in j]T appeareth evidently out of a certaine note or the custody of me j letter of remembrance, Richard Hakluyt, written by M. Nicolas Thorne the elder a principall marchant of Bristoll, to his friend and servant time resident at S. Lucar in William Ballard at that The English Andaluzia; that in the yeere of our Lord 1526 (and an iradelT ^7 a ^ circumstances and probabilities long before) certhe Canaries taine English marchants, and among 1526. factour Thomas Midnall and his owne the rest himselfe with one Thomas Spacheford exercised usuall and ordinary trade of marchandise unto the Canarie Hands. For by the sayd letter notice was given to Thomas Midnall and William Ballard aforesayd, that a certaine ship called The Christopher of Cadiz bound for the West Indies had taken in certaine fardels of cloth both course and fine, broad and narrow of divers sorts and colours, some arovas of packthreed, sixe cerons or bagges of sope with other goods of M. Nicolas Thorne, to be delivered at Santa Cruz the chiefe towne in Tenerifa one of the seven Canary-ilands. All which commodities the sayd Thomas and William were authorised by the owner in the letter before mentioned to barter & sell away at Santa Cruz. And in lieu of such mony as should arise of the sale of those goods they were appointed to returne backe into England good store of Orchell (which is a certaine kinde of mosse growing upon high rocks, in those dayes much used to die withall) some quantity of sugar, and certaine hundreds of kid-skinnes. For the procuring of which and of other commodities at the best and first hand the sayd Thomas and William were to make their abode at Santa Cruz, and to remaine there as factours for the abovesayd M. Nicolas Thorne. And here also I thought good to signifie, that in the sayd letters mention is made of one Thomas Tison an English man, who before the foresayd yere 1526 had found the way to the West Indies, and was there resident, unto whom the sayd M. Nicolas Thorne sent certaine armour and other commodities specified in the letter, aforesayd. A description of the fortunate Hands, otherwise called the Hands of Canada, with their strange fruits and commodities: composed by Thomas Nicols English man, who remained there the space of seven yeeres together. Ine intent is particularly to speake of the in Canaria Hands, which are seven number, wherein I dwelt the space of seven yeres and more, because I finde such variety in sundry writers, and especially great untruths, in a booke called The New found world Antarctike, set out by a French man called Andrew Thevet, the which his booke he dedicated to the Cardinall of Sens, keeper of the great seale of France. It appeareth by the sayd booke that he had read the works.of sundry Phylosophers, Astronomers, and Cosmographers, whose opinions he gathered together. But 