Certaine Articles delivered to M. John Lok, by Sir William Gerard Knight, M. William Winter, M. Benjamin Gonson, M. Anthony Hickman, and M. Edward Castelin the 8 to of September 1561, touching a voyage Guinea. A remembrance for you M. Lok at your comming to the coast of Guinie. Irst, when God shal send you thither, to procure, as you passe alongst the coast, to understand what rivers, havens, or there be; and to make harboroughs your selfe a plat thereof, setting those places which you shall thinke materiall in your sayd plat, with their true elevations. Also you shall learne what commodities doe belong to the places where you shall touch, and what may be good for them. It is thought good, that having a fort upon the coast The English of Mina in the king of Habaans country, it would serve ™arch"nts r intend to to great purpose: wherrore you are especially sent to fortifie in consider where the fort might be best placed, and upon Ghinea,inthe what ground: wherein are to be noted these things king of %%£* following. -ii ^ b , 1. That the ground so serve, that it joyne to the sea on the one part, so as shippes and boats may come to lade and unlade. 2. What molde of earth the ground is of. 3. What timber or wood may be had, and how it will be caried. 4. What provision of victuals may be had in the countrey: and what kinde of our victuals will best serve to continue. 5. The place must be naturally strong, or such as may be made strong with a small charge, and afterwards kept with a few men. 6. How water may be provided, if there be none to be had in the ground where the fort shall stand, or neere to it. 7. What helpe is to be had from the people of the the building of it, or for the countrey, either for defence thereof. [II. ii. 53.] To moove the king of Haban a farre off, for The king of t he m aking of a fort, and to note how he will like it; but use your communication so, that although there might fall out good cause for the doing of it, yet he do not understand your meaning. Search the countrey so farre as you may, both alongst the coast, and into the land. To learne what became of the marchants that were left at Benin. The matters which shall be of importance to be noted we nothing doubt that you will omit, wherefore we referre the order of these affaires to your good discretion. Also we pray you as occasion shall serve that you ayd and helpe our factours, both with your counsell and otherwise; and thus God send you safely to returne. William Gerrard, William Winter, Benjamin Gonson, Anthony Hickman, Edward Castelin.