The successe of this Voiage in part appeareth [H.". 5&] Indies, made by certaine briefe relations extracted out of the second voyage of Sir John Hawkins to the West in the sayd yeere 1564. which I thought good to set downe for want of further instructions, which hitherto I could not by any meanes come by, albeit I have used all possible indevour for the obtaining of the same: Take them therefore in the meane season as foloweth. Aster John Hawkins, with the Jesus of Lubeck a ship of 700. tunnes, and the Salomon, a ship of 7 score, the Tiger a barke of 50, and the Swalow of 30 tunnes, being all well furnished with men to the number of one hundred threescore and ten, as also with ordinance and victuall requisite for such a voiage, departed out of Plimmouth the 18 day of October in the yeere of our Lord 1564. with a prosperous winde: at which departing, in cutting the foresaile, a marveilous misfortune happened to one of the officers in the ship, who by the pullie of the sheat was slaine out of hand being a sorowfull beginning to them all. And after their setting out 10 leagues to the Sea, hee met the same day with the Minion a ship of the Queens Majesties, The Minion whereof was captaine David Carlet, & also her consort °fthe Queenethe John Baptist of London being bound to Guinea like- wise, who hailed one the other after the custome of the sea, with certaine pieces of ordinance for joy of their meeting: which done, the Minion departed from him to seeke her other consort the Merline of London, which was a sterne out of sight, leaving in M. Hawkins companie the John Baptist her other consort. Thus sailing forwards on their way with a prosperous wind until the 21 of the same moneth, at that time a great storme arose, the wind being at Northeast about 9 of the clocke at night, and continued so 23 houres together, in which storme M. Hawkins lost the company of the John Baptist aforesaid, and of his pinnasse called the Swallow, the other 3 ships being sore beaten with the storme. The 23 day the Swalow, to his no small rejoicing, came to him againe in the night 10 leagues to the Northward of Cape Finister, having put roomer and not being able to double the Cape, in that there rose a contrary wind at Southwest. The 25 the wind continuing contrary, he put into a place in Galicia called Ferol, where he remained 5 daies and appointed all the masters of his ships an order for the keeping of good company. The 26 day the Minion came in also where he was, for the rejoycing whereof he gave them certaine pieces of ordinance after the curtesie of the Sea for their welcome, but the Minions men had no mirth because of their ^ r r • J ^ 1 ^_ j 1 The firing and consort the Merline, whom at their departure from M. s™kin8 °fthe, Hawkins upon the coast of England, they went to seeke, Merline bound • 1 1 for Guinea aric* " a v i n g m et w l t h her, kept company two dayes together, and at last by misfortune of fire (through the negligence of one of the gunners) the pouder in the gunners roome was set on fire, which with the first blast stroke out her poope, and therewithall lost 3 men, besides many sore burned (which escaped by the Brigandine being at her sterne) and immediatly to the great losse of the owners, and most horrible sight of the beholders, she sunke before their eies. The 30 day of the moneth M. Hawkins with his consorts and company of the Minion having now both the Brigandines at her sterne, weighed anker, and set saile on their voiage having a prosperous wind thereunto. The 4 of November they had sight of the Hand of Madera, and the 6 day of Teneriffa, which they thought to have bene the Canarie, in that they supposed themselves to have bene to the Eastward of Teneriffa but were not: but the Minion beyng 3 or 4 leagues a head of us kept on her course to Teneriffa, having better sight thereof then the other had, and by that means they parted company. The aforesaid Sir John Hawkins passing on his voiage by Cavo Verde, and Sierra Leona, and afterward crossing over the maine Ocean comming to the towne of Burboroata upon the coast of Terra firma in the West Indies, had further information of the evill successe of this Guinean voyage, as in the same hereafter is verbatim mentioned. The 29 of April, we being at anker without the road, a French ship called the green Dragon of Newhaven, whereof was captaine one Bon Temps came in, who saluted us after the maner of the sea, with certaine pieces of ordinance, and we resaluted him with the like againe: with whom having communication, he declared that hee had bene at the Mina in Guinea, and was beaten off by the Portugals gallies, and enforced to come thither to make sale of such wares as he had: and further that the like was hapned unto the Minion: also, that captaine David Carlet, & a marchant, with a dozen mariners were betraied by the Negros at their first arrivall thither, remaining prisoners with the Portugals, besides other misadventures of the losse of their men hapned through the great lacke of fresh water, with great doubts of bringing home the ships: which was most sorowfull for us to understand. 265