indebted, summes the Emperors pleasure and commandement was, that they should without further ex- cuse or delay, pay and discharge the same. And thus at length I was dismissed with great honour and speciall countenance, such as hath not ordinarily bene shewed to other Ambassadors of the Christians. And touching the private affaires intreated upon betwixt her Majestie and the Emperour, I had letters from him to satisfie her highnesse therein. So to conclude, having received the like honourable conduct from his Court, as I had for my part at my first landing, I embarked my selfe with my foresaid company, and arriving not long after in England, I repaired to her Majesties court, & ended my Ambassage to her highnesse good liking, with relation of my service performed. The voyage of Thomas Stukeley, wrongfully called Marques of Ireland, into Barbary 1578. Written by Johannes Thomas Freigius in Historia de caede Sebastiani Regis Lusitaniae. Enerant autem ad regem etiam sexcenti Itali, quos Papa subministrarat, Comiti Irlandiae : qui cum Vlissiponem tribus instructis navibus appulisset Regi operam suam condixit, eumque in bellum sequi promisit. Cap. 7. Totum exercitum divisit in quatuor acies quadratas: In dextro latere primum agmen erat Velitum & militum Tingitanorum, eosque ducebat Alvarus Peresius de Tavara: sinistram aciem seu mediam tenebant Germani & Itali, quibus imperabat Marchio Irlandiae, &c. Cap. 11. Inter nobiles qui in hoc praelio ceciderunt, fuerunt, regem Sebastianum, dux de Avero, Episcopi praeter Conimbricensis & Portuensis, Commissarius generalis a Papa missus Marchio Irlandiae, Christophorus de Tavora, & plures alii. Cap. 13. The same in English. HHHere came also to Don Sebastian the King of A Portugal 600. Italians, whom the Pope sent under the conduct of the * Marques of Hand: who being in t " e w a r r e s 5 **cThomas Stukeley was arrived at Lisbone with three tall ships, proffered his service to the king, and promised to attend upon him wrongfully indued with , this title [II. ii. 68.] He divided the whole Armie into 4. squadrons : upon the right wing stood the first squadron, consisting of men lightly armed or skirmishers and of the souldiers of Tangier, Generall of whom was Don Alvaro Perez de Tavara: the left or midle squadron consisted of Germanes and Italians, under the command of the Marques of Irland, &c. cap. 7. Q Of Noblemen were slaine in this battell (besides Don Sebastian the king) the duke de Avero, the two bishops of Coimbra & of Porto, the Marques of Irland sent by the Pope as his Commissary generall, Christopher de Tavara, and many others, cap. 13. IT is further also to be remembred, that divers other English gentlemen were in this battell, whereof the most part were slaine; and among others M. Christopher Lyster was taken captive, and was there long detained in miserable servitude. Which gentleman although at length he happily escaped the cruel hands of the Moores; yet returning home into England, and for his manifold good parts being in the yeere 1586. employed by the honourable the Earle of Cumberland, in a voyage intended by the Streights of Magellan for the South sea, as Viceadmirall, (wherein he shewed singular resolution and courage) and appointed afterward in divers places of speciall command and credite, was last of all miserably drowned in a great and rich Spanish prize upon the coast of Cornwall.