Certaine remembrances of an intended voyage to Brasill, and the River of Plate, by the Edward Cotton, a ship of 260 Tunnes of Master Edward Cotton of Southhampton, which perished through extreme negligence neare Rio grande in Guinie, the 17 of July 1583. ARticles of Covenants agreed upon betweene Edward Cotton Esquier, owner of the good ship called the Edward Cotton of Southhampton, and of all the marchandizes in her laden, of the one part, and William Huddie gentleman, Captaine of the said ship, John Hooper his Lieutenant, John Foster Master, Hugh Smith Pilot for the whole voyage, and William Cheesman marchant, on the other part. O observe and keepe the dayly order of Common prayer aboord the ship, and the companie to be called thereunto, at the least once in the day, to be pronounced openly. 2 Item, that they be ready with the first faire winde, to set saile and sailes in the voyage, and not to put into any port or harbour, but being forcibly constrained by weather, or other apparant and urgent causfe. 3 Item, that they take in, at or about the Isles of Cape Verde, to the quantitie of 25 or 30 tuns of salt, to be imployed among other the owners marchandize, at Santos, and S. Vincent, to his onely behoofe, and the rest of the salt, so much as shall be needed for victuall, and for saving of the hides to be kept aboord, & the same salt to be provided either at the fishermens hands neere the said Isles for trucke of commodities, or els to be taken in at the aforesaid Isles, at the discretion of the abovenamed. 4 Item, upon the due performance of this voiage, the owner bindeth himselfe by this deede, to yeeld unto any such of the companie, as shall refuse their shares before they depart from the coast of England, 20 markes a single share, for the dutie of the whole voiage, making not above 75. shares single in the whole, 5 Item, the company according as they be appointed by the officers of the said ship above named, shall at all times be most ready to doe their painfull indevor, not onely aboord, but in all labours at the land, according to the direction given by the above named officers, upon paine of forfeiture of their shares and wages, the same to be divided amongst the company. 6 Item, that the shares be taken at their returne out of al the traine oile, and hides of the seales, and of all other commodities gotten by their handie labour, and of the salt that shall be vended and other commodities, at, or neere the coast of Brasill, to allow after 9 li. the tunne freight, whereof one third to goe to the companie. 7 Item, that if any man shall practise by any devise or devises whatsoever, to alter the voiage from the true purpose and intent of the owner, viz. to make their first port at Santos, and Saint Vincent, and there to revictuall and traffike, and from thence to the river of Plate to make their voyage by the traine, and hide of the seales, [II. ii. 111.] with such other commodities as are there to be had, according as the owner, with divers that have government in the said ship, are bound to her highnesse by their deedes obligatorie in great summes, that all such practisers, upon due proofe made, shall loose their whole intertainement due by shares or otherwise for this sayde voyage to be adjudged by the Captaine, his Lieutenant, the Master, Pilot, and marchant, or three of them at the least, whereof the Captaine to be one. 8 Item, that the pinnesse be ready at al times to serve the marchants turne upon his demand, to take in wares and commodities, and to cary and recary to and from the shore, when, and as oft as neede shall be, and to give due attendance at the marchant and marchants direction, during the whole voyage. 9 Item, that no head or chiefe officer being set downe for such an officer under the hand of the owner, at the going to sea of the said shippe, shall or may be displaced from his said place or office, without great cause, and his misdemeanor to be adjudged by the Captaine, and his Lieutenant, the Master, the Pilot, and the marchant, or by the consent of three of them at the least. 10 Item, that upon the returne of the shippe to the coast of England, the Maister and Pilot put not into any port or harbour, to the Westward of Southhampton, but forced by weather, or such like urgent cause. William Huddie. John Hooper. Hugh Smith. John Foster. William Cheesman. A direction as well for the Captaine, and other my friends of the ship, as especially for William Cheesman Marchant, for the voyage to the river of Plate. there longer stay |T your comming to the Isle of Saint Sebastian, upon the coast of Brasill, you shall according to your discretions, make sale of such commodities, as you may thinke will be thereabout well vented, and likewise to buy commodities without then your making victuals be providing, but rather to bespeake commodities against your returne from the river of Plate, especially of Amber, Sugar, Greene ginger, Cotton wooll, and some quantitie of the peppers of the countrey there. Also for Parats and Munkies, and the beast called Serrabosa. Also you shall barrell up of the beefe called Petune, two or three barrels, and to lose no good oportunitie, to gather of the Indian figges, and the graines of them to preserve drie, in such quantitie as conveniently may be done: and touching the making of the traine, and preserving of the hides, I leave it wholly to the order and the discretion of 410 The Isle ofS. the chiefe of the companie. Also that in any road where the ship shall ride upon the coast of America, triall be made with the dragges, for the pearle Oisters, and the same being taken, to be opened and searched for pearle in the presence of the Captaine, his Lieutenant, the the Pilot, and marchant, or three of them, Master, whereof the Captaine or his Lieutenant to be one, and to remaine in the custodie of the Captaine and marchant, under two lockes, either of them to have a key to his owne locke, and that a true inventorie be delivered also to the Master and Pilot of the said pearle or other jewels of price gotten in the said voiage, to the intent that no partie be defrauded of his due, and that no concealment be made of any such thing upon 'forfeiture, the partie to lose his share and dutie for the voyage that shall so conceale and not reveale it unto the officers above named. Also to doe your best indevour to try for the best Ore of golde, silver, or other rich mettals whatsoever. Forget not also to bring the kernels and seeds of strange plants with you, the Palmito with his fruit inclosed in him. Serve God, keepe good watch, and stand alwayes upon your garde. Edward Cotton. These things being thus ordered, and the ship of the burden of 260 tunnes, with 83 men of all sortes furnished, and fully appointed for the voyage, began to set saile from Hurst Castle upon Friday the 20 of May, Anno 1583, and the 17 day of July ensuing fell with the coast of Guinie, to take in fresh water, where, through meere dissolute negligence, she perished upon a sand, with the most part of the men in her, as appeareth by the confession of one that escaped, the substance and tenor whereof is this. 411 [II. ii. 112.] The confession of William Bends Masters Mate in the Edward Cotton, the 21 of October, Ann. 1584. HE sayth, that the 17 day of July, Anno 1583. having some lacke of fresh water, they put roome upon the coast of Guinie, where they were set upon a sand about 8 leagues from the shore, and this Examinate, with 29 more, got into the pinnesse, who arrived in an Island, being desolate of people, and five miles in compasse, where they rested 18 dayes through force of weather, having nought to eate but grasse. The rest of the company the ship being splitted in two, and in quarters, got them into one of the after quarters, and by the helpe of raftes came also a shore into another Island neere to Rio grande, where they all died as he supposeth. The other 30 in the pinnesse, at the end of 18 dayes, departed that Island, and came to Saint Domingo, where comming on shore, they were taken of the Moores, & stripped naked. And they buried one Coxe an olde man alive, notwithstanding his pitifull lamentation and skrikings: the rest having Rice and water allowed them, lived there a certaine time. This Examinate was at last sold to a Portugall, with whom he dwelt the space of a quarter of a yere, and in the end, a Portugall Caravel comming thither, his master same with Negroes, and he obtained leave of his master to goe in the same Caravell, & by that meanes arrived at Lisbone, and from thence came into England the 17 of October, 1584, leaving behinde him of his companie alive, Richard Hacker, John Baker, John Mathew, and a boy, with two others which were gone beyond Saint Domingo: all which, as he saith, were so sicke and diseased, that he judgeth them to be long before this time dead. laded the Rio grande. One Coxe an old English man buried alive by the Moores of Rio grande in Guinea.