that our will and pleasure is, that the said trade and trafique shal cease, and be no longer continued into the saide coasts and partes of Guinea before limited: then immediatly from and after the ende of sixe moneths [II. ii. 126.] next insuing, after such signification & notification so to be given to any of the said Company and societie, as is aforesaid, or otherwise to our Officers in our ports of Exeter or Plimouth, by them to be notified to such as shall have interest in this speciall privilege, these our present letters Patents, and our graunt therein contained shall be utterly voyde, and of none effect, ne validitie in the lawe, to all intents and purposes: any thing before mentioned to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. Witnesse our selfe at Westminster, the thirde day of May, in the thirtieth yere of our Reigne 1588. A voyage to Benin beyond the Countrey of Guinea, set foorth by Master Bird and Master Newton Marchants of London, with a shippe called the Richard of Arundell, and a Pinesse; Written by James Welsh, who was chiefe Master of the said voyage, begunne in the yeere 1588. Pon the twelft of October wee wayed our ankers at Ratcliffe and went to Blackwall. And the next day sayling from thence, by reason of contrary winde and weather, wee made it the 25. of October before wee were able to reach Plimouth, and there we stayed (to our great expense of victuals) for lacke of winde and weather unto the 14. of December. On Saturday the said 14. of December we put from thence, and about midnight were thwart of the Lizart. Rio del oro is Thursday the second of January wee had sight of the in 22. degrees, ian(i n e e re Rio del oro, God be thanked, and there had andtfmm 22< d e g r e es o f latitude, and 47. minutes. The thirde of January wee had sight of Cavo de las Cavo de las Barbas, and it bare Southeast five leagues off. Barias. T he 4. we had sight of the Crosiers in the morning. Crosiers. Tuesday the 7. day we had sight of Cavo verde, and Cavo Verde, I finde this place to be in latitude 14. degrees, and 4 3. in *4- *?eg. minutes, being 4. leagues from the shoare. 43- OTFriday the 17. Cavo de Monte bare off us North Cavo de Northeast, we sounded and had 50. fathom blacke oase, Monteand at 2. of the clocke it bare North Northwest 8. leagues off. And Cavo Mensurado bare of us East and by South, Cavo Mensuand wee went Northeast with the maine : here the currant setteth to the East Southeast alongst the shoare, and at midnight wee sounded and had 26. fathome blacke oase. T he 18. in the morning we were thwart of a land much like Cavo verde, and it is as I judge 9. leagues from Cavo Mensurado; it is a hill sadlebacked, and there are 4. or 5. one after another: and 7. leagues to the Southward of that, we saw a row of hils sadlebacked also, and from Cavo Mensurado are many mountaines. Om T he 19. we were thwart Rio de Sestos, and the 20. Rio de Sestos. Cavo dos Baixos was North & by West 4. leagues off the shoare, and at afternoone there came a boate from the shoare with 3. Negroes, from a place (as they say) called Tabanoo. And towards evening we were thwart of an Tabanoo. Island, and a great many of small Islands or rockes to the Southward, and the currant came out of the Southerboord: we sounded and had 3 5 fathomes. °f T he 2 1. wee had a flat hill that bare North Northeast the shoare 4. leagues, and off us, and wee were from at 2. a clocke in the afternoone we spake with a French- A French ship man riding neere a place called Ratire, and another place at Rattrehard by called Crua. This Frenchman caried a letter from Crua. us to M. Newton: wee layd it on hull while wee were writing of our letter; and the current set us to the South- -d currant to ward a good pase alongst the shoare South Southeast. %Jjua*as* The 25. we were in the bight of the bay that is to the Westward of Capo de Tres puntas: the currant did set East Northeast. Gavo de tres puntas. THE ENGLISH VOYAGES The 28. we lay sixe glasses a hull tarying for the The last of January the middle part of Cape de tres puntas was thwart of us three leagues at seven of the clocke in the morning: and at eight the pinesse came to an anker: and wee prooved that the current setteth to the Eastward: and at sixe at night the uttermost lande bare East and by South 5. leagues, and we went Southwest, and Southwest and by South. Saturday the first of February 1588. we were thwart of a Round foreland, which I take to be the Eastermost part of Capo de tres puntas: and within the said Round foreland was a great bay with an Island in the said bay. The Castle of Mina. The second of February wee were thwart of the Castle of Mina, and when the thirde glasse of our Looke-out was spent, we spied under our Larbord-quarter one of their Boates with certaine Negroes, and one Portugale in [II. ii. 127.] the Boate, wee would have had him to come aboord, but he would not. And over the castle upon the hie rockes we did see as it might be two watch-houses, and they did shew very white: and we went eastnortheast. Two white watch-houses. Monte Redondo. The 4 in the morning we were thwart a great high hill, and up into the lande were more high ragged hilles, and those I reckoned to be but little short of Monte Redondo. Then I reckoned that we were 20 leagues Southeast-ward from the Mina, and at 11 of the clocke I sawe two hilles within the land, these hils I take to be 7 leagues from the first hils. And to sea-ward of these hilles is a bay, and at the east end of the bay another hill, and from the hils the landes lie verie low. We went Eastnortheast, and East and by North 22 leagues, and then East along the shore. Villa longa. The 6 we were short of Villa longa, and there we met with a Portugall Caravell. The 7 a faire temperate day, and all this day we road before Villa longa. The 8 at noone we set saile from Villa longa, and ten leagues from thence we ankered againe and stayed all that night in ten fadom water. The 9 we set saile, and all alongst the shore were very thicke woodes, and in the afternoone we were thwart a river, & to the Eastward of the river a litle way off Rio de Lagos, was a great high bush-tree as though it had no leaves, and at night we ankered with faire and temperate weather. The 10 we set sayle and went East, and East and by South 14 leagues along the shoare, which was so full of thicke woods, that in my judgement a man should have much to doe to passe through them, and towards night we ankered in 7 fadome with faire weather. The 11 we sayled East and by South, and three leagues from the shore we had but 5 fadome water, and all the wood upon the land was as even as if it had beene cut with a paire of gardeners sheeres, and in running of two leagues we descerned a high tuft of trees upon the brow of a land, which shewed like a Porpose head, and when wee came at it, it was but part of the lande, and a league further we saw a head-land very low and full of trees, and a great way from the land we had very shallow water, Very shallow then we lay South into the sea, because of the sands for water* to get into the deepe water, and when we found it deepe, we ankered in five fadom thwart the river of Jaya, in the rivers mouth. The 12 in the morning we road still in the rivers mouth. This day we sent the pinnesse and the boat on land with the marchants, but they came not againe untill the next morning. The shallowest part of this river is toward the West, where there is but 4 fadom and a halfe, and it is very broad. The next morning came the boate aboord, and they also said it was Rio de Jaya. Rio de Jaya. Here the currant setteth Westward, and the Eastermost land is higher then the Westermost. Thursday the 13 we set saile, and lay South Southeast along the shore, where the trees are wonderfull even, and the East shore is higher then the West shore, and when wee had sayled 18 leagues we had sight of a great river, A currant Westward. Tenfoote water upon the barre of Rio de Benin. THE ENGLISH VOYAGES then we ankered in three fadom and a halfe, and the currant went Westward. This river is the river of Benin, and two leagues from the maine it is very shallowe. The 15 we sent the boat and pinnesse into the river with the marchants, and after that we set saile, because we road in shallow water, and went Southsoutheast, and the starbord tacke aboord untill we came to five fathom water, where we road with the currant to the Westward: then came our boat out of the harbour and went aboord the pinnesse. The West part of the land was high browed much like the head of a Gurnard, and the Eastermost land was lower, and had on it three tufts of trees like stackes of wheate or corne, and the next day in the morning we sawe but two of those trees, by reason that we went more to the Eastward. And here we road still from the 14 of Februarie untill the 14 of Aprill, with the winde at Southwest. The 16 of Februarie we rode still in 5 fadome, and the currant ranne still to the Westward, the winde at Southwest, and the boat and pinnesse came to us againe out of the river, and told us that there was but ten foote water upon the barre. All that night was drowsie, and yet reasonable temperate. The 17 a close day the winde at Southwest. Our marchants wayed their goods and put them aboord the pinnesse to goe into the river, and there came a great currant out of the river and set to the Westward. The 18 the marchants went with the boat and pinnesse into the river with their commodities. This day was close and drowsie, with thunder, raine and lightning. The 24 a close morning and temperate, and in the. afternoone the boat came to us out of the river from our marchants. Tuesday the 4 of March, a close soultry hot morning, the currant went to the Westward, and much troubled water came out of the river. The 16 our pinnesse came a boord and Anthonie Ingram in her3 & she brought in her 94 bags of pepper, and 28 Elephants teeth, and the Master of her and all [II. ii. 128.] his company were sicke. This was a temperate day and the winde at Southwest. sicknesse a™"gour The 17. 18. and 19 were faire temperate weather and the winde at Southwest. This day the pinnesse went into the river againe, and caried the Purser and the Surgion. The 25 of the said moneth 1589 we sent the boate into the river. The 30 our pinnesse came from Benin, and brought sorowfull newes, that Thomas Hemsted was dead and our The death of Captaine also, and she brought with her 159 Cerons or p^pJ^Eksackes of pepper and Elephants teeth. phants teeth. Note that in all the time of our abiding here, in the A good note. mouth of the river of Benin, and in all the coast hereabout it is faire temperate weather, when the winde is at Southwest. And when the winde is at Northeast and Northerly, then it raineth, with lightning and thunder, and is very intemperate weather. The 13 of Aprill 1589 we set saile homewards in the name of Jesus. In the morning we sayled with the winde at Southwest, and lay West and by North, but it prooved calme all that night, and the currant Southeast. The 14 the river of Benin was Northeast 7 leagues from the shore, and there was litle winde and towards night calme. The 17 a faire temperate day the winde variable, and we had of latitude foure degrees and 20 minutes. The 25 a faire temperate day the winde variable, and here we had three degrees & 29 minuts of latitude. The 8 of May we had sight of the shore, which was part of Cavo de Monte, but we did not thinke we had beene so farre, but it came so to passe by reason of the currant. deceived with the currant. The 9 we had sight of Cavo de monte. The 17 a darke drowsie day, this was the first night that I tooke the North starre. 455 In this place M. Towrson was in like maner A deceitpfull The 26 a temperate day with litle winde, and we were in 12 degrees and 13 minutes of latitude. The 30 we met a great sea out of the Northwest. The 6 of June we found it as temperate as if we had beene in England, & yet we were within the height of the sunne, for it was declined 23 degrees, and 26 minuts to the Northward, and we had 15 degrees of latitude. The 8 faire and temperate as in England, here we met with a counter sea, out of the Southborde. The 15a faire temperate day, the winde variable, here we had 18 degrees and fiftie nine minutes. Rockweedor The 12 of July in 30 degrees of latitude we met with Saragassa all g r e at s t o re of roc kWeed, which did stick together like aongthesea. c l u s t e rs o f grapeSj a n d this continued with us untill the 17 of the said moneth, and then we saw no more, at which 17 day we were in two and thirtie degrees sixe and fortie minutes of latitude. The 25 at sixe of the clocke in the morning, we had sight of the Isle of Pike, it bare North and by East from us, we being 15 leagues off. The 27 we spake with the poste of London and she told us good newes of England. The nine and twentieth we had sight of the Island of Cuervo, and the 30 we saw the Island of Flores. The 27 of August in 41 degrees of latitude we saw 9 saile of Britons, and three of them followed us untill noone, and then gave us over. The 30 we had sight of Cape Finisterre. The eight of September at night wee put into Plimouth sound, and road in Causon bay all night. The 9 we put into Catwater and there stayed untill the 28 of September, by reason of want of men and sicknesse. The nine and twentieth we set sayle from Plimouth, and arrived at London the second of October 1589. The commodities that we caried in this voyage were cloth both linnen & wollen, yron worke of sundry sorts, Manillios or bracelets of copper, glasse beades, and corrall. tn The commodities that we brought home were pepper and Elephants teeth, oyle of palme, cloth made of Cotton wooll very curiously woven, and cloth made of the barke of palme trees. Their money is pretie white [II. ii. 129.] shels, for golde and silver we saw none. They have also great store of cotton growing: their bread is a kind of roots, they call it Inamia, and when it is well sodden Inamia,akind I would leave our bread to eat of it, it is pleasant in °^^ad eating, and light of digestion, the roote thereof is as bigge as a mans arme. Our men upon fish-dayes had rather eate the rootes with oyle and vineger, then to eate good stockfish. There are great store of palme trees, out of the which they gather great store of wine, wlne °f'Palm which wine is white and very pleasant, & we should buy treeSm two gallons of it for 20 shels. They have good store of sope, and it smelleth like beaten violets. Also many pretie fine mats and baskets that they make, and spoones of Elephants teeth very curiously wrought with divers proportions of foules and beasts made upon them. There is upon the coast wonderfull great lightning and thunder, in so much as I never hard the like in no Countrey, for it would make the decke or hatches tremble under our feete, and before we were well acquainted with it, we were fearefull, but God be thanked we had no harme. The people are very gentle and loving, and they goe naked both men and women untill they be married, and then they goe covered from the middle downe to the Abundance of knees. They would bring our men earthen pottes of hony. the quantitie of two gallons, full of hony and hony TJaspresercombes for 100 shelles. They would also bring great v^^tb store of Oranges and Plantans which is a fruit groweth upon a tree, and is very like unto a Cucumber hogshead of It hath pleased God of &****" *» but very pleasant in eating. his merceifull goodnesse to give me the knowledge how to preserve fresh water with little cost, which did serve the author told us sixe moneths at the sea, & when we came into Plim- m. that lasting into an ^ ^^ mouth it was much wondered at, of the principal men of the towne, who said that there was not sweeter water in any spring in Plimouth. Thus doth God provide for his creatures, unto whom be praise now and for evermore, Amen. The voiage set forth by M. John Newton, and M. John Bird marchants of London to the kindome and Citie of Benin in Africa, with a ship called the Richard of Arundell, and a pinnesse, in the yere 1588. briefely set downe in this letter following, written by the chiefe Factor in the voyage to the foresaid Marchants at the time of the ships first arrivall at Plimouth. lOrshipful Sirs, the discourse of our whole proceeding in this voyage wil aske more time and a person in better health then I am at this present, so that I trust you will pardon me, till my comming up to you: in the meane time let this in the suffice. Whereas we departed moneth of December from the coast of England with your good ship the Richard of Arundell and the pinnesse, we held on our direct course towards our appointed port, and the 14 day of Februarie following we arrived in the haven of Benin, where we found not water enough to carry the ship over the barre, so that we left her without in the road, and with the pinnesse & ship boat, into which we had put the chiefest of our marwhere we arrived the 20 of February, the foresaid Goto being the neerest place that we could come to by water, to go for Benin. From thence we presently sent Negroes to the king, to certifie him of our arrivall, and of the cause of our comming thither: who returned to us againe the 22 day with a noble man in their 458