of Spaine from Angola by one Baltazar Almeida de Sousa, touching the state of the foresayd countrey, written the 21 of May, 1591. Now I thought He 26 of July I certified your majestie by John Frere de Bendanha your majesties pay-master and commissioner, with the governour Paulo Dias, which is lately deceased, of all things that happened the 28 of December in the yere last it conpast 1590. venient to advertise your majestie what hath fallen out since that time, which is as foloweth. The governour Luis Serrano encamped himselfe eight leagues from Cabasa, where the Negro king dwelleth, with 350 Portugal souldiers: & afterward being there encamped, it hapned that the king of Matamba sent a strong and mightie army, & in warlike maner, with strange inventions for the sayd purpose. So the king of Angola gave this other king battell, and the governour sent 114 souldiers Portugals to - helpe the said king of Angola: in which battell it was the will of God that our army was overthrowen and all slaine, as well our Portugals as the Moores which tooke part with them. So with this overthrow it happened that this realme the second time hath rebelled against your majestie. Hereupon the Governour assembling the rest of his Portugall souldiers, to the number of 250 altogether, went to Amasanguano, which is now his place of abode. Moreover, besides the manifold losses which have befallen the Portugals in this realme, your majestie hath sustained other great misfortunes both in your lands and goods. And because I cannot personally come to certifie your majestie thereof, I thought it good to write some part of the same whereby your majestie may understand the estate of this countrey. This realme, for the most 468 Paulo Dias Governour of Angola. The king of Matamba. \ \\ Portugals slain in Angola. Amasanguano the Portugals abode in to Theonelyway ^ j ^ ^ r *" part thereof hath twise bene wonne, and twise lost for want of good government. For here have bene many governours which have pretended to do justice, but have pitifully neglected the same, and practised the cleane contrary. And this I know to be most true. the onely way to recover this realme, and But augment your majesties lands, goods and treasure, must be by sending some noble and mighty man to rule here, ^om unt0 which must bring authoritie from your majestie, and by obedience. taking streight order that every captaine which doeth conquere here may bee rewarded according to his deserts. Likewise your majestie must send hither 2000 good souldiers, with munition and sufficient store of provision for them. And by this means your highnesse shall know what yeerely revenue Angola will yeeld unto your coffers, and what profit will grow thereof. Otherwise your majestie shall reape but litle benefit here. If with my presence I may doe your majestie any service in giving information of the state of this realme, as one which have had experience thereof, and have seene the order of it, upon the understanding of your majesties pleasure herein, I will doe my best indevour. And the Anusualltrick l™dgover~ cause wherefore I have not done this heretofore hath °{Q bene, by reason that the Governours of this realme would suffer none of the captaines which have conquered this countrey to informe your majestie of that which is needfull for your service, and the augmenting of this conquest. Our lord preserve your catholique person with increase of many kingdomes, and the augmentation of youre crowne. Written in the conquest of the realme of Angola the 21 of May 1591. Your majesties most loiall subject, Baltazar Almeida de Souza. 469