with us 1587. The Queenes letters to the Emperour. THE ENGLISH VOYAGES ing to his desert. And so our Lord keepe you in his safegard. Written at our royall court in Marocco, which God maintaine, the 20. day of the moneth Remodan, Anno II 996. The Queenes Majesties letters to the Emperour of Marocco. Uy alto, y muy poderoso Sennor, Aviendo entendido de parte de nuestro Agente la mucha aficion, y volontad, que nos teneys, y quanta honra, y favor le hazeys por amor nuestro, para dar nos tanto mayor testimonio de vuestra amistad, hemos recebido de lo uno y de lo otro muy grancfe contento, y satisfacion: y assy no podemos dexar de agradesceroslo, como mereceys. Vuestras cartas hemos tambien recibido, y con ellas holga- donos infinitamente, por venir de parte de un Principe, a quien tenemos tanta obligacion. Nuestro Agente nos ha escripto sobre ciertas cosas, que desseays ser os embiadas de aqui: Y, aunque queriamos poder os en ello puntualmente complazer, como pidiz, ha succedido, que las guerras, en que stamos al presente occupadas, no nos lo consienten del todo: Hemos pero mandado, que se os satisfaga en parte, y conforme a lo que por agora la necessitad nos permite, como mas particularmente os lo declarara nuestro Agente: esperando, que lo reciberreys en buena parte y conforme al animo, con que os lo concedemos. Y porque nos ha sido referido, que aveys prometido de proceder contra un Juan Herman vassallo nuestro, (el qual nos ha gravemente offendido) de la manera, que os lo demandaremos, avemos dado orden a nuestro dicho Agente de deziros mas parcularmente lo que desseamos ser hecho a cerca deste negocio, rogando os, que lo mandeys assi complir: y que seays servido de favorescer siempre al dicho Agente, y tener lo en buen credito, como hasta agora aveys hecho, sin permiter, que nadie os haga mudar de parecer a cerca de las calumnias, que le podran levantar, ny dudar, que no complamos muy por entero todo, lo que de nuestra parte os prometiere. Nuestro Sennor guarde vostra muy alta y muy poderosa persona. Hecha en nuestra Corte Real de Grenewich a 20. de Julio 1587. The same in English. Ight high and mightie Prince, Having understood from our Agent the great affection and good wil which you beare us, and how great honour and favor you shew him for our sake, to the end to give us more ample testimonie of your friendship, we have received very great contentment & satisfaction, aswel of the one as of the other: and withall we could not omit to magnifie you, according to your desert. We have also received your letters, and do not a litle rejoyce thereof, because they come from a prince unto whom we are so much beholden. Our Agent hath written unto us concerning certaine things which you desire to bee sent unto you from hence. And albeit we wish that we could particularly satisfie you, as you desire, yet it is fallen out, that the warres, wherin at this present we be busied, wil not suffer us fully to doe the same: neverthelesse, wee have commaunded according as the present necessitie doeth permit us, as our Agent will declare unto you more particularly, hoping you will receive it in good part, and according to the good will wherewith wee graunt the same. And because it hath bene signified unto us that you have promised to proceed in justice against one John Herman John Herman our subject, which hath grievously offended us, in such an' E*gItsh sort as wee have sent word unto you, wee have given order to our said Agent to informe you more particularly in that which we desire to be done in this busines, praying you also to command the same to be 433 in part, and [II. ii. 120.] to satisfie you 2 E put in execution: and that it would please you alwayes to favour our said Agent and to hold him in good credite, as you have done hitherto, not suffering your selfe to be changed in your opinion, for all the false reports which they may raise against him, nor to doubt that wee will not accomplish at large all that he shall promise you on our behalfe. Our Lord keepe and preserve your right high and mightie person. Written in our royall Court at Greenwich the 20. of July 1587. A voyage the other the Azores with two pinases, the to the one called the Serpent, and them Mary Sparke of Plimouth, both of belonging to Sir Walter Ralegh, written by John Evesham Gentleman, wherein were taken the governour, of the Isle of Sainct Michael, and Pedro Sarmiento governour of the Straits of Magalanes, in the yeere 1586. two Pinases, He 10. of June 1586. we departed from Plimouth with the one named the Serpent, of the burden of 35. Tunnes, and the other the Mary Sparke of Plimouth of the burthen of 50. Tuns, both of them belonging to sir Walter Ralegh knight; and directing our course towards the coast of Spaine, & from thence towards the Isles of the Azores, we tooke a small laden with Sumacke and other commodities, barke t he governour of S. Michaels Island, w h e r e in w as with him. And from thence we sailed to the Island of Graciosa, to the Westward of the Island of Tercera, where we discried a saile, and bearing with her wee found her to be a Spaniard: But at the first not greatly respecting whom we tooke, so that we might have enriched our selves, which was the cause of this our travaile, and for that we would not bee knowen of 434 flM'hi 