The valiant fight performed in the Straight of Gibraltar, by the Centurion of London, against five Spanish Gallies, in the moneth of April I 5 9 I |N the moneth of November 1590, there were sundry shippes appertaining to severall Marchants of London, which foorth with were rigged and fraught marchandize, for sundry places within the Straight of Gibraltar: who, together having winde and weather, which ofttime fell out very uncertaine, arrived safely in short space, at such places as they desired. Among whom was the Centurion of London, a very tall shippe of burden, yet but weakely manned, as appeareth by this discourse following. This aforesaid shippe called The Centurion safely arrived at Marseils, where after they had delivered their goods, they stayed about the space of five weekes, and better, and then tooke in lading, intending to returne to England. Now when the Centurion was ready to come away from Marseils, there were sundry other shippes of smaller burden which entreated the Master thereof, (whose name is Robert Bradshaw, dwelling at Lime-house) to stay a day or two for them, untill they were in a readinesse to depart with them, thereby perswading them, that it would be farre better for them to stay and goe together in respect of their assistance, then to depart of themselves without company, and so happily for want of aide fall into the hands of their enemies in the Spanish Gallies. Upon which reasonable perswasion, notwithstanding that this shippe was of such sufficiencie as they might hazard her in the danger of the Sea, yet they stayed for those litle shippes, according to their request, who together did put to Sea from Marseils, and vowed in generall not to flie one from another, if they should happen to meete with any Spanish Gallies. These small shippes, accompanied with the Centurion, sayling along the coast of Spaine, were upon Easter day in the Straight of Gibraltar suddenly becalmed, where immediatly they saw sundry Gallies make towards them,, in very valiant and couragious sort: the chiefe Leaders and souldiers in those Gallies bravely apparelled in silke coates, with their silver whistles about their neckes, and great plumes of feathers in their hattes, who with their Calivers shot at the Centurion so fast as they might: sa that by 10. of the clocke and somewhat before, they had boorded the Centurion, who before their comming had prepared for them, and intended to give them so soure a welcome as they might. And thereupon having prepared their close fights, and all things in a readinesse, they called upon God, on whom onely they trusted: and having made their prayers, and cheered up one another to fight so long as life endured, they beganne to discharge their great Ordinance upon the Gallies, but the little shippes durst not come forward, but lay aloofe, while five Gallies had boorded them, yea and with their grapling irons made their Gallies fast to the said shippe called the Centurion. The Gallies were grapled to the Centurion in this maner, two lay on one side, and two on another, and the Admirall lay full in the sterne, which galled and battered the Centurion so sore, that her maine Maste was greatly weakened, her sailes filled with many holes, and the Mizzen and sterne made almost unserviceable. During which time there was a sore and deadly fight on both sides, in which the Trumpet of the Centurion sounded foorth the deadly points of warre, and encouraged them to fight manfully against their adversaries: on the the contrary part, there was no warlike Musicke in [II. ii. 169.J Spanish Gallies, but onely their whistles of silver, which they sounded foorth to their owne contentment: in which fight many a Spaniard was turned into the Sea, and they in multitudes came crauling and hung upon the side of the shippe, intending to have entred into the same, but such was the courage of the Englishmen, that so fast as the Spaniards did come to enter, they gave them such entertainment, that some of them were glad to tumble alive into the Sea, being remedilesse for ever to get up alive. In the Centurion there were in all, of men and boyes, fourtie and eight, who together fought most valiantly, and so galled the enemie, that many a brave and lustie Spaniard lost his life in that place. The Centurion was fired five several! times, with wilde fire and other provision, which the Spaniards threw in for that purpose: yet, God be thanked, by the great and diligent foresight of the Master it did no harme at all. the Gallies In every of there were about 200. souldiers: who together with the shot, spoiled, rent, and battered the Centurion very sore, shot through her maine Maste, and slew 4. of the men in the said shippe, the one of them being the Masters mate. Ten other persons were hurt, by meanes of splinters which the Spaniards shotte: yea, in the ende when their provision was almost spent, they were constrained to shoote at them hammers, and the chaines from their slaves, and yet God bee thanked, they received no more the domage: but by spoyling and overwearying of Spaniards, the Englishmen constrained them to ungrapple themselves, and get them going: and sure if there had bene any other fresh shippe or succour to have relieved and assisted the Centurion, they had slaine, suncke, or taken all those Gallies and their Souldiers. The Dolphin lay a loofe off and durst not come neere, while the other two small shippes fledde away, so that one of the Gallies went from the Centurion and set upon the Dolphin, which shippe immediatly was set on fire with their owne powder, whereby both men and shippe perished: but whether it was with their good wills or no, that was not knowen unto the Centurion, but sure, if it had come forward, and bene an? aide unto the Centurion, it is to bee supposed that it had not perished. Five houres and a halfe this fight continued, in which time both were glad to depart onely to breath themselves, but when the Spaniards were gone, they never durst returne to fight: yet the next day sixe other Gallies came and looked at them, but durst not at any hand meddle with them. Thus God delivered them from the handes of their enemies, and gave them the victory: for which they heartily praised him, and not long after safely arrived in London. Iggf0 There were present at this fight Master John Hawes Marchant, and sundry other of good accompt. A report of the trueth of the fight about the last of August 1591. Isles of Ac^ores, the betwixt the Revenge, one of her Majesties shippes, and an Armada of the king of Spaine; Penned by the honourable Sir Walter Ralegh knight. this Ecause the rumours are diversly spred^ in England as in the Lowe as well late countreis and elsewhere, of encounter betweene her Majesties ships and the Armada of Spaine; and that the Spaniards according to their usuall maner,, fill the world with their vaine-glorious vaunts, making great apparance of victories, when on the contrary, themselves are most commonly and shamefully beaten and dishonoured; thereby hoping to possesse the ignorant multitude by anticipating & forerunning false reports: It is agreeable with all good reason, for manifestation of the truth, to overcome falshood and un- trueth; that the beginning, continuance and successe of