de Moura at Lisbon, from the Hand and Castle of Arguin, standing a little to the Southward of Cape Blanco, in the Northerly latitude of 19 degrees, concerning the rich and secret trade from the inland of Africa thither: Anno 1591. S concerning the trade to this Castle and Hand of Arguin, your worship is to understand, that if it would please the kings majesty to send hither two or in a yeere with three caravels once Commodities Jit for Arguin. v- | 7 U O E S^ ^1 Flanders and Spanish commodities, as is no 1 Bracelets of glasse, Knives, Belles, Linnen-cloth, Looking-glasses, with other kinds of small wares, his highnesse might do great good here. For 50 leagues up into the land the Moores have many exceeding rich golde mines; insomuch that they bring downe their golde to this Castle to traffique with u s: and for a small trifle they will give us a great wedge trade, the sayd of gold. And because here Moores cary their golde to Fez being 250 leagues distant from hence, and there doe exchange the same for the foresayd kindes of commodities. By this meanes also his majesty might stop that passage, and keepe the king of Fez from so huge a masse of golde. Scarlet-clothes, and fine Purples are greatly accepted of in these parts. It is a most fertile countrey within the land, and yeeldeth great store of Wheat, flesh of all kindes, and abundance of fruits. Therefore, if it were possible, you should do well to deale with his majesty, either himselfe to send a couple of caravels, or to give your worship leave to traffique here: for here is a very good harbour where ships may ride at ancre hard by the Castle. The countrey where all the golde-mines are is called The In this kingdome are great store kingdome of Darha. 88 Wedges of golde given for small trifles. Scarlet & fine Purple cloth greatly accepted. A good harbor before the Castle of * -I A 11 ?k reade Leo of cities and townes; and in every city and towne a Captaine with certaine souldiers; which Captaines are lords and owners of the sayd townes. One city there is Concerning called Couton, another Xanigeton, as also the cities of th" kifdme 1 Tubguer, Azegue, Amader, Quaherque, and the towne Affuanus a of Faroo. The which townes and cities are very great little after the and fairely built, being inhabited by rich Moores, and beaming of abounding with all kinde of cattell, Barley and Dates. hts 6 booke' And here is such plenty of golde found upon the sands by the rivers side, that the sayd Moores usually carry the same Northward to Marocco, and Southward to the city of Tombuto in the land of Negros, which city standeth about 300 leagues from the kingdome of Darha; and this kingdome is but 60 leagues from this Hand and Castle of Arguin. Wherefore I beseech your worship to put his majesty in remembrance hereof; for the sayd cities and townes are but ten dayes journey from hence. I heartily wish that his majesty would send two or three marchants to see the state of the Countrey, who might travell to the aforesayd cities, to understand of their rich trade. For any man may go safe and come safe from troubling of your thus without those places. And worship any further, I humbly take my leave. From the Hand and Castle of Arguin the 20 of January 1591. Your worships servant Melchior Petoney. 89