dayes after in the Expedition of London, and two more in a Flemish flie-boat, and one in the Mary Edward also of London, other two of our number died in the countrey of the bloodie-fluxe: the one at our first imprisonment at Marocco, whose name was George Hancock, and the other at S. Cruz, whose name was Robert Swancon, whose death was hastened by eating of rootes and other unnaturall things to slake their raging hunger in our travaile, and by our hard and cold lodging in the open fields without tents. Thus of fiftie persons through the rashnesse of an unskilfull Master ten onely survived of us, and after a thousand miseries returned home poore, sicke, and feeble into our countrey. Richard Johnson. William Williams Carpenter. John Silvester. John Durham. Abraham Rouse. John Matthewes. Thomas Whiting. William Church. John Fox. Thomas Henmore. The letters of the Queenes most excellent Majestie sent by one Laurence Aldersey unto the Emperour of Aethiopia, 1597. Invictissimo potentissimoque Abassenorum regi, magnoque utriusque Aethiopia? imperatori &c. iEthiopiae jjLizabetha dei gratia Angliae, Franciae, & Hiberniae regina, fidei defensor &c. summo ac potentissimo imperatori salutem. Quod ab omnibus qui ubivis terrarum ac gentium sunt regibus principibusque praestari par & aequum est, ut intervallo quanquam maximo dissiti, & moribus ac legibus discrepantes, communem tamen generis humani societatem tueri & conservare, mutuaque ut occasio ferret, charitatis & benevolentiae officia velint exercere: in eo nos de vestra fide atque humanitate spem certissimam concipientes, huic subito 129 locorum VII centi, hasce literas nostras, quibus & nostra erga vos benevolentia testata sit, & ilium hinc profectum esse constet, potissimilim vobis indicandas dedimus. Qui cum orbis terrarum perscrutandi cognoscendique studio permotus, multis antehac regionibus peragratis, jam tandem in eas regiones, quae vestrae ditionis sunt, longum, periculosiimque iter instituat: cum ipse existimavit, turn nos etiam sumus in eadem opinione, ad incolumitatem suam, atque etiam ad gratiam apud vos, plurimum illi profuturum, si diplomate nostro munitus, benevolentiae nostrae & profectionis hinc suae testimonium ad vos deferret. Nam cum summus ille mundi conditor rectorque praepotens deus, regibus principibiisque qui suam vicem gerunt, orbem terrarum, suis cuique finibus pro rata portione designatis, regendum atque administrandum dederit; eoque munere jus quoddam inter eos fraternae necessitudinis, aetermimque foedus ab illis colendum sanxerit: non erit (ut arbitramur) ingratum vobis, cfim benevolentiae nostrae significationem, tarn immensa maris ac terrarum spatia transgressam, ab ultima Britannia ad vos in Aethiopiam perferri intellexeritis. Nobisque rursus erit jucundum, cum subditorum nostrorum praedicatione, ab ipsis Nili fontibus, & ab iis regionibus quae solis cursum definiunt, fama vestri nominis ad nos recurret. Erit igitur humanitatis vestrae huic subdito nostro earn largiri gratiam, ut in ditionem vestram sub praesidio ac tutela vestri nominis intrare, ibique salvus & incolumis manere possit: quod ipsum etiam ab aliis principibus, per quorum regiones illi transeundum erit, magnopere petimus, nobisque ipsis illud honoris causa tributum exis- timabimus: neque tamen majorem hac in re gratiam postulamus, quam vicissim omnium principum subditis, omniumque gentium hominibus ad nos commeantibus liberrime concedimus. Datum Londini quinto die Novembris: anno regni nostri tricesimo nono: annoque The same in English. To the most invincible and puissant king of the Abassens, the mightie Emperour of Aethiopia the higher and the lower. Elizabeth by the grace of God Queene of England, France and Ireland, defender of the faith, &c. To the most high and mightie Emperour of Aethiopia greeting. Whereas it is a matter requisite and well beseeming all kings and princes of what lands or nations soever, be they never so much dissevered in place or differing in customes and lawes, to maintaine and preserve the common societie of mankinde, and, as occasion shall be offered, to performe mutuall duties of charitie and benevolence: we for that cause conceiving most undoubted hope of your princely fidelity and courtesie, have given unto this our subject Laurence Aldersey into your dominions, these our intending to travell letters to be delivered without faile unto your Highnesse, to the end they may be a testimony of our good will towards you and of our saide subject his departure from forren England. Who, after his travels countreys, being as yet enflamed with a desire more throughly to surveigh and contemplate the world, and now at length to undertake a long and daungerous journey into your territories and regions: both the sayd Laurence thought, and our selves also deemed, that it would very much availe him, as well for his owne safetie as for the attayning of your favour, if, being protected with our broad seale, hee might transport unto your Highnesse a testimony of our loving affection & of his departure from hence. For sithence almightie God the highest creatour and governour of the world hath allotted unto kings and princes his vicegerents over the face of the whole earth, their designed portions and limits to be ruled and administred by them; and by this his them a certaine law of gift hath established among your highnesse, when you shall have intelligence of our loving letters sent so huge a distance over sea and land, even from the farthest realme of England unto you in Aethiopia. On the other side our selves shall take great solace and delight, when as by the relation of our owne subjects, the renowme of your name shall be brought unto us from the fountains of Nilus, and from those regions which are situate under the Southerne Tropike. May it please you therefore of your princely clemencie to vouchsafe so much favour on this our subject, that he may, under the safeguard and protection of your name, enter into your highnesse dominions, and there remaine safe and free from danger. Which favour and courtesie wee doe likewise most earnestly request at the hands of other princes, through whose Seigniories our said subject is to passe; and we shall esteeme it as done unto our selfe and for our honours sake. Neither do we require any greater favour in this behalfe, then we are upon the like occasion most ready to graunt unto the subjects of all princes and the people of all Nations, traveiling into our dominions. Given at London the fift day of November in the thirtie and ninth yeere of our reigne: and in the yeare of our Lorde 1597-