de Madoco filio Oweni Guynedd, & de sua navigatione incognitas. Vixit hie terras Meredith circiter annum Domini 1477. in M rAdoc wyf, mwyedic wedd, lawn genau Owyn Guynedd: Ni iynnum dir, iy enaid oedd Na da mawr, ond y moroedd. These verses l 2 S S %S Mm William Camden. The same in English. Madoc I am the sonne of Owen Gwynedd With stature large, and comely grace adorned: No lands at home nor store of wealth me please. My minde was whole to search the Ocean seas. T he offer of the discovery of the West Indies [in. 2.] by Christopher Columbus to king Henry the seventh in the yeere 1488 the 13 of February: with the kings acceptation of the offer, & the cause whereupon hee was deprived of the same: recorded in the thirteenth chapter of the history of Don Fernand Columbus of the life and deeds of his father Christopher Columbus. Hristophoro Colon temendo, se parimente i Re di Castiglia non assentissero alia sua impresa, non gli bisognasse proporla di nuovo a qualche altro principe, & cosi in cio passasse lungo tempo; mando in Inghilterra un suo fratello, che haveva appresso di se, chiamato Bartholomeo Colon: il qual, quantunque non havesse lettere Latine, er& pero huomo prattico, & giudicioso nelle cose del mare, & sapea molto bene far carte da navigare, & sphere, & altri instrument di quella professione, come dal suo fratello era instrutto. Partito adunque Bartholomeo Colon per Inghilterra, voile la sua sorte, che desse in man di cor sali, i quali lo spogliarono insieme con gli altri della sua nave. Per la qual cosa, & per la sua poverta & infirmita, che in cosi diverse terre lo assalirono crudelmente, prolungo per gran tempo la sua ambasciata, fin che, aquistata un poco di faculta con le carte, ch' ei fabricava, comincio a far pratiche co' il Re Enrico settimo, padre de Enrico ottavo, che al presente regna: a cui appresento un mappamondo, nel quale erano scritti questi versi, che fra le sue scriture lo trovai, & da me saranno qui posti piu tosto per 1' antichitA, che per la loro eleganza. Terrarum quicunque cupis foeliciter oras Noscere, cuncta decens docte pictura docebit, Quam Strabo affirmat, Ptolomasus, Plinius, atque Isidorus: non una tamen sententia cuique. Pingitur hlc etiam nuper sulcata carinis Hispanis Zona ilia, prius incognita genti Torrida, quae tandem nunc est notissima multis. Et piu di sotto diceva. Pro Authore sive Pictore. Janua cui patriae est nomen, cui Bartholomaeus Columbus de Terra Rubra, opus edidit istud, Londoniis anno Domini 1480 atque insuper anno Octavo, decimaque die cum tertia mensis Februarii. Laudes Christo cantentur abunde. Et, percioche awertira alcuno, che dice Columbus de Terra Rubra, dico, che medesimamente lo viddi alcune sotto scritioni dell' Ammiraglio, primo che acquistasse lo stato, ou' egli si sotto scriveva, Columbus de Terra Rubra. Ma, tornando al Re d' Inghilterra, dico, che, da lui il mappamondo veduto, & cio che V Ammiraglio gli offeriva, con allegro volto accetto la sua offerta, & mandolo a chiamare. Ma, percioche Dio Y haveva per Castiglia serbata, gia 1* Ammiraglio in quel tempo era andato, & tomato con impresa, secondo che per ordine si raccontera. Lasciaro hora di raccontar cid, che Bartolomeo Colon haveva negociato in Inghilterra, & tornaro all' Ammiraglio, &c. la vittoria della sua The same in English. CHristopher Columbus fearing least if the king of Castile in like maner (as the king of Portugall had done) should not condescend unto his enterprise, he should be inforced to offer the same againe to some other prince, & so much time should be spent therein, sent into England a certaine brother of his which he had with him, whose name was Bartholomew Columbus, who, albeit he had not the Latine tongue, yet neverthelesse was a man of experience and skilfull in Sea causes, and could very wel make sea cards & globes, and other instruments belonging to that profession, as he was instructed by his brother. Wherfore after that Bartholomew Columbus was departed for England, his lucke was to fall into the hands of pirats, which spoiled him with the rest of them which were in the ship which he went in. Upon which occasion, and by reason of his poverty [HI. 3-]. and sicknesse which cruelly assaulted him in a countrey ^ 0C[a5ll so farre distant from his friends, he deferred his am- Injies were bassage for a long while, untill such time as he had not discovered gotten somewhat handsome about him with making of Sea for England. cards. At length he began to deale with king Henry the seventh the father of Henry the eight, which reigneth at this present: unto whom he presented a mappe of the world, wherein these verses were written, which I found among his papers: and I will here set them downe, rather for their antiquity then for their goodnesse. Thou which desirest easily the coasts of lands to know, learnedly the same to thee This comely mappe right will shew: Which Strabo, Plinie, Ptolomew and Isodore maintaine : Here also is set downe the late discovered burning Zone knowen, By Portingals, unto the world which whilom was unWhereof the knowledge now at length thorow all the world is blowen: And a little under he added: For the Authour or the Drawer. He, whose deare native soile hight stately Genua, Even he whose name is Bartholomew Colon de Terra The yeere of Grace a thousand and foure hundred and fourescore And eight, and on the thirteenth day of February In London published this worke. To Christ all laud Rubra, more, therefore. And because some peradventure may observe that he calleth himselfe Columbus de Terra Rubra, I say, that in like maner I have seene some subscriptions of my father Christopher Columbus, before he had the degree of Admirall, wherein he signed his name thus, Columbus King Henry de Terra Rubra. But to returne to the king of England, ^clZTtioJ'of l say' that after he had Seene the map ' a nd that which aCohmbus mY f a th er Christopher Columbus offered unto him, he accepted the offer with joyfull countenance, and sent to offer. call him into England. But because God had reserved the sayd offer for Castile, Columbus was gone in the meane space, and also returned with the performance of his enterprise, as hereafter in order shall be rehearsed. Now will I leave off from making any farther mention of that which Bartholomew Colon had negotiated in