Cabota, so many, and so great summes bf money as the saide annuitie or yeerely revenue of an hundreth, threescore and sixe pounds, thirteene shillings 4. pence, doeth amount and rise unto from the feast of S. Michael the Archangel last past unto this present time, the aforesaid Sebastian to be had and received by Cabota, and his assignes out of our aforesaid Treasurie, at the handes of our aforesaide Treasurers, and officers of our Exchequer of our free gift without accompt, or any thing else therefore to be yeelded, payed, or made, to us, our heires or successours, forasmuch as herein expresse mention is made to the contrary. In witnesse whereof we have caused these our Letters to be made patents: Witnesse the King at Westminster the sixt day of Januarie, in the second yeere of his raigne. The yeere of our Lord 1548. A discourse written by Sir Humphrey Gilbert Knight, to prove a passage by the Northwest to Cathaia, and the East Indies. ^f The Table of the matters in every Chapter of this discourse. Capitulo 1. O prove by authoritie a passage to be on the North side of America, to goe to Cataia, China, and to the East India. Capitulo 2. To prove by reason a passage to be on the North side of America, to goe to Cataia, Moluccas, &c. Capitulo 3. To prove by experience of sundry mens travailes the opening of this Northwest passage, whereby good hope remaineth of the rest. Capitulo 4. To prove by circumstance, that the Northwest passage hath bene sailed throughout. Capitulo 5. To proove that such Indians as have bene driven upon the coastes of Germanie came not thither by the Southeast, and Southwest, nor from any part of Afrike or America. Capitulo 6. To proove that the Indians aforenamed came not by there is no thorow passage the Northeast, and that navigable that way. To prove that these Indians came by the Northwest, which induceth a certaintie of this passage by experience. Capitulo 7. Capitulo 8. What several reasons were alleaged before the Queenes Majestie, and certaine Lords of her Highnesse privie Council, by M. Anth. Jenkinson a Gentleman of great travaile and experience, to prove this passage by the Northeast, with my severall answeres then alleaged to the same. How that this passage by the Northwest is more commodious for our traffike, then the other by the Northeast, if there were any such. Capitulo 9. Capitulo 10. What commodities would ensue, this passage being once discovered. To prove by authoritie a passage to be on the Northside of America, to goe to Cathaia, and the East India. Chapter 1. WHen I gave my selfe to the studie of Geographie, after I had perused and diligently scanned the descriptions of Europe, Asia & Afrike, and conferred them with the Mappes and Globes both Antique and Moderne: I came in fine to the fourth part of the world, commonly called America, which by all descriptions I found to bee an Hand environed round about with Sea, having on the Southside of it the frete or straight of Magellan, on the West side Mar del Sur, which Sea runneth towards the North, separating it from the East parts of Asia, where the Dominions of the Cathaians are: On the East part our West Ocean, and on the North side the sea that severeth it from Groneland, thorow which Northren Seas the Passage lyeth, which I take now in hand to discover. Plato in Timaeo, and in the Dialogue called Critias, discourseth of an incomparable great Hand then called Atlantis, being greater then all Aflrike and Asia, which lay Westward from the Straights of Gibraltar, navigable round about: affirming also that the Princes of Atlantis did aswell enjoy the governance of all Affrike, and the most part of Europe, as of Atlantis it selfe. Also to prove Platos opinion of this Hand, and the inhabiting of it in ancient time by them of Europe, to be of the more credite; Marinaeus Siculus in his Chronicle of Spaine, reporteth that there have bene found by the Spaniards in the gold Mines of America, certaine pieces of Money ingraved with the Image of Augustus Csesar: which pieces were sent to the Pope for a testimonie of the matter, by John Rufus Archbishop of Consentinum. Moreover, this was not only thought of Plato, but by Marsilius Ficinus, and excellent Florentine Philosopher, Crantor the Graecian, and Proclus, and Philo the famous Proclus pag, Jew (as appeareth in his booke De Mundo, and in the 24~ Commentaries upon Plato) to be overflowen and swallowed up with water, by reason of a mightie earthquake, and streaming downe of the heavenly Fludgates. The like whereof happened unto some part of Italy, when by the forciblenes of the Sea, called Superum, it cut off Sicilia from the Continent of Calabria, as appeareth in Justine, in the beginning of his fourth booke. Also Justine Lib. 4. there chanced the like in Zetland a part of Flanders. And also the Cities of Pyrrha and Antissa, about P/ime, Meotis palus : and also the Citie Burys, in the Corynthian bosome, commonly called Sinus Corinthiacus, have bene swallowed up with the Sea, and are not at this day to be discerned: By which accident America grew to be unknowen of long time, unto us of the later ages, and was lately discovered againe, by Americus Vespucius, in the yeere of our Lord 1497. which some say to have bene first discovered by Christophorus Columbus a Genuois, Anno 1492. The same calamitie happened unto this Isle of Atlantis 6OQ. and odde yeres before Plato his time, which some of the people of the Southeast parts of the world accompted as 9000. yeeres: for the maner then was to reckon the Moone her Period of the Zodiak for a yeere, which is our usual moneth, depending a Luminari minori. So that in these our dayes there can no other mayne or Islande be found or judged to bee parcell of this Atlantis, then those Westerne Islands, which beare now the name of America: countervailing thereby the name of Atlantis, in the knowledge of our age. Then, if when no part of the sayd Atlantis was oppressed by water, and earthquake, the coasts round about the same were navigable: a farre greater hope now the remaineth of the same by the Northwest, seeing most part of it was (since that time) swallowed up with A minore ad water, which could not utterly take away the olde deeps maJusand chanels, but rather, be an occasion of the inlarging 161 VII THE ENGLISH VOYAGES of the olde, and also an inforcing of a great many new : why then should we now doubt of our Northwest passage and navigation from England to India? &c. seeing that Atlantis now called America, was ever knowen to be an Island, and in those dayes navigable round about, which by accesse of more water could not be diminished. Also Aristotle in his booke De Mundo, and the learned Germaine Simon Gryneus in his annotations upon the same, saith that the whole earth (meaning thereby, as manifestly doth appeare, Asia, Africk, and Europe, being all the countreys then knowen) is but one Island, compassed about with the reach of the sea Atlantine: which likewise prooveth America to be an Island, and in no part adjoyning to Asia, or the rest. both the Ocean sea, (which lieth East of India) Atlanticum pelagus, and that sea also on the West coasts of Spaine and Africk, Mare Atlanticum : the distance betweene the two coasts is almost halfe the compasse of the earth. So that it is incredible, as by Plato appeareth manifestly, that the East Indian Sea had the name Atlanticum pelagus of the mountaine Atlas in Afrik, or yet the sea adjoining to Africk, had the name Oceanus Atlanticus of the same mountaine: but that those seas and the mountaine Atlas were so called of this great Island Atlantis, and that the one and the other had their names for a memorial of the mighty prince Atlas, sometime king thereof, who was Japhet yongest sonne to Noah, in whose time the whole earth was divided between the three brethren, Sem, Cam, and Japhet. Wherefore I am of opinion that America by the Northwest will be found favourable to this our enterprise, and am the rather imboldened to beleeve the same, for that I finde it not onely confirmed by Plato, Aristotle, and other ancient Phylosophers: but also by all the best moderne Geographers, as Gemma Frisius, Munsterus, Appianus, Hunterus, Gastaldus, Guyccardinus, Michael 162 Valerius Anselmus in Catalogo annorum 13 prin- cipium.fol. 6. Tramasinus, Franciscus Demongenitus, Bernardus Puteanus, Andreas Vavasor, Tramontanus, Petrus Martyr, and also Ortelius, who doth coast out in his general! Mappe set out Anno 1569, all the countreys and Capes, on the Northwest side of America, from Hochelaga to Cape de Paramantia: describing likewise the sea coastes of Cataia and Gronland, towards any part of America, making both Gronland and America, Islands disjoyned by a great sea, from any part of Asia. All which learned men and painefull travellers have affirmed with one consent and voice, that America was an Island: and that there lyeth a great Sea betweene it, Cataia, and Grondland, by the which any man of our countrey, that will give the attempt, may with small danger passe to Cataia, the Moluccae, India, and all other places in the East, in much shorter time, then either the Spaniard, or Portugal doeth, or may doe, from the neerest parte of any of their countreys within Europe. r 1 1 11 What moved these learned men to affirme thus much, We ougk* h I know not, or to what ende so many and sundry reasons rt&ht travellers or both ages nave allowed the same: .But 1 reverent conjecture affirmed, or notified their opinions therein to the world, worthy men. if they had not had great good cause, and many probable reasons, to have lead them thereunto. that they would never have so constantly opinion of t° "aVe -r» 11 1 1 T 1 a Now least you should make small accompt of ancient writers or of their experiences which travelled long before our times, reckoning their authority amongst fables of no importance: I have for the better assurance of those proofes, set downe some part of a discourse, written in the Saxon tongue, and translated into English by M. Nowel servant to Sir William Cecil, lord Burleigh, and lord high treasurer of England, wherein there is described a Navigation, which one Ochther made, in the time of A Navigation king Alfred, king of Westsaxe Anno 871. the words of which discourse were these: Hee sailed right North, mJJr^s having alwaies the desert land on the Starborde, and on the Larbord the maine sea, continuing his course, untill 163 'ftf™ THE ENGLISH VOYAGES hee perceived that the coast bowed directly towards the East, or else the Sea opened into the land he could not tell how farre, where he was compelled to stay until he h a (i a w e s t e r ne w i n d e > or somewhat upon the North, and ~ sayled thence directly East alongst the coast, so farre as hee was able in foure dayes, where he was againe inforced to tary untill hee had a North winde, because the coast there bowed directly towards the South, or at least opened he knew not howe farre into the land, so that he sayled thence along the coast continually full South, so farre as he could travell in the space of five dayes, where hee discovered a mighty river, which opened farre into the land, and in the entrie of this river he turned backe againe. By Sir Hugh to be by sea, until it was since discovered by our English in the timC ° f Kin& Edward the sixt 5 but TJT/ Whereby it appeareth that he went the very same way, that we now doe yerely trade by S. Nicholas into Moscovia, which way no man in our age knew for certaintie mCn' before that time that Groneland had joyned to Normoria, Byarmia, &c. and therefore was accompted a new discovery, being nothing so indeede, as by this discourse of Ochther it appeareth. t h o ug ht uUorand Borough. Neverthelesse if any man should have taken this voyage in hand by the encouragement of this onely author, he should have bene thought but simple: considering that this Navigation was written so many yeres past, in so barbarous a tongue by one onely obscure author, and yet we in these our dayes finde by our owne experiences his former reports to be true. How much more then ought we to beleeve this passage to Cataia to bee, being verified by the opinions of all the best, both Antique, and Moderne Geographers, and plainely set out in the best and most allowed Mappes, Charts, Globes, Cosmographical tables & discourses of this our age, and by the rest not denied, but left as a matter doubtfull. To proove by reason, a passage to be on the Northside of America, to goe to Cataia, &c. Chap. 3. First, all seas are maintained by the abundance of Experimented water, so that the neerer the end any River, Bay hour English or Haven is, the shallower it waxeth, (although by some *s ers' accidentall barre, it is sometime found otherwise) But the farther you sayle West from Island towards the place, where this fret is thought to be, the more deepe are the seas: which giveth us good hope of continuance of the same Sea with Mar del Sur, by some fret that lyeth betweene America, Groneland and Cataia. 2 Also if that America were not an Island, but a part of ye continent adjoyning which inhabite Mangia, Anian, & Quinzay, &c. being borderers upon it, would before this time have made some road into it, hoping to have found some like commodities to their owne. to Asia, either the people [III. 14.] 3 Or els the Scythians and Tartarians (which often times heretofore have sought farre and neere for new seats, driven thereunto through the necessitie of their Neede makes cold and miserable countreys) would in all this time have the old Wlfe t0 found the way to America, and entred the same, had the passages bene never so straite or difficult; the countrey being so temperate, pleasant and fruitfull, in comparison of their owne. But there was never any such people the Spaniards, Portugals, or found Frenchmen, who first discovered the Inland of that countrey: which Spaniards, or Frenchmen must then of necessitie have seene some one civil man in America, considering how full of civill people Asia is: But they never saw so much as one token or signe, that ever any man of the knowen part of the world had bene there. there by any of 4 Furthermore it is to be thought, that if by reason of mountaines, or other craggy places, the people neither of Cataia or Tartarie could enter the countrey of America, or they of America have entred Asia if it were so joyned: yet some one savage or wandring beast would in so many yeres have passed into it: but there hath not any time bene found any of the beasts proper to Cataia, or Tartarie &c. in America: nor of those proper to America, in Tartarie, Cataia, &c. or any part of Asia. Which thing proveth America, not onely to be one Island, and in no part adjoyning to Asia: But also that the people of those Countreys, have not had any traffique with each other. 5 Moreover at the least some one of those painefull travellers, which of purpose have passed the confines of both countreys, with intent only to discover, would as it is most likely have gone from the one to the other: if there had bene any piece of land, or Isthmos, to have joyned them together, or els have declared some cause to the contrary. 6 But neither Paulus Venetus, who lived and dwelt a long time in Cataia, ever came into America, and yet was at the sea coastes of Mangia, over against it where he was embarked, and perfourmed a great Navigation along those seas: Neither yet Verarzanus, or Franciscus Vasques de Coronado, who travelled the North part of America by land, ever found entry from thence by land • • 1 1 , TT r ^ > The Sea hath to Cataia, or any part of Asia. three motions. y Also it appeareth to be an Island, insomuch as the 1 Mourn ab S ea r u n n e th by n a t u re circularly from the East to the r 11 onente in oca- i- dentem. West, following the diurnal motion of P n m um Mobile, 2 Motum which carieth with it all inferiour bodies moveable, aswel fluxus W re- celestiall as elemental: which motion of the waters is fiuxus. ^cularenu *""" Southside of Afrike, where the current that runneth from AdcceR motum ele- motion) that the Portugals in their voyages Eastward 7exce°tTm terrTjmoven- ^forced to make divers courses, the current there being tur. most evidently seene in the Sea, which lieth on the the East to the West is so strong (by reason of such in P a s s i n g b y C a P- de buona Sperai^a are so swift as it striketh from thence all along Westward 166 tO C a l I c u t> » upon the fret of Magellan, being distant from thence, neere the fourth part of the longitude of the earth: and not having free passage and entrance thorow the fret towards the West, by reason of the narrownesse of the sayd Straite of Magellan, it runneth to salve this wrong (Nature not yeelding to accidentall restraints) all along the Easterne coastes of America, Northwards so far as Cape Fredo, being the farthest knowne place of the same continent towards the North: which is about 4800 leagues, reckoning therewithall the trending of the land. 8 So that this current being continually maintained with such force, as Jaques Carrier affirmeth it to be, who met with the same being at Baccalaos, as he sayled along the coastes of America, then either it must of necessitie have way to passe from Cape Fredo, thorow this fret, Westward towards Cataia, being knowen to come so farre, onely to salve his former wrongs, by the authority before named: or els it must needes strike over, upon the coast of Island, Norway, Finmarke, and Lappia, (which are East from the sayd place about 360 leagues) with greater force then it did from Cape de Posita causa, buona Speransa, upon the fret of Magellan, or from Ponitur effec~ the fret of Magellan to Cape Fredo, upon which coastes Jaques Carrier met with the same, considering the shortnesse of the Cut from the sayd Cape Fredo, to Island, Lappia, &c. And so the cause Efficient remaining, it would have continually followed along our coasts, through the narrow seas, which it doth not, but is disgested about the North of Labrador, by some through passage there thorow this fret. The like course of the water in some respect happeneth in the Mediterrane sea (as affirmeth Conterenus) wheras Conterenus. the current which commeth from Tanais, & Pontus Euxinus, running along all the coasts of Greece, Italy, France, and Spaine, and not finding sufficient way out through Gibraltar, by meanes of the straitnesse of the fret it runneth backe againe along the coastes of Barbary, by Alexandria, Natolia, &c. An objection answered. The sea doth evermore performe this cir- cular motion, either in Suprema, or concava superJicie aqua. The yce set westward every yeere from Island. Auth. Jona Arngrimo. THE ENGLISH VOYAGES It may (peradventure) bee thought that this course of the sea doth sometime surcease, and thereby impugne this principle, because it is not discerned all along the coast of America, in such sort as Jaques Carrier found it: Whereunto I answere this: that albeit, in every part of the Coast of America, or elswhere this current is not sensibly perceived, yet it hath evermore such like motion, either in the uppermost or nethermost part of the sea: as it may be proved true, if ye sinke a sayle by a couple of ropes, neere the ground, fastening to the nethermost corners two gunne chambers or other weights: by the driving whereof you shall plainely perceive, the course of the water, and current, running with such course in the bottome. By the like experiment, you may finde the ordinary motion of the sea, in the Ocean: howe farre soever you be off the land. 9 Also there commeth another current from out the Northeast from the Scythian Sea (as M. Jenkinson a man of rare vertue, great travaile and experience, told me) which runneth Westward towardes Labrador, as the other did, which commeth from the South: so that both these currents, must have way thorow this our fret, or else encounter together and runne contrarie courses, in one line, but no such conflicts of streames, or contrary courses are found about any part of Labrodor, or Terra nova, as witnesse our yeerely fishers, and other saylers that way, but is there disgested, as aforesayd, and found by experience of Barnard de la Torre, to fall into Mar del Sur. 10 Furthermore, the current in the great Ocean, could not have beene maintained to runne continually one way, from the beginning of the world unto this day, had there not beene some thorow passage by the fret aforesayd, and so by circular motion bee brought againe to maintaine it selfe: For the Tides and courses of the sea are maintayned by their interchangeable motions: as fresh rivers are by springs, by ebbing and flowing, by rarefaction and condensation. So that it resteth not possible (so farre as my simple The flowing is reason can comprehend) that this perpetuall current can occasioned by by any meanes be maintained, but onely by continuall '^a™of the reaccesse of the same water, which passeth thorow the mome boyleth, fret, and is brought about thither againe, by such cir- andmaketh the certaine falling the water cular motion as aforesayd. And thereof by this fret into Mar del Sur is prooved by the ^arefaclhl testimonie and experience, of Bernard de la Torre, who An experience was sent from P. de la Natividad to the Moluccae, Anno toproovethe domini 1542. by commandement of Anthony Mendoza, /*&*& °fthis then Viceroy of Nova Hispania, which Bernard sayled 750. Leagues, on the Northside of the Aequator, and there met with a current, which came from the Northeast the which drove him backe againe to Tidore. ^ TL Wherfore, this current being proved to come from C. de buona Speran$a to the fret of Magellan, and wanting sufficient entrance there, by narrownes of the straite, is by the necessitie of natures force, brought to Terra de Labrador, where Jaques Carrier met the same, and thence certainly knowen, not to strike over upon Island, Lappia, &c. and found by Bernard de la Torre in Mar therefore this del Sur, on the backeside of America: current (having none other passage) must of necessity, fall out thorow this our fret into Mar del Sur, and so trending by the Moluccae, China, and C. de buona Speranfa, maintaineth it selfe by circular motion, which is all one in nature, with Motus ab Oriente in Occidentem. remooved. Wherefore, So that it seemeth, we have now more occasion to doubt of our returne, then whether there be a passage that way, yea or no: which doubt, hereafter shall be sufficiently in mine opinion, reason it self, grounded upon experience, assureth us of this passage, if there were nothing els to put us in hope thereof. But least these might not suffice, I have added in this chapter following, some further proofe hereof, by the experience of such as have passed some part of this discoverie: and in the next adjoining to that the authority of those, which have sailed wholy, thorow every part thereof. To prove by experience of sundry mens travels, the opening of some part of this Northwest passage: wherby good hope remaineth of the rest. Chap. 3. PAulus Venetus, who dwelt many yeres in Cataia, affirmed that hee sayled 1500 miles upon the coastes of Mangia, and Anian, towards the Northeast: alwayes finding the Seas open before him, not onely as farre as he went, but also as farre as he could discerne. 2 Also Franciscus Vasques de Coronado passing from Mexico by Cevola, through the countrey of Quivira, to Siera Nevada, found there a great sea, where were certaine ships laden with Merchandise, carrying on their prowes [III. 16.J Jlcatrarzi be the pictures of certaine birds called Alcatrarzi, part whereof Pellicanes, Baros lib. 9. Of Ms first Decas cap. 1 were made of golde, and part of silver, who signified by signes, that they were thirty dayes comming thither: which likewise proveth America by experience to be disjoyned from Cataia, on that part by a great Sea, because they could not come from any part of America, as Natives thereof: for that, so farre as is discovered, there hath not bene found there any one Shippe of that countrey. 3 In like maner, John Baros testifieth that the Cosmographers of China (where he himselfe had bene) affirme that the Sea coast trendeth from thence Northeast, to 50 degrees of Septentrional latitude, being the furthest part that way which the Portugals had then knowledge of: And that the said Cosmographers knew no cause to the contrary, but that it might continue further. By whose experiences America is prooved to be separate from those parts of Asia, directly against the same. And not contented with the judgements of these learned men only, I have searched what might be further sayd for the confirmation hereof. 4 And I found that Franciscus Lopez de Gomara affirmeth America to be an Island, and likewise Gronland: and that Gronland is distant from Lappia 40 leagues, and from Terra de Labrador, 50. 5 Moreover, Alvarus Nunnius a Spaniard, and learned two Cosmographer, and Jacobus Carrier, who made voyages into those parts, and sayled 900 miles upon the Northeast coastes of America doe in part confirme the same. 6 Likewise Hieronymus Fracastorius, a learned Italian, and travailer in the North parts of the same land. 7 Also Jaques Cartier having done the like, heard say at Hochelaga in Nova Francia, how that there was the end was not a great Sea at Saguinay, whereof knowen: which they presupposed to be the passage to Cataia. Furthermore, Sebastian Cabota by his personal ex- Written in the perience and travel hath set foorth, and described this discourses of passage in his Charts, which are yet to be seene in the amSattonQueens Majesties privie Gallerie at Whitehall, who was sent to make this discovery by king Henrie the seventh, and entred the same fret: affirming that he sayled very farre Westward, with a quarter of the North, on the Northside of Terra de Labrador the eleventh of June, untill he came to the Septentrionall latitude of 67 degrees and a halfe, and finding the Seas still open, sayd, that he might, & would have gone to Cataia, if the mutinie of the Master and Mariners had not bene. Now as these mens experience hath proved some part of this passage: so the chapter following shal put you in full assurance of the rest, by their experiences which have passed through every part thereof. 171 To proove by circumstance that the Northwest passage hath bene sayled throughout. Chap. 4. ' T ^ He diversitie betweene bruite beastes and men, or Quinque s*ny/sus A betweene the wise and the simple is, that the one judgeth by sense onely, and gathereth no surety of any 2 Auditw. 3 Olfactus. thing that he hath not seene, felt, heard, tasted, or 4 Gustus. smelled: And the other not so onely, but also findeth i f: the certaintie of things by reason, before they happen sensu, univer- to be tryed. Wherefore I have added proores of both salia verb mente percl- pwntur. sorts, that the one and the other might thereby be satisfied. j pj r s t^ as Gemma Frisius reciteth, there went from Europe three brethren through this passage: whereof it tooke the name of Fretum trium fratrum. 2 Also Plinie affirmeth out of Cornelius Nepos, (who wrote 57 yeeres before Christ) that there were certaine Indians driven by tempest, upon the coast of Germanie which were presented by the king of Suevia, unto Quintus Metellus Celer, the Proconsull of France. Lib.z.cap.66. 3 And Plinie upon the same sayth, that it is no marvell though there be Sea by the North, where there is such abundance of moisture: which argueth that hee doubted not of a navigable passage that way, through which those Indians came. 4 And for the better proofe that the same authoritie of Cornelius Nepos is not by me wrested, to prove my opinion of the Northwest passage: you shall finde the same affirmed more plainly that behalfe, by the excellent Geographer Dominicus Marius Niger, who in Pag. 590. sheweth how many wayes the Indian sea stretcheth it [III. 17.J selfe, making in that place recital of certaine Indians, that were likewise driven through the North Seas from India, upon the coastes of Germany, by great tempest, as they were sayling in trade of marchandize. Avouched by 5 Also while Frederic Barbarossa reigned E m p e r o u r, A n no D o. 1 1 6 0. there came certaine other Indians upon F t i Lo f ^^ 6 Likewise Othon in the stone of the Gothes affirmeth, of India, lib. ^ that in the time of the Germane Emperours, there were i. cap. 10. also certaine Indians cast by force of weather, upon the coast of the sayd countrey, which foresaid Indians could not possibly have come by the Southeast, Southwest, nor from any part of Afrike or America, nor yet by the Northeast: therefore they came of necessitie by this our Northwest passage. To proove that these Indians aforenamed came not by the Southeast, Southwest, nor from any other part of Afrike, or America. Cap. 5. First, they could not come from the Southeast by the Cape de bona Speran^a, because the roughnes of the Seas there is such (occasioned by the currents and great winds in that part) that the greatest Armadas the king of Portugal hath, cannot without great difficulty passe that way, much lesse then a Canoa of India could live in those outragious seas without shipwracke (being a vessell of very small burden) and have conducted themselves to the place aforesayd, being men unexpert in the Arte of navigation. 2 Also, it appeareth plainely that they were not able to come from alongst the coast of Afrike aforesayd, to those parts of Europe, because the winds doe (for the most part) blow there Easterly off from the shore, and the current running that way in like sort, should have driven them Westward upon some part of America: for such winds and tides could never have led them from thence to the said place where they were found, nor yet could they have come from any of the countries aforesayd, keeping the seas alwayes, without skilful mariners to have conducted necessary to performe such a voiage. them such like courses as were 3 Presupposing also, if they had bene driven to the West (as they must have bene, comming that way) then they should have perished, wanting supplie of victuals, not having any place (once leaving the coast of Afrike) untill they came to America, nor from America untill they arrived upon some part of Europe, or the Islands adjoyning to it, to have refreshed themselves. 4 Also, if (notwithstanding such impossibilities) they might have recovered Germanie by comming from India by the Southeast, yet must they without all doubt have striken upon some other part of Europe before their arrivall there, as the Isles of the Acjores, Portugal, Spaine, France, England, Ireland, &c. which if they had done, it is not credible that they should or would have departed undiscovered of the inhabitants: but there was never found in those dayes any such ship or men but only upon the coasts of Germanie, where they have bene sundry times and in sundry ages cast aland: neither is it like that they would have committed themselves againe to sea, if they had so arrived, not knowing where they were, nor whither to have gone. suc^ ^ o r ce u P on 5 And by the Southwest it is unpossible, because the Thisfift reason by later c u r r e nt aforesayd which commeth from the East, striketh eprove7uttlrh Wlt^ untrue. t^le ^ r et °^ Magellan, and falleth with such swiftnesse and furie into Mar del Zur, that hardly any ship (but not possibly a Canoa, with such unskilfull mariners) can come into our Westerne Ocean through that fret, from the West seas of America, as Magellans experience hath partly taught us. 6 And further, to proove that these people so arriving upon the coast of Germany, were Indians, & not inhabiters of any part either of Africa or America, it is That the Indians could manifest, because the natives both of Africa and America 7LerTWeS n e i t h er had > or h a ve at 6Africa, or of k i . nd °f b o a t es America. t h en such as do beare neither mastes nor sailes, (except onely upon the coasts of Barbarie and the 174 is reported) other Turkes ships) but do carie themselves from place to place neere the shore by the ore onely. To proove that those Indians came not by the Northeast, and that there is no thorow navigable passage that way. Cap. 6. IT is likely that there should be no thorow passage by the Northeast, whereby to goe round about the world, because all Seas (as aforesayd) are maintained by the abundance of water, waxing more shallow and shelffie towards the ende, as we find it doeth by experience in Mare Glaciali, towards the East, which breedeth small hope of any great continuance of that sea, to be navigable towards the East, sufficient to saile thereby round about the world. i i , . , .. r • -i & , that 2 Also, it standeth scarcely with reason, the [IIL l*>] Indians dwelling under Torrida Zona, could endure the Qmc<lmd . 10 injurie or the cold ay re, about the Septentrional latitude pr'watur^ of 80. degrees, under which elevation the passage by the quam dtissime Northeast cannot bee (as the often experience had of all corrumpitur. the South parts of it sheweth) seeing that some of the inhabitants of this cold climate (whose Summer is to them Quails causa an extreme Winter) have bene stroken to death with the talis eJfectuscold damps of the aire about 72 degrees, by an accidental mishap, and yet the aire in such like Elevation is alwaies cold, and too cold for such as the Indians are. naturah loco 3 Furthermore, the piercing cold of the grosse thicke aire so neere the Pole wil so stiffen and furre the sailes and ship tackling, that no mariner can either hoise or strike them (as our experience farre neerer the South, then this passage is presupposed to be, hath taught us) without the use whereof no voiage can be performed. 4 Also, the aire is so darkened with continuall mists and fogs so neere the Pole, that no man can well see, either to guide his ship, or direct his course. similis est ratio. Quicquid corrumpitur a contrario corrumpitur. Omne simile gignit sui simile. THE ENGLISH VOYAGES suddenly vary, which things must of force have bene their destructions, although they had bene men of much more skill then the Indians are. 6 Moreover, all baies, gulfes, and rivers doe receive their increase upon the flood, sensibly to be discerned on the one side of the shore or the other, as many waies as they be open to any main sea, as Mare Mediterraneum, Mare Rubrum, Sinus Persicus, Sinus Bodicus, Thamesis, and all other knowen havens or rivers in any part of the world, and each of them opening but on one part to the maine sea, doe likewise receive their increase upon the flood the same way, and none other, which Mare Glaciale doeth, onely by the West; as M. Jenkinson affirmed unto me: and therfore it followeth that this Northeast sea, receiving increase but onely from the West, cannot possibly open to the maine Ocean by the East. 7 Moreover, the farther you passe into any sea towards the end of it, on that part which is shut up from the maine sea (as in all those above mentioned) the lesse and lesse the tides rise and fall. The like whereof also happeneth in Mare Glaciale, which proveth but small continuance of that Sea toward the East. 8 Also, the further yee goe toward the East in Mare Glaciale, the lesse salt the water is: which could not happen, if it were open to the salt Sea towards the East, as it is to the West only, seeing Every thing naturally ingendreth his like: and then must it be like salt throughout, as all the seas are, in such like climate and elevation. And therefore it seemeth that this Northeast sea is maintained by the river Ob, and such like fresshets, as Mare Goticum, and Mare Mediterraneum, in the uppermost parts thereof by the rivers Nilus, Danubius, Neper, Tanais, &c. 9 Furthermore, if there were any such sea at that elevation, of like it should be alwaies frozen throughout (there being no tides to hinder it) because the extreme coldnes of the aire being in the uppermost part, and the extreme coldnesse of the earth in the bottome, the sea there being but of small depth, whereby the one accidentall coldnesse doth meet with the other, and the Sunne not having his reflection so neere the Pole, but at very blunt angels, it can never be dissolved after it is frozen, notwithstanding the great length of their day: for that the sunne hath no heate at all in his light or beames, but proceeding onely by an accidentall reflection, which there wanteth in effect. 10 And yet if the Sunne were of sufficient force in that elevation, to prevaile against this ice, yet must it be broken before it can be dissolved, which cannot be but through the long continuance of the sunne above their Horizon, and by that time the Sommer would be so farre spent, and so great darkenes and cold ensue, that no man could be able to endure so cold, darke, and discomfortable a navigation, if it were possible for him then, and there to live. 11 Further, the ice being once broken, it must of force so drive with the windes and tides, that no ship can saile in those seas, seeing our Fishers of Island, and the New found land, are subject to danger through the great Islands of Ice which fleete in the Seas (to the sailers great danger) farre to the South of that presupposed passage. 12 And it cannot be that this Northeast passage should be any neerer the South, then before recited, for then it should cut ofF Ciremissi, & Turbi Tartari, with Uzesucani, Chisani, and others from the Continent of Asia, which are knowen to be adjoyning to Scythia, Tartaria, &c. with the other part of the same Continent. And if there were any thorowe passage by the Northeast, yet were it to small ende and purpose for our traffique, because no shippe of great burden can Navigate in so shallow a Sea: and ships of small burden [III. 19.J are very unfit & unprofitable, especially towards the blustering North, to performe such a voyage. VII 177 [To proove To proove that the Indians aforenamed, came induceth a only by the Northwest, which certaintie of our passage by experience. I Cap. 7. 'T is as likely that they came by the Northwest, as it is unlikely that they should come either by the Southeast, Southwest, Northeast, or from any other part this Northwest of Africa or America, and therefore passage having bene alreadie so many wayes proved, by disprooving of the others, &c. I shall the lesse neede in this place, to use many words otherwise then to conclude in this sort, That they came onely by the Northwest from England, having these many reasons to leade me thereunto. 1 First, the one halfe of the windes of the compasse might bring them by the Northwest, bearing alwayes betweene two sheats, with which kind of sayling the Indians are onely acquainted, not having any use of a bow line, or quarter winde, without the which no ship can possibly come either by the Southeast, Southwest or Northeast, having so many sundry Capes to double, whereunto are required such change and shift of windes. True, both in^ 2 And it seemeth likely that they should come by ^fis oblique ^e Northwest, because the coast whereon they were aho\n Mentis driven, lay East from this our passage, And all windes ex diametro doe naturally drive a ship to an opposite point from sphantibus. whence it bloweth, not being otherwise guided by Arte, which the Indians do utterly want, & therefore it seemeth that they came directly through this our fret, which they might doe with one wind. 3 For if they had come by the Cape de buona Speran9a, then must they (as aforesaid) have fallen upon the South parts of America. 4 And if by the fret of Magellan, then upon the coasts of Afrike, Spaine, Portugal!, France, Ireland or England. 5 And if by the Northeast, then upon the coasts of Ceremissi, Tartarii, Lappia, Island, Terra de Labrador, &c. and upon they have never bene found. these coasts (as aforesaid) So that by all likelihood they could never have come the coastes of Germanie, if without shipwracke upon the coastes of so many they had first striken upon countries, wanting both Arte and shipping to make orderly discovery, and altogether ignorant both in the the Rockes, Flats, Arte of Navigation, and also of Sands or Havens of those parts of the world, which in most of these places are plentifull. 6 And further it seemeth very likely, that the inhabitants of the most part of those countries, by which they must have come any other way besides by the Northwest, being for the most part Anthropophagi, or men eaters, would have devoured them, slaine them, or (at the least wise) kept them as wonders for the gaze. So Indians (which as you have heard in sundry ages were driven by tempest upon the shore of Germanie) came onely through our Northwest passage. it plainely appeareth those that that 7 Moreover, the passage is certainely prooved by a Navigation that a Portugall made, who passed through this fret, giving name to a Promontorie farre within the same, calling it after his owne name, Promontorium Corterialis, neere adjoyning unto Polisacus fluvius. 8 Also one Scolmus a Dane entred and passed a great part thereof. 9 Also there was one Salvaterra, a Gentleman of Victoria in Spaine, that came by chance out of the West Indias into Ireland, Anno 1568. who affirmed the Northwest passage from us to Cataia, constantly to be beleeved in America navigable. And further said in the presence of sir Henry Sidney (then lord Deputie of Ireland) in my hearing, that a Frier of Mexico, called Andrew Urdaneta, more then eight yeeres before his then comming into Ireland, told him there, that he this came from Mar del Sur Northwest passage, & shewed Salvaterra (at time being then with him in Mexico) a Sea Card made by his owne experience and travell in that voyage, wherein this Northwest was plainly set downe and described passage, agreeing in all points with Ortelius mappe. into Germany through that to publish And further, this Frier tolde the king of Portugall (as he returned by that countrey homeward) that there was (of certainty) such a passage Northwest from Engthe same: which land, and that he meant done, the king most earnestly desired him not in any wise to disclose or make the passage knowen to any nation: For that (said the king) if England had knowlec%e a n d experience thereof, it would greatly hinder [III. 20.] theltif Portugal/, to both the king of Spaine and me. This Frier (as SalAndro Urda- vaterra reported) was the greatest Discoverer by sea, neta a Frier, that hath bene in our age. Also Salvaterra being touching the p e r s w a d e d of this passage by the frier Urdaneta, and . b concealing of 1 this Northwest ®Y ^ e common opinion or inhabiting passage from America, offered most willingly to accompanie me in this Discovery, which of like he would not have done England to thereof. Qataia. • the bpaniards s t o od ; n d o u bt j f he h ad • 1 L-^r . o J f / . these moderne experiences cannot be And now as impugned, so, least these things (gathered out of ancient writers, which wrote so this many yeeres past) might serve it might be objected to proove litle that An objection, passage by the North of America, because both America and India were then utterly unknowen: Aristotle lib. this suffise: That Aristotle demundo^ap. ^w^o w as ^oo. yeeres before Christ) named Mare IndiIM 5 to them let this doubt, r emoove to cum. Also Berosus (who lived 330 yeres before Christ) hath these words, Ganges in India. Also in the first the dayes of chapter of Hester be these wordes, In to Aethiopia, which Assuerus which ruled from India Assuerus lived 580 yeeres before Christ. Also Quintus Curtius (where he speaketh of the conquests of Alexander) mentioneth India. Also, Arianus, Philostratus, and Sidrach in his discourses of the warres of the king of Bactria, and of Garaab, who had the most part of India under his government. All which assureth us, that both India and Indians were knowen in those days. These things considered, we may (in my opinion) the not only assure our selves of this passage by Northwest, but also that it is navigable both to come and go, as hath bene prooved in part and in all, by the experience of divers, as Sebastian Cabota, Corterialis, Indians, and the three brethren above named, Urdaneta the Frier of Mexico, &c. the And yet notwithstanding all this, there be some that have a better hope of this passage to Cataia by the Northeast then by the West, whose reasons with my severall answeres ensue in the chapter following. Certaine reasons alleaged for the prooving of a passage by the Northeast, before the Queenes Majestie, and certaine Lords of the Counsell, by Master Anthonie Jenkinson, with my severall answeres then used to the same. Cap. 8. BEcause you may understand as well those things alleaged against me, as what doth serve for my purpose, I have here added the reasons of Master Anthony Jenkinson a worthy gentleman, and a great traveller, who conceived a better hope of the passage to Cataia from us, to be by the Northeast, then by the Northwest. He first said that he thought not to the contrary, The Northbut that there was a passage by the Northwest, accord- w^stP^age ing to mine opinion: but assured he was, that there assente unt0% might be found a navigable passage by the Northeast from England, to goe to all the East parts of the world, which he endevoured to proove three wayes. The first was that he heard a Fisherman of Tartaria The first say in hunting the Morce, that he sayled very farre reasontowards the Southeast, finding no end of whereby he hoped a thorow passage to be that way. the Sea: The answer or Whereunto I answered, that the Tartarians were a resolution. barbarous people, and utterly ignorant in the Arte of Navigation, not knowing the use of the Sea Card, Compasse or Starre, which he confessed to be true: and therfore they could not (said I) certainly know the Southeast from the Northeast, in a wide sea, and a place unknowen from the sight of the land. Or if he sailed any thing neere the shore, yet he (being ignorant) might be deceived by the doubling of many points and Capes, and by the trending of the land, albeit he kept continually alongst the shore. And further, it might be that the poore Fisherman through simplicitie thought that there was nothing that Fisus nonnun- way but sea, because he saw no land: which proofe quamfallitur ( u n cl er correction") giveth small assurance of a Navigable in suo objecto. ^ / D ^ , 1 ^ , , The second reason or die- h o me gation. [III. 21.] , ^, of XT 1 • 1 • 1 1 C Q a st T a r t a r ia found / v 1 j sea by the Northeast, to goe round about the world. For that he judged by the eye onely, seeing we in this our cleare aire doe account twentie miles a ken at Sea. His second reason is, that there was an Unicornes c o u ld 1 1 not come (said he) thither* by any other meanes then with the tides, through some fret in the Northeast of Mare Glaciale, there being no Unicorne in any part of Asia, saving in India and Cataia: which reason (in my simple judgement) forceth as litle. n ^ \ FirSt> lt is d o u b t f u 11 whether those barbarous Tartarians do know an Unicornes home, yea, or no: and if it were one, yet it is not credible that the Sea could have driven it so farre, being of such nature that it will not swimme. w h i ch 1 Also the tides running too and fro, would have driven it as farre backe with the ebbe, as it brought it forward with the flood. There is also a beast called Asinus Indicus (whose home most like it was) which hath but one home like in his forehead, whereof there is great an Unicorne plenty in all the North parts therunto adjoyning, as in Lappia, Noruegia, Finmarke, &c. as Jacobus Zieglerus writeth in his historie of Scondia. And as Albertus saieth, there is a fish which hath but one home in his forehead like to an Unicorne, and therefore it seemeth very doubtfull both from whence it came, and whether it were an Unicornes home, yea, or no. His third and last reason was, that there came a con- The third and tinuall streame or current through Mare Glaciale, of such last ream or 11 T_- x 1 assertion. -r •r i- / i swirtnesse (as a Lolmax told him) that 11 you cast any thing therein, it would presently be carried out of sight towards the West. Whereunto I answered, that there doth the like from The answer or Mseotis Palus, by Pontus Euxinus, Sinus Bosphorus, resoluttonand along the coast of Graecia, &c. As it is affirmed by Contarenus, and divers others that have had experience of the same: and yet that Sea lieth not open to any maine Sea that way, but is maintained by freshets as by Tanais, Danubius, &c. In like maner is this current in Mare Glaciale increased and maintained by the Dwina, the river Ob, &c. Now as I have here briefly recited the reasons alleaged, to proove a passage to Cataia by the Northeast, with my severall answeres thereunto: so will I leave it to your judgement, to hope or dispaire of either at your pleasure. How that the passage by the Northwest is more commodious for our traffique, then the other by the East, if there were any such. Cap, 9. First, by the Northeast (if your windes doe not give you a marvelous speedie & luckie passage) you are in danger (being so neere the Pole) to be benighted almost the one halfe of the yeere, and what danger that were, to live so long comfortlesse, voide of light, (if the thts' THE ENGLISH VOYAGES cold killed you not) each man of reason or understanding may judge. 2 Also Mangia, Quinzai, and the Moluccas are neerer unto us by the Northwest, then by the Northeast, more then two five parts, which is almost by the halfe. 3 Also we may have by the West a yerely returne, it being at all times navigable, whereas you have but 4. moneths in the whole yeere to goe by the Northeast: the passage being at such elevation as it is formerly expressed, for it cannot be any neerer the South. 4 Furthermore, it cannot be finished without divers wintrings by the way, having no havens in any temperate climate to harbour in there : for it is as much as we can well saile from hence to S. Nicholas, in the trade of Moscovia, and returne in the navigable season of the yeere, & from S. Nicholas to Cerimissi Tartari, which stande at 80 degrees of the Septentrionall latitude, it is at the least 400 leagues, which amounteth scarce to the third part of the way, to the end of your voyage by the Northeast. 5 And yet after you have doubled this Cape, if then there might be found a navigable Sea to carie you Southeast according to your desire, yet can you not winter conveniently, until you come to 60 degrees, and to take up one degree running Southeast, you must saile 24 leagues and three foure parts, which amounteth to 495 leagues. 6 Furthermore, you may by the Northwest saile thither with all Easterly windes, and returne with any Westerly windes, whereas you must have by the Northeast sundry windes, and those proper, according to the lying of the coast and Capes, you shalbe inforced to double, which windes are not alwaies to be had, when they are looked for: whereby your journey should be greatly prolonged, and hardly endured so neere the Pole. As we are taught by sir Hugh Willoughbie, who was frozen to death farre neerer the South. 7 Moreover, it is very doubtfull, whether we should 8 Also the Queenes Majesties dominions are neerer [III. 22.] long injoy that trade by the Northeast, if there were any such passage that way, the commodities thereof once knowen to the Moscovite, what privilege soever hee hath granted, seeing pollicy with the masse of excessive gaine, to the inriching (so greatly) of himselfe and all his dominions would perswade him to presume the same, having so great opportunitie to utter the commodities of those countries by the Narve. But by the Northwest, we may safely trade without danger or annoyance of any prince living, Christian or Heathen, it being out of all their trades. the Northwest passage then any other great princes that might passe that way, and both in their going and returne, they must of necessitie succour themselves and their ships upon some part of the same, if any tempestuous weather should happen. Further, no princes navie of the world is able to incounter the Queenes Majesties navie, as it is at this pre- sent : and yet it should be greatly increased by the traffike insuing upon this discoverie, for it is the long voyages that increase and maintaine great shipping. Now it seemeth necessarie to declare what commodities would growe thereby, if all these things were, as we have heretofore presupposed, and thought them to be : which next adjoyning are briefly declared. W h at commodities would ensue, this passage once discovered. Cap. 10. First, it were the onely way for our princes, to possesse the wealth of all the East parts (as they terme them) of the world, which is infinite: as appeareth by the experience of Alexander the great, in the time of his conquest of India, and other the East parts of the world, alleaged by Quintus Curtius, which would be a great advancement to our countrey, a wonderfull inriching to our prince, and an unspeakable commoditie to all the inhabitants of Europe. 2 For through the shortnesse of the voyage, we should be able to sell all maner of merchandize, brought from thence, farre better cheape then either the Portugall or Spaniard doth or may do. And further, we should share with the Portugall in the East, & the Spaniard in the West, by trading to any part of America, thorow Mar del Sur, where they can no maner of way offend us. 3 Also we might sayle to divers very rich countreys, both civill and others, out of both their jurisdictions, trades and traffikes, where there is to be found great abundance of golde, silver, precious stones, cloth of gold, silkes, all maner of spices, grocery wares, and other kinds of merchandize of an inestimable price, which both the Spaniard and Portugall, through the length of their journies, cannot well attaine unto. 4 Also we might inhabite some part of those countryes, and settle there such needy people of our countrey, which now trouble the common wealth, and through want here at home are inforced to commit outragious offences, whereby they are dayly consumed with the gallowes. 5 Moreover, we might from all the aforesaid places have a yeerely returne, inhabiting for our staple some convenient place of America, about Sierra Nevada, or some other part, whereas it shal seeme best for the shortning of the voyage. 6 Beside uttering of our countrey commodities, which the Indians, &c. much esteeme: as appeareth in Hester, where the pompe is expressed of the great king of India, Assuerus, who matched the coloured clothes, wherewith his houses and tents were apparelled, with gold and silver, as part of his greatest treasure: not mentioning either velvets, silkes, cloth of gold, cloth of silver, or such like, being in those countreyes most plentifull: whereby it plainly appeareth in what great estimation they would have the clothes of this our countrey, so that there would be found a farre better vent for them by this meanes, then yet this realme ever had: and that without depending either upon France, Spaine, Flanders, Portugall, Hamborow, Emden, or any other part of Europe. 7 Also, here we shall increase both our ships and mariners, without burthening of the state. 8 And also have occasion to set poore mens children to learne handie craftes, and thereby to make trifles and such like, which the Indians and those people do much esteeme: by reason whereof, there should be none occasion to have our countrey combred with loiterers, vaga- bonds, and such like idle persons. All these commodities would grow by following this our discovery, without injury done to any Christian prince, by crossing them in any of their used trades, whereby they might take any just occasion of offence. Thus have I briefly shewed you some part of the grounds of mine opinion, trusting that you will no longer judge me fantasticke in this matter: seeing I have conceived no vaine hope of this voyage, but am perswaded thereunto by the best Cosmographers of our age, the same being confirmed both by reason and certaine experiences. Also this discovery hath bene divers times heretofore by others both offered, attempted, and performed. It hath bene offered by Stephan Gomes unto Carolus the fift Emperour, in the yeere of our Lord God 1527, [III. 23.] as Alphonso Ullva testifieth in the story of Carolus life: who would have set him forth in it (as the story mentioneth) if the great want of money, by reason of his long warres had not caused him to surcease the same. And the king of Portugall fearing least the Emperour would have persevered in this his enterprise, gave him to This discovery leave the matter unattempted, the summe of 350000 °fferedcrownes: and it is to be thought that the king of Portu- gall would not have given to the Emperour such summes of money for egges in mooneshine. This discovery It hath bene attempted by Sebastian Cabota in the attempted. t ; me o f j^-^g Henry the seventh, by Corterialis the Portugall, and Scolmus the Dane. Also divers have offered This discovery And it hath bene performed by three brethren, the performed. Indians aforesaid, and by Urdaneta the Frier of Mexico. the French king, who hath sent two or three times to have discovered the same: The discoverers spending and con- suming their victuals in searching the gulfes and bayes betweene Florida and Terra de Labrador, whereby the yce is broken to the after commers. the like unto So that the right way may now easily be found out that with litle jeoperdie and lesse in short time: and expences. For America is discovered so farre towardes the North as Cape Frio, which is at 62 degrees, and that part of to stand but at Grondland next adjoyning is knowen The labour of y2 degrees. So that wee have but 10 degrees to saile fhor£d7rie N o r th & S o u t h> to P ut t he world o ut of d o u bt h e r e o f: other mens travell. a n d it is likely that the king of Spaine, and the king of Portugall would not have sit out all this while, but that they are sure to possesse to themselves all that trade they now use, and feare to deale in this discovery, least the Queenes Majestie having so good opportunitie, and finding the commoditie which thereby might ensue to the common wealth, would cut them off, and enjoy a nd P o r t u g a l s > w i th Why ye kings the whole traffique to her selfe, and thereby the Spaniards toftu™ ^ would not persever in this discovery, paine of death, should seeke to discover to the Northwest, bush, and other men catch the birds: which thing they foreseeing, have commanded that no pilot of theirs upon t h e ir g r e at charges, should beate the or plat out in any Sea card any thorow passage that way by the Northwest. Now, and if you will indifferently compare the hope that remaineth, to animate me to this enterprise, with those likelihoods which Columbus alleaged before Ferdinando the king of Castilia, to proove that there were such Islands in the West Ocean, as were after by him and others discovered to the great commodity of Spaine and all the world: you will thinke then this Northwest passage to be most worthy travell therein. For Columbus had none of the West Islands set foorth unto him, either in globe or card, neither yet once mentioned of any writer (Plato excepted, and the commentaries upon the same) from 942 yeeres before Christ, untill that day. Moreover, Columbus himselfe had neither seene America nor any other of the Islands about it, neither, understood he of them by the report of any other that had seene them, but only comforted himselfe with this hope, that the land had a beginning where the Sea had an ending: for as touching that which the Spaniards doe write of a Biscaine, which should have taught him the way thither, it is thought to be imagined of them, to deprive Columbus of his honour, being none of their countrey man, but a stranger borne. And if it were true of the Biscaine, yet did he but rove at the matter, or (at the least) gathered the knowledge of it, by conjectures onely. And albeit my selfe have not seene this passage or any part thereof, but am ignorant of it as touching experience (as Columbus was before his attempt made) yet have I both the report, relation, and authoritie of divers most credible men, which have both seene and passed through some and every part of this discovery, besides sundry reasons for my assurance thereof: all which Columbus wanted. These things considered, & indifferently weighed tothis gither, with the wonderfull commodities which discovery may bring, especially to this realme of England : I must needes conclude with learned Baptista Ramusius, and divers other learned men, who said, that this discovery hath bene reserved for some noble prince or woorthie man, thereby to make himselfe rich, and the world happie: desiring you to accept in good part this briefe and simple discourse, written in haste, which if I may perceive that it shall not sufficiently satisfie you in this behalfe, I will then impart unto you a large discourse, which I have written onely of this discovery. And further, because it sufficeth not only to know that such a thing there is, without abilitie to performe the same, I wil at leasure make you partaker of another [III. 24. J simple discourse of navigation, wherein I have not a litle travelled, to make my selfe as sufficient to bring these things to effect, as I have bene readie to offer my selfe therein. And therein I have devised to amend the errors of usuall sea cards, whose common fault is, to make the degrees of longitude in every latitude of one like bignesse. And have also devised therein a Spherical instrument, with a compasse of variation for the perfect knowing of the longitude. And a precise order to pricke the sea card, together with certaine infallible rules for the shortning of any discovery, to know at the first entring of any fret, whether it lie open to the Ocean more wayes then one, how farre soever the sea stretcheth it selfe into the land. Desiring you hereafter never to mislike with me, for the taking in hande of any laudable and honest enterprise : for if through pleasure or idlenesse we purchase shame, the pleasure vanisheth, but the shame remaineth for ever. Pereas qui And therefore umbras alwayes to live and die in this mind, That he is not worthy to live at all, that for feare, or danger of death, shunneth his countries service, and his owne honour: seeing death is inevitable, and the fame of vertue immortall. Wherefore in this behalfe, Mutare vel timere sperno. to give me leave without offence, Certaine other reasons, or arguments to proove a passage by the Northwest, learnedly written by M. Richard Willes Gentleman. FOure famous wayes there be spoken of to those fruitfull and wealthie Islands, which wee doe usually call Moluccaes, continually haunted for gaine, and dayly travelled for riches therein growing. These Islands, although they stand East from the Meridian, distant almost halfe the length of the worlde, in extreame heate, under the Equinoctiall line, possessed of Infidels and Barbarians: yet by our neighbours great abundance of wealth there is painefully sought in respect of the voyage thence dangerously brought /leerely bought, and from home unto us. Our neighbours I call the Portugals in comparison of the Molucchians for neerenesse unto us, for like situation Westward as we have, for their usuall trade with us, for that the farre Southeasterlings doe knowe this part of Europe by no other name then Portugall, not greatly acquainted as yet with the other Nations thereof. Their voyage is very well understood of all men, and the Southeasterne way round about 1 By the Afrike by the Cape of Good hope more spoken of, better Southeast. knowen and travelled, then that it may seeme needfull to discourse thereof any further. The second way lyeth Southwest, betweene the West 2 By the India or South America, and the South continent, through Southwestthat narrow straight where Magellan first of all men that ever we doe read of, passed these latter yeeres, leaving thereunto therefore his name. The way no doubt the Spaniardes would commodiously take, for that it lyeth neere unto their dominions there, could the Easterne current and levant windes as easily suffer them to returne, Thts u an er~ as speedily therwith they may be carried thither: for rn'" the which difficultie, or rather impossibility of striving against the force both of winde and streame, this passage is litle or nothing used, although it be very well knowen. Northeast. OrteL tab. Asia 3. 4 By the tlortheast. Ob. 1. [III. 25.] InTheatro. THE ENGLISH VOYAGES The third way by the Northeast, beyond all Europe and Asia, that worthy and renowmed knight sir Hugh Willoughbie sought to his perill, enforced there to ende his life for colde, congealed and frozen to death. And truely this way consisteth rather in the imagination of Geographers, then allowable either in reason, or approved by experience, as well it may appeare by the dangerous trending of the Scythish Cape set by Ortelius under the 80 degree North, by the unlikely sailing in that Northerne sea alwayes clad with yce and snow, or at the least continually pestred therewith, if happily it be at any time dissolved: besides bayes and shelfes, the water waxing more shallow toward the East, that we say nothing of the foule mists and darke fogs in the cold clime, of the litle power of the Sunne to cleare the aire, of the uncomfortable nights, so neere the Pole, five moneths long. A fourth way to go unto these aforesaid happy Islands Moluccas sir Humphrey Gilbert a learned and valiant knight discourseth of at large in his new passage to Cathayo. The enterprise of it selfe being vertuous, the fact must doubtlesse deserve high praise, and whensoever it shal be finished, the fruits thereof cannot be smal: where vertue is guide, there is fame a follower, & fortune a companion. But the way is dangerous, the passage doubtfull, the voiage not throughly knowen, and therefore gainesaid by many, after this maner. First, who can assure us of any passage rather by the Northwest, then by the Northeast? doe not both wayes lye in equall distance from the North Pole? Stand not the North Capes of eyther continent under like elevation ? Is not the Ocean sea beyond America farther distant from our Meridian by 30. or 40. degrees West, then the extreame poyntes of Cathayo Eastward, if Ortelius general! Carde of the world be true? In the Northeast that noble Knight Syr Hugh Willoughbie perished for colde: and can you then promise a passenger any better happe by the Northwest ? Who hath gone for triall sake at any time this way out of Europe to Cathayo ? If you seeke the advise herein of such as make pro- Ob. 2. in Cosmographie, Ptolome the father of Geofession graphie, and his eldest children, will answere by their mappes with a negative, concluding most of the Sea within the land, and making an ende of the world Northward, neere the 63. degree. The same opinion, when learning chiefly florished, was received in the Romanes time, as by their Poets writings it may appeare: tibi serviat ultima Thyle, said Virgil, being of opinion, that Island was the extreme part of the world habitable toward the North. Joseph Moletius an Italian, and Mercator a Germaine, for knowledge men able to be compared with the best Geographers of our time, the one in his halfe Spheres of the whole world, the other in some of his great globes, have continued the West Indies land, even to the North Pole, and consequently, cut off all passage by sea that way. Thirdly, the greatest favourers of this voyage can not Ob. 3. The same doctors, Mercator in other of his globes and mappes, Moletius in his sea Carde, neverthelesse doubting of so great continuance of the former continent, have opened a gulfe betwixt the West Indies and the extreame Northerne land: but such a one, that either is not to be travelled for the causes in the first objection alledged, or cleane shut up from us in Europe by Groenland: the South ende whereof Moletius maketh firme land with America, the North part continent with Lappeland and Norway. denie, but that if any such passage be, it lieth subject unto yce and snow for the most part of the yeere, whereas it standeth in the edge of the frostie Zone. Before the Sunne hath warmed the ayre, and dissolved the yce, eche one well knoweth that there can be no sailing: the continuall abode the sunne maketh a certaine season in those parts, how shall it be possible for so weake a vessel as a shippe is, to holde out amid whole Islands, as it were of yce continually beating on eche side, and at the mouth of 193 the yce once broken through VII that gulfe, issuing downe furiously from the north, and safely to passe, when whole mountaines of yce and snow shall be tumbled downe upon her? Ob. 4. Well, graunt the West Indies not to continue continent unto the Pole, grant there be a passage betweene these two lands, let the gulfe lie neerer us then commonly in cardes we finde it set, namely, betweene the 61. and 64. degrees north, as Gemma Frisius in his mappes and globes imagineth it, and so left by our countryman Sebastian Cabot in his table which the Earle of Bedford hath at Cheinies: Let the way be voyde of all difficulties, yet doeth it not follow that wee have free passage to Cathayo. For examples sake: You may trend all Norway, Finmarke, and Lappeland, and then bowe Southward to Saint Nicholas in Moscovia: you may likewise in the Mediterranean Sea fetch Constantinople, and the mouth of Tanais: yet is there no passage by Sea through Moscovia into Pont Euxine, now called Mare Maggiore. Againe, in the aforesaid Mediterranean sea, we saile to Alexandria in Egypt, the Barbarians bring their pearle and spices from the Moluccaes up the Red sea or Arabian gulph to Sues, scarcely three dayes journey from the aforesayd haven: yet have wee no way by sea from Alexandria to the Moluccaes, for that Isthmos or litle straight of land betweene the two seas. In like maner although the North erne passage be free at 61 degrees of latitude, and the West Ocean beyond America, usually called Mar del Zur, knowen to be open at 40. degrees elevation from three hundred leagues Northerly above Japan: yet may there be land to hinder the thorow passage that way by Sea, as in the examples aforesaid it falleth out, Asia and America there being joyned together in one continent. Ne can this opinion seeme altogether frivolous unto any one that diligently peruseth our Cosmographers doings. Josephus Moletius is of that minde, not onely in his plaine Hemispheres of the world, but also in his Sea card. The French Geographers in like maner be of 194 of a Hart you may perceive: as though the West Indies were part of Asia. Which sentence well agreeth with that old conclusion in the Schooles : Quicquid praeter Africam & Europam est, Asia est, Whatsoever land doeth neither apperteine unto Afrike nor to Europe, is part of Asia. Furthermore it were to small purpose to make so long, Ob. 5. so painefull, so doubtfull a voyage by such a new found way, if in Cathayo you should neither bee suffered to land for silkes and silver, nor able to fetch the Molucca spices and pearle for piracie in those Seas. Of a law denying all Aliens to enter into China, and forbidding all the inhabiters under a great penaltie to let in any stranger into those countryes, shall you reade in [III. 26.3 the report of Galeotto Perera there imprisoned with other Portugals: as also in the Japonish letters, how for that cause the worthy traveller Xavierus bargained with a Barbarian Merchant for a great summe of pepper into Canton, a port in China. The to be brought great and dangerous piracie used in those Seas no man can be ignorant of, that listeth to reade the Japonish and East Indian historic Finally, all this great labour would be lost, all these Ob. 6. charges spent in vaine, if in the ende our travellers might not be able to returne againe, and bring safely home into their owne native countrey that wealth & riches, which they in forrein regions with adventure of goods, & danger of their lives have sought for. By the Northeast there is no way, the Southeast passage the Portugals doe hold as the Lords of those Seas. At ye Southwest Magellans experience hath partly taught us, and partly we are persuaded by reason, how the Easterne current striketh so furiously on that straight, and falleth with such force into that narrow gulph, that that way into our West hardly any ship can returne Ocean out of Mar del Zur. The which if it be true, as truely it is, then wee may say that the aforesayd following after the heavenly motions, lodseth not altois doubled rather by an other gether his force, but current from out the Northeast, in the passage betweene America and the North land, whither it is of necessity caryed: having none other way to maintaine it selfe in fury circular motion, & consequently thereof to be no lesse in the straight of Anian, where it striketh South into Mar del Zur, beyond America (if any such straight of Sea there be) then in Magellans fret, both straights being of like bredth: as in Belognine Zalterius table of new France, and in Don Diego Hermano de Toledo his Card for navigation in that region we doe finde precisely set downe. the force and that passed Neverthelesse to approove that there lyeth a way to the Northwest from out of Europe, we Cathayo at have experience, namely of three brethren that went that journey, as Gemma Frisius recordeth, and left a name unto is called that straight, whereby now trium fratrum. We doe reade againe of a Fretum Portugall this straight, of whom Master Frobisher speaketh, that was imprisoned therefore many yeeres in Lisbone, to verifie the olde Spanish proverbe, I suffer for doing well. Likewise Andrew Urdaneta a Fryer of Mexico came out of Mar del Zur this way into Germanie: his Carde (for he was a great Discoverer) made by his owne experience and travell in that voyage, hath bene seene by Gentlemen of good credite. it Now if the observation and remembrance of things breedeth experience, and of experience proceedeth arte. , , \ . 1 11 1 • 11 r 1 . and the certaine knowledge we have in all faculties, as the best Philosophers that ever were doe affirme: truely the voyage of these aforesayd travellers that have gone out of Europe into Mar del Zur, and returned thence at the Northwest, do most evidently conclude that way to be navigable, and that passage free. So much the Cic. 1. de oraf-£nst' pru Metapk. r Lib. i. Geog. m o re we Cap. z. ^inke, for that the first principle and chiefe ground in all Geographie, as Ptolome saith, a re so to is, reports made by is the history of in Geometrie and Astronomie, of all travellers skilful to Geographie doe such things in their journey as belong. It onely then remaineth, that we now answere to those arguments that seemed to make against this former conclusion. The first objection is of no force, that generall table SoL i. of the world set forth by Ortelius or Mercator, for it greatly skilleth not, being unskilfully drawen for that point: as manifestly it may appeare unto any one that conferreth the same with Gemma Frisius his universall Mappe, with his round quartered carde, with his globe, table, and Ortelius his with Sebastian Cabota his in this case generall mappe alone, worthily preferred before all Mercator & Ortelius other doings: for that Cabota was not onely a skilful Sea man, but a long traveller, and such a one as entred personally that straight, sent by king Henry the seventh to make this aforesayd Discoverie, as in his owne discourse of navigation you may reade in his carde drawen with his owne hand, that the Northwesterne the mouth of straight lyeth neere the 318. Meridian, betweene 61. and 64. degrees in the elevation, continuing the same bredth about 10. degrees West, where it openeth Southerly more and more, untill it come under the tropicke of Cancer, and so runneth into Mar del Zur, at the least 18. degrees more in bredth there, then it was where it first began: otherwise I could as well imagine this passage to be more unlikely then the voyage to Moscovia, and more impossible then it for the farre situation and continuance thereof in the frostie clime: as now I can affirme it to be very possible and most likely in comparison thereof, for that it neither coasteth so farre North as the Moscovian passage doeth, neither is this straight so long as that, before it bow downe Southerly towardes the Sunne againe. The second argument concludeth nothing. Ptolome Sol. 2. knew not what was above sixteene degrees South the Equinoctiall beyond line, he was ignorant of all passages Northward from the elevation or 63. degrees: he knewe no Ocean sea beyond Asia, yet have the [HI. 27.] Portugals trended the cape of Good hope at the South point of Afrike, and travelled to Japan an Island in the East Ocean, betweene Asia & America: our merchants in the time of king Edward the sixt discovered the Moscovian passage farther North then Thyle, & shewed Greenland not to be continent with Lappeland & Norway: the like our Northwesterne travellers have done, declaring by their navigation that way, the ignorance of all Cosmographers that either doe joyne Groen- land with America, or continue the West Indies with that frosty region under the north pole. As for Virgil to the knowledge of men in his he sang according time, as an other Poet did of the hot Zone. Ovid. 1. Meta. Sol. 3. Sol 4. Quarum quae media est, non est habitabilis asstu. Imagining, as most men then did, Zonam torridam, for heat, to be altogether dishabited the hot Zone though presently wee know many famous and woorthy kingdomes and cities in that part of the earth, and the Island of S. Thomas neere ^Ethiopia, & the wealthy Islands for the which chiefly all these voyages are in hand, to be inhabited even under the taken equinoctiall line. To answere the third objection, besides Cabota and all other travellers navigations, the onely credit of 1VL through all these Frobisher may suffice, who Islands of ice, and mountaines of snow, passed that way, even beyond the gulfe that tumbleth downe from though he drewe one the North, and in some places inch thicke ice, as he returning in August did, yet came he home safely againe. lately is there any isthmos or strait of The fourth argument is altogether frivolous & vaine, land for neither betweene America and Asia, ne can these two landes joyntly be one continent. The first part of my answere is manifestly allowed of by Homer, whom that excellent in this Lib. Geog. three places. Dionisius followeth, yeelding him in OIKOV/JLWW irepir\yr\<ri to Alexander, attributed unto Aristotle, is Geographer Strabo facultie the price. The authour of that booke likewise irepl Koa-juLou of the same opinion that Homer and Strabo be of, in two or this verse WT«? owceavoy irepihkhpofxe yalav diracrav. hath So doth the Ocean Sea runne round about the worlde: speaking onely of Europe, Afrike and Asia, as then Asia was travelled and knowen. With these Doctours may Note, you joyne Pomponius Mela. cap. 2. lib. I. Plinius lib. 2. cap. 67. and Pius 2. cap. 2. in his description of Asia. All the which writers doe no lesse confirme the whole Easterne side of Asia to be compassed about with the sea, then Plato doeth affirme in Timaeo, under the name Atlantis, the West Indies to be an Island, as in a special discourse thereof R. Eden writeth, agreeable RichardEden. unto the sentence of Proclus, Marsilius Ficinus, and others. Out of Plato it is gathered that America is an Island. Homer, Strabo, Aristotle, Dionysius, Mela, Plinie, Pius 2. affirme the continent of Asia, Afrike, & Europe, to be environed with I may therfore boldly say (though later intelligences therof had we none at all) that Asia & the West Indies be not tied together by any Isthmos or straight of land, contrary to the opinion of some new Cosmographers, by whom doubtfully this matter hath bin brought in controversie. And thus much for the first part of my answere unto the fourth objection. the Ocean. The second part, namely that America and Asia cannot be one continent, may thus be proved, Kara Lib. z. Me!" TtJV Ttjg y*J9 KOlXoTtJTO. p€l KOI TCOV 7TOT(XjUL(iOV TO 7r\ij6o$. most Rivers take downe that way their course, where the earth is most hollow and deepe, writeth Aristotle: and the Sea (sayth he in the same place) as it goeth Into what gulfe doe the further, so is it found deeper. Moscovian rivers Onega, Duina, Ob, powre out their streames Northward out of Moscovia into the sea ? Which way doeth that sea strike ? The South is maine 199 ff°r' Ca?' land, the Easterne coast waxeth more and more shalow: from the North, either naturally, because that part of the earth is higher Aristot. 2 Met. cap. 1. or of necessitie, for that the forcible influence of some Northerne starres causeth the earth there to shake off" the Sea, as some Philosophers doe thinke: or finally for the great store of waters engendred in that frostie and colde climate, that the bankes are not able to holde them. Alber. in 2. Meteor, cap. 6. From the North, I say, continually falleth downe great abundance of water. So that this Northeasterne currant must at the length abruptly bow toward us South on the West side of Finmarke and Norway: or else strike downe Southwest above Groneland, or betwixt Groneland and Iseland, into the North- west straight we speake of, as of congruence it doeth, if you marke the situation of that Region, and by the report of M. Frobisher experience teacheth us. And M. Frobisher the further he travailed in the former passage, as he tolde me, the deeper alwayes he found the Sea. Lay you now the summe hereof together. The rivers runne where the chanels are most hollow, the sea in taking his course waxeth deeper, the Sea waters fall continually from the North Southward, the Northeasterne current striketh downe into the straight we speake of, and is there augmented with whole mountaines of yce and snowe falling downe furiously out from the land PRn. lib. 2. under the North pole. Where store of water is, there j s -lt a thing impossible to want Sea, where Sea not onely cap. 67. doeth not want, but waxeth deeper, there can be discovered no land. Finally, whence I pray you came the [III 28.] contrary tide, that M. Frobisher mette withall after that he had sailed no small way in that passage, if there bee any Isthmos or straight of land betwixt the aforesayd Northwesterne gulfe, and Mar del Zur, to joyne Asia and America together ? That conclusion frequented in scholes Quicquid praeter, &c. was meant of the partes of the world then knowen, and so is it of right to be understood. policie in the travailer, to winne the Barbarians favour by some good meanes: and so to arme and strengthen himselfe, that when he shal have the repulse in one coast, he may safely travaile to an other, commodiously taking his convenient times, and discreetely making choise of them with whom hee will throughly deale. To force a violent entry, would for us Englishmen be very hard, considering the strength and valour of so great a Nation, farre distant from us, and the attempt thereof might be most perillous unto the doers, unlesse their part were very good. Touching their lawes against strangers, you shall reade neverthelesse in the same relations of Galeotto Perera, that the Cathaian king is woont to graunt free aqcesse unto all forreiners that trade into his Countrey for Marchandise, and a place of libertie for them to remaine in: as the Moores had, untill such time as they had brought the Loutea or Lieutenant of that coast to bee a circumcised Saracene: wherefore some of them were put to the sword, the rest were scattered abroad: at Fuquien a great citie in China, certaine of them are yet this day to be seene. As for the Japans they be most desirous to be acquainted with strangers. The Portingals though they were straitly handled there at the first, yet in the ende they found great favour at the Prince his hands, insomuch that the Loutea or president that misused them was therefore put to death. The rude Indian Canoa halleth those seas, the Portingals, the Saracenes, and Moores travaile continually up and downe that reach from Japan to China, from China to Malacca, from Malacca to the Moluccaes: and shall an Englishman, better appointed then any of them all (that I say no more of our Navie) feare to saile in that Ocean ? What seas at all doe want piracie ? what Navigation is there voyde of perill ? To the last argument. Our travailers neede not to SoL 6. seeke their returne by the Northeast, neither shall they to attempt they be constrained, except 201 Luc. lib, 1. Pharsal. What the Eastern cur- s p h e r es J rent ts. Magellans straight at the Southwest, or to be in danger they may returne of the Portingals for the Southeast: by the Northwest, that same way they doe goe foorth* as experience hath shewed. The reason alleadged for proofe of the contrary may be disproved after this maner. And first it may be called in controversie, whether any current continually be forced by the motion of Primum mobile, round about the world, or no ? For learned men doe diversly handle that question. The naturall course of all waters is downeward> wherefore of congruence they fall that way where they finde the earth most lowe and deepe: in respect whereof,, it was erst sayd, the seas doe strike from the Northren landes Southerly. Violently the seas are tossed and troubled divers wayes with the windes, encreased and diminished by the course of the Moone, hoised up & downe through the sundry operations of the Sunne and the starres: finally, some be of opinion, that the seas be caried in part violently about the world, after the dayly motion of the highest moveable heaven, in like maner as the elements of ayre and fire, with the rest of the heavenly u n tQ t he W e s t> A nd t h is a re from 1 t he E a st x- • 1 n 1 they doe call their Jkasterne current, or levant streame. Some such current may not be denied to be of great force in the hot Zone, for the neerenesse thereof unto the centre of the Sunne, and blustring Easterne windes violently driving the seas Westward: howbeit, in the temperate climes, the Sunne being further off, & the windes more divers, blowing as much from the North, the West and South, as from the East, this rule doeth not effectually withholde us from travailing Eastward, neither be we kept ever backe by the aforesaid Levant windes and streame. But in Magellans streight wee are violently driven backe Westward: Ergo, through the Northwesterne straight or Anian frette shall we not be able to returne Eastward ? It followeth not. The first, for that the northwesterne straight hath more sea roome least by one hundreth English myles, then at the It must be Peregrinationis historia, that is, true Li^- *• GeoS' Magellans frette hath, the onely want whereof causeth all narrow passages generally to be most violent. So would I say in the Anian gulfe, if it were so narrow as Don Diego and Zalterius have painted it out, any returne that way to bee full of difficulties, in respect of such streightnesse thereof, not for the neerenesse of the Sunne, or Easterne windes, violently forcing that way any levant streame: But in that place there is more sea roome by many degrees, if the Cardes of Cabota, and Gemma Frisius, and that which Tramezine imprinted, be true. And hitherto reason see I none at all, but that I may as well give credite unto their doings, as to any of the rest. reportes of skilfull travailers, as Ptolome writeth, that in such controversies of Geographie must put us out of doubt. Ortelius in his universall tables, in his particular [III. 29.] Mappes of the West Indies, of all Asia, of the Northren kingdomes, of the East Indies, Mercator in some of his globes, and generall Mappes of the world, Moletius in his universall table of the Globe divided, in his sea Carde, and particuler tables of the East Indies, Zalterius, and Don Diego, with Ferdinando Bertely, and others, doe so much differ from Gemma Frisius and Cabota, among themselves, and in divers places from themselves, concerning the divers situation and sundry limits of America, that one may not so rashly, as truely surmise, these men either to be ignorant in those points touching the aforesaid region, or that the Mappes they have given out unto the world, were collected onely by them, and never of their owne drawing. ?' 2* 203