The seventh day of this moneth we had a very terrible 7« storme, by force whereof, one of our men was blowen into the sea out of our waste, but he caught hold of the foresaile sheate, and there held till the Captaine pluckt him againe into the ship. The 25. day of this moneth we had sight of the [HI- 32] Island of Orkney, which was then East from us. The first day of October we had sight of the Sheld, The SheU. and so sailed about the coast, and ankered at Yarmouth, and the next day we came into Harwich. The language of the Argoteyt, a hand. Cangnawe, a nose. Arered, an eye. Keiotot, a tooth. Mutchatet, the head. Chewat, an eare. Comagaye, a legge. Atoniagay, a foote. Callagay, a paire of breeches. people of Meta incognita. ' Attegay, a coate. Pollevetagay, a knife. Accaskay, a shippe. Coblone, a thumbe. Teckkere, the foremost finger. finger. Ketteckle, the middle finger. Mekellacane, the fourth Yacketrone, the litle finger. The second voyage of Master Martin Frobisher, made to the West and Northwest Regions, in the yeere 1577. with a description of the Countrey, and people: Written by Master Dionise Settle. N Whitsunday, being the sixe and twentieth of May, in the yeere of our Lord God 1577. Captaine Frobisher departed from Blacke Wall, with one of the Queenes Majesties ships, called The Aide, of nine score tunnes, or thereabouts : and two other little Barkes like- wise, the one called The Gabriel, whereof Master Fenton, a Gentleman of my Lord of Warwikes, was Captaine: and the other, The Michael, whereof Master Yorke, a Gentleman of my Lord Admirals was Captaine, accompanied with seven score Gentlemen, souldiers, and sailers, well furnished with victuals, and other provision necessarie for one halfe yeere, on this his second voyage, for the further discovering of the passage to Cathay, and other Countreys, thereunto adjacent, by West and Northwest navigations: which passage or way, is supposed to bee on the North and Northwest part of America: and the said America to be an Island invironed with the sea, where through our Merchants may have course and recourse with their merchandize, from these our Northernmost parts of Europe, to those Orientall coasts of Asia, in much shorter time, and with greater benefite then any others, to their no little commoditie and profite that do or shall frequent the same. Our said Captaine and General of this present voyage and company having the yeere before, with two little pinnesses, to his great danger, and no small commendations, given a worthy attempt towards the performance thereof, is also prest, when occasion shall be ministred (to the benefite of his Prince, and native Countrey) further therein. As for this second voyage, it seemeth sufficient, that he hath better explored and searched the commodities of those people and Countreys, which in his first voyage the yeere before he had found out. to adventure himselfe Upon which considerations, the day and yeere before expressed, we departed from Blacke Wall to Harwich, where making an accomplishment of things necessary, the last of May we hoised up sailes, and with a merrie wind the 7. of June we arrived at the Islands called Orcades, or vulgarly Orkney, being in number 30. subject and adjacent to Scotland, where we made provision of fresh water; in the doing whereof our Generall licensed the Gentlemen and souldiers for their recreation, to goe on shore. At our landing, the people fled from their poore cottages, with shrikes and alarms, to warne their neighbours of enemies, but by gentle perswasions we reclamed 2 12 The Islands Ot cades, or Orkney. TheOrcadians upon smal occatheir them to their houses. It seemeth they are often frighted with Pirats, or some other enemies, that moove them to such sudden feare. Their houses are very simply builded with Pibble stone, without any chimneis, the fire being made in the middest thereof. The good man, wife, children, and other of their family eate and sleepe on the one side of the house, and the cattell on the other, very beastly and rudely, in respect of civilitie. They are destitute of wood, their fire is turfFes, and Cowshards. No wood in They have corne, bigge, and oates, with which they pay Orkney* their Kings rent, to the maintenance of his house. They take great quantitie of fish, which they dry in the wind and Sunne. They dresse their meat very filthily, and eate it without salt. Their apparell is after the rudest sort of Scotland. Their money is all base. Their Church and religion is reformed according to the Scots. The fisher men of England can better declare the dispositions F'lsher men of of those people then I: wherefore I remit other their &*&****" i dam traffike usages to their reports, as yeerely repaires thither, in t0 Qrkney. their course to and from Island for fish. i . i r i . We departed herehence the 8. of June, and followed [HI. 33.] our course betweene West and Northwest, untill the 4. l"Ju™ ™fj of July: all which time we had no night, but that easily, in'thoTe West and without any impediment we had when we were so and Northdisposed, the fruition of our bookes, and other pleasures west regions. to passe away the time: a thing of no small moment, to such as wander in unknowen seas, and long navigations, especially, when both the winds and raging surges do passe their common and wonted course. This benefite endureth in those parts not 6. weekes, while the sunne is neere the Tropike of Cancer: but where the pole is raised to 70. or 80. degrees, it continueth much longer. All along these seas, after we were sixe dayes sailing Great abunfrom Orkney, we met floting in the sea, great Firre trees, dance of Fine which as we judged, were with the furie of great floods treesfiot™g™ i J i 1 • T 1 i rooted up, and so driven into the sea. Island hath almost no other wood nor fuell, but such as they take It seemeth, that these trees are up upon their coastes. 1 1 • 1 Me sea. Inquire further of this c u r r e nt current. ^^ ^ ^ driven from some part of the New found land, with the t h at setteth from the West to the East. j^ ^ ^^^ within the making of Frisland. From this shoare 10. or 12. leagues, we met great Islands of yce, of halfe a mile, some more, some lesse in compasse, shewing above the sea, 30. or 40. fathoms, and as we supposed fast on ground, where with our lead we could scarse sound the bottome for depth. Here, in place of odoriferous and fragrant smels of sweete gums, & pleasant notes of musical! birdes, which other Countreys in more temperate Zones do yeeld, wee Yet% snow\and tasted the most boisterous Boreal blasts mixt with snow haikmJum a nd h a il and Ju/y. • ^ moneths of June and July, nothing 1. . 1 1 ' & . r . inferior to our untemperate winter: a sudden alteration, and especially in a place or Parallele, where the Pole is not elevate above 61. degrees: at which height other Countreys more to the North, yea unto 70. degrees, shew themselves more temperate then this doth. All along this coast yce lieth, as a continuall bulwarke, & so defendeth the Countrey, that those that would land there, incur great danger. Our Generall 3. dayes together attempted with the ship boate to have gone on shoare, which for that without great danger he could not accomplish, he deferred it untill a more convenient time. All along the coast lie very high mountaines covered with snow, except in such places, where through the steepenes of the mountaines of force it must needs fall. Foure dayes coasting along this land, we found no signe of habitation. Little birds, whiche we judged to have lost Friseland sub- the shore, by reason of thicke fogges which that Countrey ject tofigge. j s m u c h subject unto, came flying into our ships, which causeth us to suppose, that the Countrey is both more tollerable, and also habitable within, then the outward shore maketh shew or signification. From hence we departed the eight of July: and the 16. of the same, we came with the making of land, which land our Generall the yeere before had named The Queenes foreland, being an Island as we judge, lying neere the supposed continent with America: and on the other side, opposite to the same, one other Island called Halles Isle, after the name of the Master of the ship, neere adjacent to the firme land, supposed continent with Asia. Betweene the which two Islands there is a large entrance or streight, called Frobishers streight, after Frobishers the name of our Generall, the first finder thereof. This stret**** said streight is supposed to have passage into the sea of Sur, which I leave unknowen as yet. It seemeth that either here, or not farre hence, the sea should have more large entrance, then in other parts within the frozen or untemperate Zone: and that some contrary tide, either from the East or West, with maine force casteth out that great quantity of yce, which commeth floting from this coast, even unto Friseland, causing that Countrey to seeme more untemperate then others, much more Northerly then the same. I cannot judge that any temperature under the Pole, the time of the Sunnes Northerne declination being halfe a yere together, and one whole day, (considering that the Sunnes elevation surmounteth not 23. degrees and 30. minuts) can have power to dissolve such monstrous and huge yce, comparable to great mountaines, except by islands of yce. some other force, as by swift currents and tides, with comPara,bk t0 1 • 1 1 the helpe of the said day of halfe a yeere. mountaines. ir 1 r r ! i , Before we came within the making of these lands we tasted cold stormes, in so much that it seemed we had changed summer with winter, if the length of the dayes had not remooved us from that opinion. . l °. At our first comming, the streights seemed to be shut up with a long mure of yce, which gave no litle cause of discomfort unto us all: but our Generall, (to whose C?Ptaine Frodiligence imminent dangers, and difficult attempts seemed ^ffr hts ? ^ffr hts s?e d d i f f il ctall c&re and •if nothing, in respect of his willing mind, for the com- diligence for moditie of his Prince and Countrey,) with two little the benefite of Pinnesses prepared of purpose, passed thorow to* Prince and them to the East shore, and the Islands thereunto CountreJadjacent: and the ship, with the two Barks lay off and 215 twise r &i • • 1 , ( 1 The order of the people appearing on shoare. Fierce and bold people. One taken. THE ENGLISH VOYAGES on something further into the sea, from the danger of the yce. Whilest he was searching the Countrey neere the shoare, some of the people of the Countrey shewed themselves leaping and dauncing, with strange shrikes and cries, which gave no little admiration to our men. Our Generall desirous to allure them unto him by faire meanes, caused knives, and other things to be profered unto them, which they would not take at our hands: but being laid on the ground, and the party going away, they came and' tooke up, leaving some thing of theirs to countervaile the same. At the length two of them leaving their weapons, came downe to our Generall and Master, who did the like to them, commanding the company to stay, and went unto them: who after certaine dumbe signes, and mute congratulations, began to lay handes upon them, but they deliverly escaped, and ranne to their bowes aind arrowes, and came fiercely upon them, (not respecting the rest of our companie which were ready for their defence) but with their arrowes hurt divers of them : we tooke the one, and the other escaped. the Whilest our Generall was busied in searching Countrey, and those Islands adjacent on the Eastshoare^ the ship and barkes having great care, not to put farre into the sea from him, for that he had small store of victuals, were forced to abide in a cruell tempest, chancing in the night, amongst and in the thickest of the yce, which was so monstrous, that even the least of a thousand had bene of force sufficient, to have shivered our ship and barks into small portions, if God (who in all necessities, hath care upon the infirmitie of man) had not provided for this our extremitie a sufficient remedic through the light of the night, whereby we might well discerne to flee from such imminent dangers, which we avoyded with 14. Bourdes in one watch the space of 4 houres. If we had not incurred this danger amongst these monstrous Islands of yce, we should have lost our Generall and Master, and the most of our best sailers, which were on the shoare destitute of victuals: but by the valure of our Master Gunner, Master Jackman, and Richard Cox, Andrew Dier, the Masters Mates, men expert both in Master&n' navigation, and other good qualities, wee were all content Master Jackto incurre the dangers aforerehearsed, before we would man. with our owne safetie, runne into the seas, to the destruc- AndrewDier. tion of our sayd Generall, and his company. The day following, being the 19. of Julie, our captaine returned to the ship, with report of supposed riches, which shewed it selfe in the bowels of those barren mountaines, wherewith wee were all satisfied. Within foure daies after we had bene at the entrance of the streights, the Northwest and West winds dispersed the yce into the sea, & made us a large entrance into the streights, so that without any impediment, on the 19. of Julie we entred them, and the 20. thereof, our Generall and Master with great diligence, sought out and sounded the West shoare, and found out a faire Harborough for the ship and barkes to ride in, and named it after our Masters mate, Jackmans sound, and brought the ship, Jackmans barkes, and all their company to safe anker, except one souridt man, which died by Gods visitation. At our first arrivall, after the ship rode at anker, our generall, with such company as could well be spared from the ships, in marching order entred the lande, having speciall care by exhortations, that at our entrance thereinto, wee should all with one voyce, kneeling upon our knees, chiefly thanke God for our safe arrivall: secondly beseech him, that it would please his divine Majestie, long to continue our Queene, for whom he, and all the rest of our company in this order tooke possession of the Possession Countrey: and thirdly, that by our Christian studie and takenendevour, those barbarous people trained up in Pagan- isme, and infidelitie, might be reduced to the knowledge of true religion, and to the hope of salvation in Christ our Redeemer. With other words very apt to signifie his willing mind, and affection toward his Prince and Countrey: whereby all suspicion of an undutifull subject, may credibly be judged to be utterly exempted from his mind. All the rest of the Gentlemen and other deserve worthily herein, their due praise and commendation. These things in this order accomplished, our Generall commanded all the company to be obedient in things needfull for our owne safegard, to Master Fenton, Master Yorke, and Master Beast his Lieutenant, while he was occupied in other necessarie affaires, concerning our comming thither. After this order we marched through the Countrey, with Ensigne displaied, so farre as was thought needfull, and now and then heaped up stones on high mountaines, and other places in token of possession, as likewise to signifie unto such as hereafter may chance to arrive there, that possession is taken in the behalfe of some other Prince, by those who first found out the Countrey. Tee needefull Whoso maketh navigations to those Countreys, hath to be regarded n ot o n ely extreme winds, and furious seas to encounter men n?lS withall, but also many monstrous and great Islands of yce: a thing both rare, wonderfull, and greatly to be regarded. We were forced sundry times, while the ship did ride here at anker, to have continuall watch, with boats & [III. 35.] men ready with halsers to knit fast unto such yce, as with the ebbe & flood were tossed to and fro in the harborough, & with force of oares to hale them away, for endangering the ship. Our Generall certaine dayes searched this supposed continent with America, and not finding the commodity triall to answere his expectation, after he had made thereof he departed thence with two little barks, and men sufficient to the East shore being the supposed continent of Asia, and left the ship with most of the Gentlemen, souldiers, and sailers, untill such time as he either thought good to send or come for them. wUh sparkles ^he s t o n es °f t h is supposed continent with America like gold, be altogether sparkled, and glister in the Sunne like they verifie glistereth. the old Proverb: All is not gold that A common proverbe- The sea UniOn this West shore we found a dead fish floating, which had in his nose a home streight and torquet, of length two yards lacking two ynches, being broken in the top, where we might perceive it hollow, into the which some of our sailers putting spiders they presently died. I saw not the triall hereof, but it was reported unto me of a trueth: by the vertue whereof we supposed it to be the sea Unicorne. After our Generall had found out good harborough for corne% the ship and barks to anker in, and also such store of supposed gold ore as he thought himselfe satisfied withall, he returned to the Michael, whereof Master Yorke aforesaid was Captaine, accompanied with our master and his Mate: who coasting along the West shore not farre from whence the ship rode, they perceived a faire harborough, and willing to sound the same, at the entrance thereof they espied two tents of Seale skins, unto which the Captaine, our said Master, and other company resorted. At the sight of our men the people fled into The PeoPle the mountaines: neverthelesse they went to their tents, si^fofo ur where leaving certaine trifles of ours, as glasses, bels, meflt knives, and such like things they departed, not taking any thing of theirs except one dogge. They did in like maner leave behind them a letter, pen, yncke, and paper, whereby our men whom the Captaine lost the yere before, and in that peoples custody, might (if any of them were alive) be advertised of our presence and being there. e On the same day after consultation had, all the Gentlemen, and others likewise that could be spared from the ship, under the conduct and leading of Master Master PkilPhilpot, (unto whom in our Generall his absence, and his Pot* Lieutenant Master Beast, al the rest were obedient) went Master Beast. a shore, determining to see, if by faire means we could either allure them to familiarity, or otherwise take some of fierce When they were landed they fiercely assaulted our A assault of a m en ^\fa their bowes and arrowes, who wounded three **' them, and so attaine to some knowledge of those men whom our Generall lost the yeere before. At our comming backe againe to the place where their tents were before, they had remooved their tents further into the said Bay or Sound, where they might if they were driven from the land, flee with their boates into the sea. We parting our selves into two companies, and compassing a mountaine came suddenly upon them by land, who espying us, without any tarying fled to their boates, leaving the most part of their oares behind them for haste, and rowed downe the bay, where our two Pinnesses met them and drove them to shore: but if they had had all their oares, so swift are they in rowing, it had bene lost time to have chased them. of them with our arrowes: and perceiving themselves thus hurt, they desperatly leapt off" the Rocks into the Sea, and drowned themselves: which if they had not done, but had submitted themselves, or if by any meanes we could have taken them alive (being their enemies as they judged) we would both have saved them, & also have sought remedy to cure their wounds received at our hands. But they altogether voyd of humanity, and ignorant what mercy meaneth, in extremities looke for no other then death: and perceiving they should fall into our hands, thus miserably by drowning rather desired death then otherwise to be saved by us: the rest perceiving their fellowes in this distresse, fled into the high mountaines. Two women not being so apt to escape as the men were, the one for her age, and the other being incombred with a yong child, we tooke. The old wretch, whom divers of our Saylers supposed to be eyther a devill, or a witch, had her buskins plucked off, to see if she were cloven footed, and for her ougly hew and deformity we let her goe: the yong woman and the child we brought away. We named the place where they were slaine, Bloodie point: and the Bay or Harborough, Yorks sound, after the name of one of the Captaines of the two Barks. Having this knowledge both of their fiercenesse and Faire meanes cruelty, and perceiving that faire meanes as yet is not not ahle t0 able to allure them to familiarity, we disposed our selves, famUiarity. ** contrary to our inclination, something to be cruel, returned to their tents and made a spoyle of the same: where we found an old shirt, a doublet, a girdle, and also shooes of our men, whom we lost the yeere before: on nothing else unto them belonging could we set our eyes. Their riches are not gold, silver or precious Drapery, [III. 36.] but their said tents and botes, made of the skins of red Boafes °f Deare and Seale skins: also dogges like unto woolves, but for the most part black, with other trifles, more to be wondred at for their strangenesse, then for any other commoditie needefull for our use. Thus returning to our ship the 3. of August, we Our departure firme w i t h ^ * ^ '' the West shore supposed departed from America, after we had ankered there 13. dayes: and so the 4. thereof we came to our Generall on the East shore, and ankered in a faire Harborough named Anne Warwickes sound, unto which is annexed an Island both named after the Countesse of Warwicke, Anne Warwickes sound and Isle. In this Isle our Generall thought good for this -voyage, to fraight both the ship and barkes, with such stone or supposed gold minerall, as he judged to countervaile the charges of his first, and this his second navigation to these Countreys. In the meane time of our abode here some of the The countrey countrey people came to shew themselves unto us, sundry ^/<?/J times on the maine shore, neere adjacent to the said unt0 USt Isle. Our Generall desirous to have some newes of his men, whom he lost the yeere before, with some company with him repaired with the ship boat to common, or signe with them for familiaritie, whereunto he is perswaded to bring them. They at the first shew made tokens, that three of his five men were alive, and desired penne, ynck, and paper, and that within three or foure dayes they would returne, and (as we judged) bring those of our men which were living, with them. They also made signes or tokens of their King, whom they called Cacough, & how he was carried on mens shoulders, and a man farre surmounting any of our company, in bignesse and stature. With these tokens and signes of writing, penne, yncke, and paper was delivered them, which they would not take at our hands, but being laid upon the shore, and t h e )r d e s i re a n y t h i n S f° r c h a n g e °f theirs, t h e 7 do w h en Jaying for that which is left so much as they thinke will countervaile the same, and not comming neere toIt seemeth they have bene used to this trade gether. or traffique, with some other people adjoyning, or not farre distant from their Countrey. b ut k nd firme After 4. dayes some of them shewed themselves upon w e re before> Qur w h e re ^ ^ General very glad thereof, supposing to heare of our men, went from the Island, with the boat, and sufficient company with him. They seemed very glad, and allured him about a certaine point of the land: behind which they might perceive a company of the crafty villaines to lye lurking, whom our Generall would not deale withall, for that he knew not what company they were, and so with few signes dismissed them and returned to his company. An other time as our said Generall was coasting the Countrey with two little Pinnesses, whereby at our returne ^ e might make the better relation thereof, three of the crafty villains, with a white skin allured us to them. Once againe our generall, for that he hoped to heare of his men, went towards them: at our comming neere the shore whereon they were, we might perceive a number of them lie hidden behind great stones, & those 3. in sight labouring by al meanes possible that some would come on land: and perceiving we made no hast ^ The people shew themselves the third time. The people by words nor friendly signes, which they used by clapping Their first of their hands, and being without weapon, and but 3. me*nes t0 in sight, they sought further meanes to provoke us thereunto. One alone laid flesh on the shore, which Their second we tooke up with the Boat hooke, as necessary victuals manes. for the relieving of the man, woman, and child, whom we had taken: for that as yet they could not digest our meat: whereby they perceived themselves deceived of their expectation, for all their crafty allurements. Yet once againe to make (as it were) a full shew of their Their third 7f craftiest craftie natures, and subtile sleights, to the intent thereby an s^ a i_ • j _i 1 ° r V allurement. to have intrapped and taken some of our men, one of them counterfeited himselfe impotent and lame of his legs, who seemed to descend to the water side, with great difficulty: and to cover his craft the more, one of his fellowes came downe with him, and in such places where he seemed unable to passe, he tooke him on his shoulders, set him by the water side, and departed from him, leaving him (as it should seeme) all alone, who playing his counterfait pageant very well, thought thereby to provoke some of us to come on shore, not fearing, but that one of us might make our party good with a lame man. Our Generall having compassion of his impotency, Compassion to i r b 1 1 1 i* i J • thought good (if it were possible) to cure him thereof: cfre a cra^ wherefore he caused a souldier to snoote at him with his Caleever, which grased before his face. The counterfeit villeine deliverly fled, without any impediment at all, and got him to his bow and arrowes, and the rest from their lurking holes, with their weapons, bowes, arrowes, slings, and darts. Our Generall caused some caleevers to be shot off at them, wherby some being hurt, they might hereafter stand in more feare of us. ' a me m a n -i This was all the answere for this time we could have [III. 37.] of our men, or of our Generals letter. Their crafty dealing at these three severall times being thus manifest unto us, may plainely shew their disposition in other things to be correspondent. We judged that they used these stratagemes, thereby to have caught some of us> for the delivering of the man, woman and child whom we had taken. They are men of a large corporature, and good proportion : their colour is not much unlike the Sunne burnt Countrey man, who laboureth daily in the Sunne for his living. They weare their haire something long, and cut before either with stone or knife, very disorderly. Their women weare their haire long, and knit up with two loupes, shewing forth on either side of their faces, and the rest foltred upon a knot. Also some of their women race their faces proportionally, as chinne, cheekes, and forehead, and the wrists of their hands, whereupon they lay a colour which continueth darke azurine. They eate their meat all raw, both flesh, fish, and foule, or something per boyled with blood and a little water which they drinke. For lacke of water they will eate yce, that is hard frosen, as pleasantly as we will do Sugar Candie, or other Sugar. If they for necessities sake stand in need of the premisses, such grasse as the Countrey yeeldeth they plucke up and eate, not deintily, or salletwise to allure their stomacks to appetite: but for necessities sake without either salt, oyles or washing, like brute beasts devouring the same. They neither use table, stoole, or table cloth for comlines: but when they are imbrued with blood knuckle deepe, and their knives in like sort, they use their tongues as apt instruments to lick them cleane: in doing whereof they are assured to loose none of their victuals. Dogges like They frank or keepe certain e dogs not much unlike unto wolves. Wolves, which they yoke togither, as we do oxen & horses, to a sled or traile: and so carry their necessaries over the yce and snow from place to place: as the captive, whom we have, made perfect signes. And when those dogs are not apt for the same use: or when with hunger they are constrained for lacke of other victuals* they eate them: so that they are as needfull for them Theyeatedogs in respect of their bignesse, as our oxen are for us. fieshThey apparell themselves in the skins of such beasts as they kill, sewed together with the sinewes of them. All the foule which they kill, they skin, and make thereof one kind of garment or other, to defend them from the cold. , J *V They make their apparel with hoods and tailes, which Hoods and tailes they give when they thinke to gratifie any friend- taiks t0Jheir , . ship shewed unto them: a great signe of friendship with them. The men have them not so side as the women. i i • apparell r'• -, P J rr r The men and women weare their hose close to their legges, from the wast to the knee without any open before, as well the one kind as the other. Upon their legges they weare hose of leather, with the furre side inward two or three paire on at once, and especially the In those hose they put their knives, needles, women. and other things needfull to beare about. They put a bone within their hose, which reacheth from the foote to the knee, whereupon they draw their said hose, and so in place of garters they are holden from falling downe about their feete. They dresse their skinnes very soft and souple with the haire on. In cold weather or Winter they weare the furre side inward: and in Summer outward. Other apparell they have none but the said skinnes. Those beasts, fishes, and foules, which they kill, are their meat, drinke, apparell, houses, bedding, hose, shooes, threed, and sailes for their boates, with many other necessaries whereof they stand in need, and almost all their riches. Their houses are tents made of Seale skins, pitched TJMr houses up with 4. Firre quarters foure square meeting at the ^ /^ top, and the skins sewed together with sinewes, and laid thereupon: they are so pitched up, that the entrance into them is alwayes South or against the Sunne. They have other sorts of houses which we found not vii 225 bones, and a skinne layd over them, to withstand the raine, or other weather: the entrance of them being not much unlike an Ovens mouth, whereto I thinke they resort for a time to fish, hunt, and foule, and so leave them untill the next time they come thither againe. Their weapons Their weapons are bowes, arrowes, darts, and slings. of defence. Their bowes are of wood of a yard long, sinewed at the back with strong sinewes, not glued too, but fast girded and tyed on. Their bow strings* are likewise sinewes. Their arrowes are three pieces nocked with bone, and ended with bone, with those two ends, and the wood in the midst, they passe not in length halfe a yard or little more. They are fethered with two fethers the penne end being cut away, and the fethers layd upon the arrow with the broad side to the wood ; insomuch that they seeme when they are tyed on, to have foure [III. 38.] Three sorts of fethers. They have also three sorts of heads to those heads to their a r r o w es : o ne s o r t of stone or yron, proportioned like to a heart: the second sort of bone, much like unto a stopt head, with a hooke on the same: the third sort of bone likewise made sharpe at both sides, and sharpe pointed. They are not made very fast but lightly tyed to, or else set in a nocke, that upon small occasion the arrowes leave these heads behind them: and they are of small force, except they be very neere when they shoote. Their Darts are made of two sorts : the one with many of bones in the fore end and likewise in the midst: their proportions are not much unlike our toasting yrons but longer: these they cast out of an instru- ment of [wood, very readily. The other sort is greater then the first aforesayd, with a long bone made sharpe on both sides not much unlike a Rapier, which I take to bee their most hurtfull weapon. They have two sorts of boats made of leather, set out of wood, artificially tyed t he i n n er s i de w i th q u a r t e rs . 1 • 1 1 together with thongs or the same: the greater sort are not much unlike our wherries, wherein sixeteene or 226 r 1 1 J J Two sorts oj- iarts. forkes Two sorts of hates made of guts of such beasts as they kill very fine and thinne, which they sew together: the other boate is but for one man to sit and row in with one oare. Their order of fishing, hunting, and fouling are with T**y u*e t0 these said weapons: but in what sort, or how they use ^ j/ them we have no perfect knowledge as yet. I can suppose their abode or habitation not to be here, If tsl°^e su?~ for that neither their houses or apparell, are of such ^/ r z-^^7_ force to withstand the extremity of cold, that the Coun- ing is ehetrey seemeth to be infected with all: neither do I see where, any signe likely to performe the same. Those houses or rather dennes which stand there, have no signe of footway, or any thing else troden, which is one of the chiefest tokens of habitation. And those tents which they bring with them, when they have sufficiently hunted and fished, they remove to other places: and when they have sufficiently stored them of such victuals, as the Countrey yeeldeth or bringeth forth, they returne to their winter stations or habitations. This conjecture do I make, for the infertility which I conjecture to be in that Countrey. They have some yron whereof they make arrow heads, Their use °f instruments, to worke their yron' little knives, and other boates, bowes, arrowes, and darts withall, which are very unapt to doe any thing withall but with great labour. It seemeth that they have conversation with some other people, of whom for exchange they should receive the same. They are greatly delighted with any thing that is bright, or giveth a sound. What knowledge they have of God, or what Idoll Anthropophagi. they adore, we have no perfect intelligence, I thinke them rather Anthropophagi, or devourers of mans flesh then otherwise: for that there is no flesh or fish which they find dead (smell it never so filthily) but they will eate it, as they finde it without any other dressing. A loathsome thing, either to the beholders or hearers. There is no maner of creeping beast hurtfull, except Signes of gold some Spiders (which as many affirme, are signes of great eure. store of gold) and also certaine stinging Gnattes, which bite so fiercely, that the place where they bite shortly after swelleth and itcheth very sore. Signes of gold They make signes of certaine people that weare bright /rom other pl at es of gold in their foreheads, and other places of people. r r Description of The Countreys on both sides the streights lye very r o u gh stony mountaines, and great quantitie the Countreis. j^gh wj tj 1 t • their bodies. i_ _r of snow thereon. There is very little plaine ground and no grasse, except a little which is much like unto mosse that groweth on soft ground, such as we get Turffes in. There is no wood at all. To be briefe there is nothing fit or profitable for the use of man, which that Countrey with roote yeeldeth or bringeth forth: Howbeit there is great quantity of Deere, whose skins are like unto Asses, there heads or homes doe farre exceede, as well in length as also in breadth, any in these our parts or Countreys: their feete likewise are as great as our oxens, which we measured to be seven or eight ynches in breadth. There are also hares, wolves, fishing beares* and sea foule of sundry sorts. As the Countrey is barren and unfertile, so are they rude and of no capacitie to culture the same to any perfection: but are contented by their hunting, fishing, and fouling, with raw flesh and warme blood to satisfie their greedy panches, which is their only glory. A signe oj ^* There is great likelihood of Earthquakes or thunder: *° r t ' l at t ^ l e re a re k u £ e anc* m o n s t r o us mountaines, whose greatest substance are stones, and those stones so shaken with some extraordinarie meanes that one is separated from another, which is discordant from all other Quarries. There are no rivers or running springs, but such as s u ch water as the mountaines and hilles, whereon [III. 39.] NsuchTsTtheUt t h r o u g h 7unn7doth discendeth from cause to come great drifts of snow do lie, are ingendred. of snow. It argueth also that there should be none: for that the earth, which with the extremitie of the Winter is so 228 t he S u n n e > w i th . should be neior Such valleis as are rivers in the frosen within, that that water which should have recourse A probability within to maintaine springs, hath not his thf^e[e the same r , i • r L 11 • • i motion, whereof great waters have their onginall, as by ther s^r- experience is seene otherwhere. capable to receive the water, that in the Summer time ground. by the operation of the Sunne descendeth from great abundance of snowe, which continually lyeth on the mountaines and hath no passage, sinketh into the earth and so vanisheth away, without any runnell above the earth, by which occasion or continuall standing of the said water, the earth is opened, and the great frost yeeldeth to the force thereof, which in other places foure or five fathoms within the ground for lacke of the said moisture, the earth (even in the very Summer time) is frosen, and so combineth together, that scarcely instruments with great force can unknit them. Also where the water in those valleis can have no such passage away, by the continuance of time in such order as is before rehearsed, the yeerely descent from the mountaines filleth them full, that at the lowest banke of the same, they fall into the valley, and so continue as fishing Ponds or Stagnes in Summer time full of water, and in the Winter hard frosen: as by skarres that remaine thereof in Summer may easily be perceived: so that the heat of Summer is nothing comparable or of force to dissolve the extremitie of cold that commeth in Winter. the stones Neverthelesse I am assured that below the force of the frost within the earth, the waters have recourse, and themselves out of sight into the sea, which emptie through the extremitie of the frost are constrained to doe the same: by which occasion the earth within is kept the warmer, and springs have their recourse, which is the Springs nouonely nutriment of golde and Minerals within the same. n$h M There is much to be sayd of the commodities of these Countreys, which are couched within the bowels of the earth, which I let passe till more perfect triall be made thereof. The 24. of August, after we had satisfied our minds with fraight sufficient for our vessels, though not our covetous desires with such knowledge of the Countrey, people, and other commodities as are before rehearsed, Our departure we departed therehence. The 17. of September we fell flJSe w i th t he l a n ds e nd of E n g l a n d> a nd so s a i l ed Haven, from whence our Generall rode to the Court for order, to what Port or Haven to conduct the ship. to Milford How & when We lost our two Barkes in the way homeward, the t he o t t i er the 31. of the same WBarkl°whkh o ne Godnevertke- moneth, by occasion of great tempest and fogge. Howlesse restored, beit God restored the one to Bristowe, and the other t he 2 9" °^ A ug u s t> made his course by Scotland to Yermouth. In this voyage we lost two men, one in the way by Gods visitation, and the other homeward cast over borde with a surge of the sea. The conclusion, j Could declare unto the Readers, the latitude and A longitude of such places and regions as we have bene at, but not altogether so perfectly as our masters and others, with many circumstances of tempests and other accidents incident to Sea faring men, which seeme not altogether strange, but I let them passe to their reports as men most apt to set forth and declare the same. I have also left the names of the Countreys on both the shores untouched, for lacke of understanding the peoples language: as also for sundry respects, not needfull as yet to be declared. Countreys new discovered where commoditie is to be looked for, doe better accord with a new name given by the discoverers, then an uncertaine name by a doubtfull Authour. Our general named sundry Islands, Mountaines, Capes, and Harboroughs after the names of divers Noble men and other gentlemen his friends, aswel on the one shore as also on the other.