The first Voyage of M. Martine Frobisher, to the Northwest, for the search of the straight or passage to China, written by Christopher Hall, Master in the Gabriel, and made in the yeere of our Lord 1576. \\rm nnrr^jJHe 7. of June being Thursday, the two June- WMMatthew j g | -i « « l D| Barks, viz. the Gabriel, and the II Michael ml tfcaJLe K oftheMickael. |G$2it llSRill b a re d o wn & our Pinnesse set saile at Ratcliffe, and to D e t f o r d> a nd th<;re we ancred: the cause was, that our Pinnesse burst her boultsprit, and foremast aboard of a ship that rode at Detford, else wee meant to have past that day by the Court then at Grenewich. The 8. day being Friday, about 12 of the clocke we wayed at Detford, and set saile all three of us, and bare downe by the Court, where we shotte off our ordinance and made the best shew we could: Her Majestie beholding the same, commended it, and bade us farewell, with shaking her hand at us out of the window. Afterward shee sent a Gentleman aboord of us, who declared that her Majestie had good liking of our doings, and thanked us for it, and also willed our Captaine to come the next day to the Court to take his leave of her. The same day towards night M. Secretarie Woolly came aboorde of us, and declared to the company, that her Majestie had appointed him to give them charge to be obedient, and diligent to their Captaine, and governours in all things, and wished us happie successe. The 12. day being over against Gravesend, by the castle or blockehouse, we observed the latitude, which was 51. degrees 33. min. And in that place the variation of the Compasse is 11. degrees and a halfe. Faire hknd. The 24. day at 2. of the clocke after noone, I had sight of Faire yle, being from us 6. leagues North and by East, and when I brought it Northwest and by North, it did rise at the Southermost ende with a litle hornmocke, and swampe in the middes. The 25. day from 4. to 8. a clocke in the forenoone, the winde at Northwest and by North a fresh gale, I cast about to the Westward, the Southermost head of Shot- Shotknd. land called Swinborne head Northnorthwest from me, and the land of Faire yle, West Southwest from me. I sailed directly to the North head of that said land, sounding as I ranne in, having 60. 50. and 40. fathoms, and gray redde shels: and within halfe a mile of that Island, there are 36. fathoms, for I sailed to that Island to see whether there were any roadesteede for a Northwest winde, and I found by my sounding hard rockes, and foule ground, and deepe water, within two cables length of the shoare, 28. fathome, and so did not ancre but plied to and fro with my foresaile, and mizen till it was a high water under the Island. The tide setteth there Northwest and Southeast: the flood setteth Southeast, and the ebbe Northwest. The 26. day having the winde at South a faire gale, sayling from Faire yle to Swinborne head, I did observe the latitude, the Island of Fowlay being West Northwest from me 6. leagues, and Swinborne head East southeast from me, I found my * elevation to be 37. degr. and my * By elevation declination 22. degr. 46. min. So that my latitude was h[ me/neth , x- • A 1 1 • the distance of 59. degr. 46. mm. At that present being neere to thesunnefrom Swinborne head, having a leake which did trouble us, as the zenith. also to take in fresh water, I plyed roome with a sound, which is called S. Tronions, and there did ancre in seven S. Tronions. fathoms water, and faire sande. You have comming in the sounds mouth in the entring 17. 15. 12. 10. 9. 8. and 7. fathoms, and the sound lyeth in North northwest, and there we roade to a West sunne, & stopped our leake, and having refreshed our selves with water, at a North northwest sunne, I set saile from S. Tronions the winde at South Southest, and turned out till wee were cleare of the sound, and so sailed West to go cleare of the Island of Fowlay. And running ofF toward Fowlay, Fowfoyhland. [III. 30.] I sounded, having fiftie fathome, and streamie ground, and also I sounded Fowlay being North from mee one league off that Islande, having fiftie fathome at the South head, and streamie ground, like broken otmell, and one shell being redde and white like mackerell. The 27. day at a South sunne I did observe the Latitude 59. deg. 59. mm. latitude, the Island of Fowlay being from me two leagues j Here they be- -^ gintosaik East Northeast: I found my selre to be in latitude 59. West and by degrees, 59. min. truly observed, the winde at South Nortk. Southwest: I sailed West and by North. -^ J X T' ir 1 1 J • r . T From 12. to foure a clocke afternoone, the wind at South, a faire gale the shippe sailed West and by North 6. leagues, and at the ende of this watch, I sounded having 60. fathome, with little stones and shels, the Island from us 8. leagues East. July the first The first of July, from 4. to 8. a clocke, wee sailed West 4. glasses 4. leagues, and at that present we had so much winde that we spooned afore the sea Southwest 2. leagues. 3. The 3. day we found our Compasse to bee varied one point to the Westwards: this day from 4. to 8. a clocke we sailed West and by North 6. leagues. The Compasse ^warTs^^' 4# point. From 8. to 12. a clocke at noone West and by North l e a g u e s - At t h at present I found our Compasse to be varied i l. deg. and one 4. part to the Westwards, which is one point. 11. The 11 day at a Southeast sunne we had sight of the The Island of ]ancj of Friseland bearing from us West northwest 16. leagUes, a n d rising like pinacles of steeples, and all rise an . covered with snowe. I found my selfe in 61. degr. of latitude. Wee sailed to the shoare and could finde no ground at 150. fathoms, we hoised out our boate, and the Captaine with 4. men rowed to the shoare to get on land, but the land lying full of yce, they could not get on land, and so they came aboord againe: We had much adoe to get cleare of the yce by reason of the fogge. Yet from Thursday 8. a clocke in the morning to Friday at noone we sailed Southwest 20. leagues. The 18. day at a Southwest sunne I found the sunne 18. to be elevated 33. deg. And at a Southsoutheast sunne 40. deg. So I observed it till I found it at the highest, and then it was elevated 52. deg. of the Compasse to be 2. points and a halfe to the °{w0 points Westward. I judged the variation The variation ^ a halfe to the The 21. day we had sight of a great drift of yce, West. seeming a firme lande, and we cast Westward to be A sreat ofyce' cleare of it. drift The 26. we had sight of a land of yce: the latitude The latitude of degrees z. was 62. degrees, and two minutes. fa. The 28. day in the morning was very foggie: but at the clearing up of the fogge, wee had sight of lande, Sight of land which I supposed to be Labrador, with great store of s"PPosedto y . "- , T . 3 , . & - . . have bene Layce about the land: I ranne in towards it, and sownded, brador. but could get no ground at 100. fathom, and the yce being so thicke, I could not get to the shoare, and so lay off, and came cleare of the yce. Upon Munday 30. we came within a mile of the shoare, and sought a harborowe: all the sownd was full of yce, and our boate rowing a shoare, could get no ground at 100. fathom, within a Cables length of the shoare: then we sailed Eastnortheast along the shoare, for so the lande lyeth, and the currant is there great, setting Northeast, and Southwest: and if we could have gotten anker ground, wee would have seene with what force it had runne, but I judge a ship may drive a league and a halfe, in one houre, with that tide. This day at 4. of the cloke in the morning, being 31. faire and cleere, we had sight of a head land, as we judged, bearing from us north, and by East, and we sailed Northeast, and by North to that land, and when we came thither, wee could not get to the lande for yce: for the yce stretched along the coast, so that we could not come to the land, by five leagues. Wednesday the first of August it calmed, and in the August. after noone I caused my boate to be hoysed out, being *• hard by a great Island of yce, and I and foure men rowed 2* to that yce, and sownded within two Cables length of it, and had sixteene fathome, and little stones, and after that sownded againe within a Minion shot, and had ground at an hundreth fathome, and faire sand: we sownded the next day a quarter of a myle from it, and had sixtie fathome rough ground, and at that present being aboord, that great Island of yce fell one part from another, making a noyse as if a great cliffe had fallen into the Sea. And at foure of the clocke I sownded againe, and had 90. fathbme, and small blacke stones, and little white stones, like pearles. The tide here did set to the shoare. 10. The tenth I tooke foure men, and my selfe, and rowed to shoare to an Island one league from the maine, and there the flood setteth Southwest alongest the shoare, and it floweth as neere as I could judge so too, I could not tarry to proove it, because the ship was a great way from me, and I feared a fogge: but when I came a I went to ye top of the shoare, it was a low water. Island, and before I came backe, it was hied a foote water, and so without tarrying I came aboord. "• The 11. we found our latitude to be 63. degr. and StreitlTthe6 e ^ t minutes, and this day we entred the streight. latitude0/63. The 12. wee set saile towardes an Island, called the dcg.andZ.min. Gabriels Island, which was 10. leagues then from us. nil •• I2« We espied a sound, and bare with it, and came to a s a n die Baye, where we came to an anker, the land bearing I 13 East southeast off" us, and there we rode al night in 8* fathome water. It floweth there at a Southeast Moone. We called it Priors sownd, being from the Gabriels Island* tenne leagues. 14. The 14. we waied, and ranne into another sownde, where wee ankered in 8. fathome water, faire sand, and blacke oaze, and there calked our ship, being weake from the wales upward, and tooke in fresh water. 15. The 15. day we waied, and sailed to Priors Bay, being a mile from thence. 16. The 16. day was calme, and we rode still, without yce, but presently within two houres it was frozen round about the ship, a quarter of an ynch thicke, and that day very faire, and calme. The 17. day we waied, and came to Thomas Williams 17. Island. The 18. day we sailed North northwest, and ankered 18. againe in 23. fathome, and tough oaze, under Burchers Island, which is from the former Island, ten leagues. The 19. day in the morning, being calme, and no 19. winde, the Captaine and I tooke our boate, with eight men in her, to rowe us a shoare, to see if there were there any people, or no, and going to the toppe of the Island, we had sight of seven boates, which came rowing s*g& °fthe from the East side, toward that Island: whereupon we C°™*ey returned aboord againe: at length we sent our boate with five men in her, to see whither they rowed, and so with a white cloth brought one of their boates with their men along the shoare, rowing after our boate, till such time as they sawe our ship, and then they rowed a* shoare: then I went on shoare my selfe, and gave every of them a threadden point, and brought one of them aboord of me, where hee did eate and drinke, and then carried him on shoare againe. Whereupon all the rest came aboord with their boates, being nineteene persons, and they spake, but we understoode them not. They The dexripbee like to Tartars, with long blacke haire, broad faces, *£0°£the and flatte noses, and tawnie in colour, wearing Seale skinnes, and so doe the women, not differing in the fashion, but the women are marked in the face with blewe streekes downe the cheekes, and round about the eyes. Their boates are made all of Seales skinnes, with a keele of wood within the skin: the proportion of them is like a Spanish shallop, save only they be flat in the bottome, and sharpe at both ends. The twentieth day wee wayed, and went to the East- 20. side of this Island, and I and the Captaine, with foure men more went on shoare, and there we sawe their houses, and the people espying us, came rowing towards 209 VII c. of our men taken by the people. They returne. 26. September. our boate: whereupon we plied toward our boate: and wee being in our boate and they ashoare, they called to us, and we rowed to them, and one of their company came into our boate, and we carried him a boord, and gave him a Bell, and a knife: so the Captaine and I willed five of our men to set him a shoare at a rocke, and not among the company, which they came from, but their wilfulnesse was such, that they would goe to them, and so were taken themselves, and our boate lost. The next day in the morning, we stoode in neere the shoare, and shotte off a fauconet, and sounded our trumpet, but we could heare nothing of our men: this sound wee called the five mens sound, and plyed out of it, but ankered againe in thirtie fathome, and oaze: and riding there all night, in the morning, the snow lay a foote thicke upon our hatches. The 22. day in the morning we wayed, and went againe to the place where we lost our men, and our boate. We had sight of foureteene boates, and some came neere to us, but wee could learne nothing of our men: among the rest, we intised one boate to our ships side, with a Bell, and in giving him the Bell, we tooke him, and his boate, and so kept him, and so rowed downe to Thomas Williams Island, and there ankered all night. The 26. day we waied, to come homeward, and by 12. of the clocke at noone, we were thwart of Trumpets Island. The next day we came thwart of Gabriels Island, and at 8. of the clocke at night we had the Cape Labrador as we supposed West from us, ten leagues. The 28. day we went our course Southeast. We sailed Southeast, and by East, 22. leagues. The first day of September in the morning we had sight of the land of Friseland, being eight leagues from us, but we could not come neerer it, for the monstrous yce that lay about it. From this day, till the sixth of this Moneth, we ranne along Island, and had the South part of it at eight of the clocke, East from us ten leagues. 2 10 2 1. 2 2. 27. 28. 29. The seventh day of this moneth we had a very terrible 7« storme, by force whereof, one of our men was blowen into the sea out of our waste, but he caught hold of the foresaile sheate, and there held till the Captaine pluckt him againe into the ship. The 25. day of this moneth we had sight of the [HI- 32] Island of Orkney, which was then East from us. The first day of October we had sight of the Sheld, The SheU. and so sailed about the coast, and ankered at Yarmouth, and the next day we came into Harwich. The language of the Argoteyt, a hand. Cangnawe, a nose. Arered, an eye. Keiotot, a tooth. Mutchatet, the head. Chewat, an eare. Comagaye, a legge. Atoniagay, a foote. Callagay, a paire of breeches. people of Meta incognita. ' Attegay, a coate. Pollevetagay, a knife. Accaskay, a shippe. Coblone, a thumbe. Teckkere, the foremost finger. finger. Ketteckle, the middle finger. Mekellacane, the fourth Yacketrone, the litle finger. The second voyage of Master Martin Frobisher, made to the West and Northwest Regions, in the yeere 1577. with a description of the Countrey, and people: Written by Master Dionise Settle. N Whitsunday, being the sixe and twentieth of May, in the yeere of our Lord God 1577. Captaine Frobisher departed from Blacke Wall, with one of the Queenes Majesties ships, called The Aide, of nine score tunnes, or thereabouts : and two other little Barkes like- wise, the one called The Gabriel, whereof Master Fenton, a Gentleman of my Lord of Warwikes, was Captaine: