The English Voyages, Navigations, and Discoveries (intended for the finding of a North- west passage) to the North parts of America, to Meta incognita, and the backeside of Gronland, as farre as 72 degrees and 12 minuts : performed first by Sebastian Cabota, and since by Sir Martin Frobisher, and M. John Davis, with the Patents, Discourses, and Advertisements thereto belonging. The Letters patents of King Henry the seventh granted unto John Cabot and his three sonnes, the disLewis, Sebastian, and Sancius for coverie of new and unknowen lands. Enricus Dei gratia rex Angliae, & Franciae, & Dominus Hiberniae, omnibus, ad quos praesentes literae nostrae pervenerint, salutem. Notum sit & manifestum, quod dedimus & concessimus, ac per praesentes damus & concedimus pro nobis & haeredibus nostris, dilectis nobis Joanni Caboto civi Venetiarum, Lodovico, Sebastiano, & Sancio, filiis dicti Joannis, & eorum ac cujuslibet eorum haeredibus & deputatis, plenam ac liberam authoritatem, facultatem & potestatem navigandi ad omnes partes, regiones, & sinus maris orientalis, occidentalism & septentrionalis, sub banneris, vexillis, & insigniis nostris, cum quinque navibus sive navigiis, cujusciinque portiturae & qualitatis existant, & cum tot & tantis nautis & hominibus, quot & quantos in dictis navibus secum ducere voluerint, suis & eorum propriis sumptibus & expensis, ad inveniendum, disinsulas, cooperiendum, & investigandum quascunque patrias, regiones sive provincias gentilium & infidelium quorumcunque, in quacunque parte mundi positas, quae Christianis omnibus ante haec tempora fuerint incognitae. Concessimus etiam eisdem & eorum cuilibet, eorumque & cujuslibet eorum haeredibus & deputatis, ac licentiam dedimus ad affigendum praedictas banneras nostras & insignia in quacunque villa, oppido, castro, insula seu terra firma a se noviter inventis. Et quod praenominatus Joannes, & filii ejusdem, seu haeredes & eorum deputati, quascunque hujusmodi villas, castra, oppida, & insulas a se inventas, quae subjugari, occupari, possideri possint, subjugare, occupare, possidere valeant tanquam vasalli nostri, & gubernatores, locatenentes, & deputati eorundem, dominium, titulum & jurisdictionem earundem insularum, ac terrae villarum, castrorum, oppidorum, firmae sic inventorum nobis acquirendo. Ita tamen, ut ex omnibus fructibus, proficuis, emolumentis, commodis, lucris, & obventionibus ex hujusmodi navigatione provenientibus, praefatus Johannes, & filii ac haeredes, & eorum deputati, teneantur & sint obligati nobis pro omni viagio suo, toties quoties ad portum nostrum Bristolliae applicuerint (ad quern omnino applicare teneantur & sint astricti) deductis omnibus sumptibus & impensis necessariis per eosdem factis, quintam partem capitalis lucri facti, sive in mercibus, sive in pecuniis persolvere: Dantes nos & concedentes eisdem suisque haeredibus & deputatis, ut ab omni solutione custumarum omnium & singulorum bonorum & mercium, quas secum reportarint ab illis locis sic noviter inventis, liberi sint & immunes. Et insuper dedimus & concessimus eisdem ac suis haeredibus & deputatis, quod terras omnes firmae, insulae, villae, oppida, castra, & loca quaecunque a se [III. 5.] inventa, quotquot ab eis inveniri contigerit, non possint ab aliis quibusvis nostris subditis frequentari seu visitari, absque licentia praedictorum Joannis & ejus filiorum, suoriimque deputatorum, sub poena amissionis tarn navium quam bonorum omnium quorumciinque ad ea loca sic inventa navigare praesumentium. Volentes & strictissime mandantes omnibus & singulis nostris subditis, tarn in terra quam in mari constitutis, ut prsefato Joanni, & ejus filiis ac deputatis, bonam assistentiam in provisione commeatus & victualium pro sua pecunia emendorum, atque aliarum omnium rerum sibi providendarum pro dicta navigatione sumenda suos omnes favores & auxilia impertiant. has literas nostras fieri fecimus patentes. Teste meipso apud Westmonasterium quinto die Martii anno regni nostri undecimo. In cujus rei testimonium Ann- DomlW$ The same in English. HEnry by the grace of God, king of England and France, and lord of Ireland, to all to whom these presents shall come, Greeting. Be it knowen that we have given and granted, and by these presents do give and grant for us and our heires, to our welbeloved John Cabot citizen of Venice, to Lewis, Sebastian, and Santius, sonnes of the sayd John, and to the heires of them, and every of them, and their deputies, full and free authority, leave, and power to saile to all parts, countreys, and seas of the East, of the West, and of the North, under our banners and ensignes, with five ships of what burthen or quantity soever they be, and as many mariners or men as they will have with them in the sayd ships, upon their owne proper costs and charges, to seeke out, discover, and finde whatsoever isles, countreys, regions or provinces of the heathen and infidels whatsoever they be, and in what part of the world soever they be, which before this time have bene unknowen to all Christians: we have granted to them, and also to every of them, the heires of them, and every of them, and their deputies, and have given them licence to set up our banners and ensignes in every village, towne, castle, isle, or maine land of them newly found. And that the aforesayd John and his sonnes, or their heires and assignes may subdue, occupy and possesse all such townes, cities, castles and isles of them found, which they can subdue, occupy and possesse, as our vassals, and lieutenants, getting unto us the rule, title, and jurisdiction of the same villages, townes, castles, & firme land the aforesayd John, and his so found. Yet so that sonnes and heires, and their deputies, be holden and bounden of all the fruits, profits, gaines, and commodities growing of such navigation, for every their voyage, as Bristol thought oft en as yemeetestport w h i ch for Westerne discoveries. \ 11 ^ J t h ey shall arrive at our port of Bristoll (at the s h aU be b o u nd a nd J h o l d en i o n e l y L A to • arrive) all maner of necessary costs and charges by them r made, being deducted, to pay unto us in wares or money the fift part of the capital! gaine so gotten. We giving and granting unto them and to their heires and deputies, Freedomefrom that they shall be free from all paying of customes of custome. ajj a n (j si ng Ui ar suc}1 merchandize as they shall bring with them from those places so newly found. And moreover, we have given and granted to them, their heires and deputies, that all the firme lands, isles, villages, townes, castles and places whatsoever they be that they shall chance to finde, may not of any other of our subjects be frequented or visited without the licence of the foresayd John and his sonnes, and their deputies, under paine of forfeiture aswell of their shippes as of all and singuler goods of all them that shall presume to saile to those places so found. Willing, and most straightly commanding all and singuler our subjects aswell on land as on sea, to give good assistance to the aforesayd John and his sonnes and deputies, and that as well in arming and furnishing their ships or vessels, as in provision of food, and in buying of victuals for their money, and all other things by them to be provided necessary for the sayd navigation, they do give them all their helpe and favour. In witnesse whereof we have caused to be made these our Letters patents. Witnesse our selfe at Westminster the fift day of March, in the eleventh yeere of our reigne.