In witnesse whereof we have made these standing. our Letters to bee made patents: Witnesse our selfe 1583. at Westminster, the sixt day of Februarie, in the sixe and twenty yeere of our reigne. The first voyage of M. John Davis, undertaken in June 1585. for the discoverie of the Northwest passage, Written by M. John Janes Marchant, sometimes servant to the worshipfull Master William Sanderson. likelyhood of the Discoverie of Ertaine Honourable personages and worthy Gentlemen of the Court & Countrey, with divers worshipful Marchants of London and of the West Countrey, mooved with desire to advance Gods glory and to seeke the good of their native Countrey, consulting together of the Northwest the passage, which heretofore had bene attempted, but unhappily given over by accidents unlooked for, which turned the enterprisers from their principall purpose, resolved after good deliberation, to put downe their adventures to provide for necessarie shipping, and a fit man to be chiefe Conductour of this so hard an enterprise. The setting forth of this Action was committed by the adventurers, especially to the care of M. William Sanderson Marchant of London, who was so forward therein, that besides his travaile which was not small, hee became the greatest adventurer with his purse, and commended unto the rest of the companie one M. John Davis, a man very well grounded in the principles of the Arte of Navigation, for Captaine and chiefe Pilot of this exployt. Thus therefore all things being put in a readines, the seventh of June, wee departed from Dartmouth towards the aforesayd Northwest passage, with two Barkes, the one being of 50. tunnes, 381 T HE E N G L I SH V O Y A G ES named the Sunneshine of London, and the other being In 35. tunnes, named the Mooneshine of Dartmouth. the Sunneshine we had 23. persons, whose names are these following, M. John Davis Captaine, William Eston Master, Richard Pope Masters mate, John Jane Marchant, Henry Davie gunner, William Crosse boatswayne, John Bagge, Walter Arthur, Luke Adams, Robert Coxworthie, John Ellis, John Kelley, Edward Helman, Robert Wats Carpenter, William Russell, Christopher Gorney boy: James Cole, Francis Ridley, John Russell, Robert Cornish Musicians. The Mooneshine had 19. persons, William Bruton Captaine, John Ellis Master, the rest Mariners. The 7. of June the Captaine and the Master drewe out a proportion for the continuance of our victuals. The 8. day the wind being at Southwest and West southwest, we put in for Falmouth, where we remained untill the 13. The 13. the wind blew at North, and being faire weather we departed. into Silley. The 14. with contrary wind we were forced to put The 15. wee departed thence, having the wind North and by East moderate and faire weather. The 16. wee were driven backe againe, and were constrained to arrive at newe Grymsby in Silley: here the winde remained contrary 12. dayes, and in that space the Captaine, the Master and I went about all the Hands, and the Captaine did plat out and describe the situation of all the Hands, rocks and harboroughs to the exact use of Navigation, with lines and scale thereunto convenient. They depart The 28. in Gods name we departed the wind being from Silley. E a s t e r l y but calme. July. The first of July wee sawe great store of Porposes; The Master called for an harping yron, and shot twise or thrise: sometimes he missed, and at last shot one and strooke him in the side, and wound him into the [III. 99.3 ship: when we had him aboord, the Master sayd it was a Darlie head. The 2. we had some of the fish sodden, and it did eat as sweete as any mutton. The 3. wee had more in sight, and the Master went to shoote at them, but they were so great, that they burst our yrons, and we lost both fish, yrons, pastime and all: yet neverthelesse the Master shot at them with a pike, and had welnigh gotten one, but he was so strong that he burst off the barres of the pike and went away: then he tooke the boat-hooke, and hit one with that, but all would not prevaile, so at length we let them alone. The 6. we saw a very great Whale, and every day we saw whales continually. The 16. 17. and 18. we saw great store of Whales. Great store of The 19. of July we fell into a great whirling and whale$brustling of a tyde, setting to the Northwards: and sayling about halfe a league wee came into a very calme Sea, which bent to the Southsouthwest. Here we heard a mighty great roaring of the Sea, as if it had bene the breach of some shoare, the ayre being so foggie and full of thicke mist, that we could not see the one ship from the other, being a very small distance asunder: so the Captaine and the Master being in distrust how the tyde might set them, caused the Mooneshine to hoyse out her boate and to sound, but they could not finde ground in 300. fathoms and better. Then the Captaine, Master, and I went towards the breach, to see what it should be, giving charge to our gunners that at every glasse they should shoote off a musket-shot, to the intent we might keepe our selves from loosing them. Then comming nere to the breach, we met many Hands of yce floting, which had quickly compassed us about: then we went The routing if upon some of them, and did perceive that all the roaring which we heard, was caused onely by the rowling of this yce together: Our companie seeing us not to returne 3*3 according to our appoyntment, left off shooting muskets, and began to shoote falkonets, for they feared some mishap had befallen us, but before night we came aboord Ycetumedinto againe with our boat laden with yce, which made very Water' The land of Captaine named it, The land of Desolation. Desolation. T he 2 I> g°°d fresh water. Then wee bent our course toward the North, hoping by that meanes to double the land. The 20. as we sayled along the coast the fogge brake up, and we discovered the land, which was the most deformed rockie and mountainous land that ever we saw: The first sight whereof did shew as if it had bene in forme of a sugar-loafe, standing to our sight above the cloudes, for that it did shew over the fogge like a white liste in the skie, the tops altogether covered with snow, and the shoare beset with yce a league off into the Sea, making such yrkesome noyse as that it seemed to be the the same our true patterne of desolation, and after c a me Northerly and overblew, so t he w'mfe to bend our course South that we were constrained againe, for we perceived that we were runne into a very deepe Bay, where wee were almost compassed with yce, for we saw very much toward the Northnortheast, West, and Southwest: and this day and this night wee cleared our selves of the yce, running Southsouthwest along the shoare. Upon Thursday being the 22. of this moneth, about three of the clocke in the morning, wee hoysed out our boate, and the Captaine with sixe saylers went towards the shoare, thinking to find a landing place, for the night before we did perceive the coast to be voyde of yce to our judgement, and the same night wee were all perswaded that we had seene a Canoa rowing along the shoare, but afterwards we fell in some doubt of it, but we had no great reason so to doe. The Captaine rowing towards the shoare, willed the Master to beare in with the land after him, and before he came neere the shoare by the space of a league, or about two miles, hee found so much yce, that hee could not get to land by any meanes. Here our mariners put to their lines to see if they could get any fish, because there were so many seales upon the coast, and the birds did beate upon the water, but all was in vaine: The water about this place V*n hlacke was very blacke and thicke like to a filthy standing poole, water' we sounded and had ground in 120. fathoms. While the Captaine was rowing to the shoare, our men sawe woods upon the rocks like to the rocks of Newfoundland, but I could not discerne them, yet it might be so very well: for we had wood floting upon the coast every day, Floting mod. and the Mooneshine tooke up a tree at Sea not farre from the coast being sixtie foote of length and foureteene handfuls about, having the roote upon it: After this the Captaine came aboord, the weather being very calme and faire we bent our course toward the South, with intent to double the land. The 23. we coasted the land which did lie Eastnortheast and Westsouthwest. The 24. the winde being very faire at East, we coasted the land which did lie East and West, not being able to come neere the shoare by reason of the great quantitie of yce. At this place, because the weather was somewhat Coldebyreason colde by reason of the yce, and the better to encourage °fyceour men, their allowance was increased: the captaine and [III. 100.] the master, tooke order that every messe, being five persons, shbuld have halfe a pound of bread and a kan of beere every morning to breakfast. The weather was not very colde, but the aire was moderate like to our Aprilweather in England: when the winde came from the land, or the ice, it was somfc what colde, but when it came off the sea it was very hote. The 25 of this moneth we departed from sight of this They saik land at sixe of the clocke in the morning, directing our Northwest^1 XT 1 J 1 course to the Northwestward, hoping in Gods mercy to j?mre d finde our desired passage, and so continued above foure • A J c T 1 ^ The 29 of July we discovered land in 64 degrees ^ees 15 minutes of latitude, bearing Northeast from us. T he min. A 1 A ' A- A c Land in 6± I5 j. ward above VII 385 winde being contrary to goe to the Northwestwards, we bare in with this land to take some view of it, being utterly void of the pester of yce and very temperate. Comming neere the coast, we found many faire sounds and good roads for shipping, and many great inlets into the land, whereby we judged this land to be a great number of Islands standing together. Heere having mored our barke in good order, we went on shoare upon a small Island to seeke for water and wood. Upon this Island we did perceive that there had bene people: for we found a small shoo and pieces of leather sowed with sinewes, and a piece of furre, and wooll like to Bever. Then we went upon another Island on the other side of our shippes: and the Captaine, the Master, and I, being got up to the top of an high rocke, the people of the countrey having espied us, made a lamentable noise, as we thought, with great outcries and skreechings: we hearing them, thought it had bene the howling of wolves. At last I hallowed againe, and they likewise cried. Then we perceiving where they stood, some on the shoare, and one rowing in a Canoa about a small Island fast by them, we made a great noise, partly to allure them to us, and partly to warne our company of them. Whereupon M. Bruton and the Master of his shippe, with others of their company, made great haste towards us, and brought our Musicians with them from our shippe, purposing either by force to rescue us, if need should so require, or with courtesie to allure the people. When they came unto us, we caused our Musicians to play, our selves dancing, and making many signes of friendship. At length there came tenne Canoas from the other Islands, and two of them came so neere the shoare where we were, that they talked with us, the other being in their boats a prety way off. Their pronunciation was very hollow thorow the throat, and their speech such as we could not understand: onely we allured them by friendly imbracings and signes of curtesie. At length one of them pointing up to the Sunne with his hand, would presently strike his breast so 386 The sound where our ships did ride was called Gilberts sound. Musicians, The people of the countrey came and conhard that we might heare the blow. This hee did many times before he would any way trust us. Then John Ellis the Master of the Mooneshine was appointed to use his best policie to gaine their friendship; who strooke his breast, and pointed to the Sunne after their order: which when he had divers times done, they beganne to trust him, and one of them came on shoare, to whom we threw our cappes, stockings and gloves, and such other things as then we had about us, playing with our musicke, and making signes of joy, and dauncing. So the night comming, we bade them farewell, and went aboord our barks. The next morning being the 30 of July there came 37 Thirty seven Canoas rowing by our ships, calling to us to come on Canoasshoare: we not making any great haste unto them, one of them went up to the toppe of the rocke, and leapt and daunced as they had done the day before, shewing us a seales skinne, and another thing made like a timbrell, which he did beat upon with a sticke, making a noise Their musike. like a small drumme. Whereupon we manned our boats and came to them, they all staying in their Canoas: we came to the water side were they were: and after we had sworne by the Sunne after their fashion, they did trust us. So I shooke hands with one of them, and he kissed my hand, and we were very familiar with them. We were in so great credit with them upon this single Great famMacquaintance, that we could have any thing they had. a^ wlth the We bought five Canoas of them : we bought their clothes avage5t from their backs, which were all made of seales skinnes & birds skinnes; their buskins, their hose, their gloves, all being commonly sowed and well dressed: so that we were fully perswaded that they have divers artificers among them. We had a paire of buskins of them full of fine wooll like bever. Their apparell for heat was made of birds skinnes with their feathers on them. We saw among them leather dressed like Glovers leather, and thicke thongs like white leather of a good length. We had of their darts and oares, and found in them that they would by no meanes displease us, but would give us whatsoever we asked of them, and would be satisfied with whatsoever we gave them. They tooke great care one of another: for when we had bought their boats, then two other would come and cary him away betweene that had solde us his. They are very tractable them people, void of craft or double dealing, and easie to be to any civility or good order: but we judge them to be idolaters and to worship the Sunne. [III. 101.] brought Divers sorts of wood. During the time of our abode among these Islands we found reasonable quantity of wood, both firre, spruse and juniper; which whether it came floting any great distance to these places where we found it, or whether it grew in some great Islands neere the same place by us not yet discovered, we know not; but we judge that it groweth then we were, because the there further into the land people had great store of darts and oares which they made none account of, but gave them to us for small trifles, as points and pieces of paper. We saw about this They may -make much coaS|- marveilous great abundance of seales skulling tohadm'eanes^ g e ther like skuls of small fish. We found no fresh water how to use it. among these Islands, but onely snow water, whereof we found great pooles. The cliffes were all of such oare as M. Frobisher brought from Meta incognita. We had Moscovie divers shewes of Study or Muscovy glasse shining not altogether unlike to Christall. We found an herbe growglasse. A fruit like i ng upon the rocks, whose fruit was sweet, full of red juice, and the ripe ones were like corinths. We found connths. also birch and willow growing like shrubbes low to the ground. These people have great store of furres as we this judge. They made shewes unto us the 30 of present, which was the second time of our being with them, after they perceived we would have skinnes and furres, that they would go into the countrey and come againe the next day with such things as they had: but this night the winde comming faire, the captaine and the master would by no meanes detract the purpose of our discovery. And so the last of this moneth about foure of the clocke in the morning in Gods name we set saile, and were all that day becalmed upon the coast. The first of August we had a faire winde, and so pro- August ceeded towards the Northwest for our discovery. The sixt of August we discovered land in 66 degrees Land in 66 40 minuts of latitude, altogether void from the pester of de&'ees 4° ice: we ankered in a very faire rode under a brave mount, the cliffes whereof were as orient as golde. This mount was named Mount Raleigh. The rode where our ships lay at anker was called Totnes rode. The sound which did compasse the mount was named Exeter sound. The foreland towards the North was called Diers cape. The foreland towards the South was named Cape Walsingham. So soone as we were come to an anker in Totnes rode under Mount Raleigh, we espied foure white Foure white beares at the foot of the mount: we supposing them to be goats or wolves, manned our boats and went towards them: but when we came neere the shore, we found them to be white beares of a monstrous bignesse: we being desirous of fresh victuall and the sport, began to assault them, and I being on land, one of them came downe the hill right against me: my piece was charged with hailshot & a bullet: I discharged my piece and shot him in the necke; he roared a litle, and tooke the water straight, making small account of his hurt. Then we followed him with our boat, and killed him with boare-speares, & two more that night. We found nothing in their mawes ; but we judged by their dung that they fed upon grasse, because it appeared in all respects like the dung of an horse, wherein we might very plainly see the very strawes. The 7 we went on shore to another beare which lay all night upon the top of an Island under Mount Raleigh, and when we came up to him he lay fast asleep. I levelled at his head, and the stone of my piece gave no fire: with that he looked up, and layed downe his head 4 huge white againe : then I shot being charged with two bullets, and h strooke him in the head: he being but amazed fell take backwards: whereupon we ran all upon him with boarespeares, and thrust him in the body: yet for all that he gript away our boare-speares, and went towards the water; and as he was going downe, he came backe againe. Then our Master shot his boare-speare, and strooke him the water, and in the head, and made him to swimme into a cove fast by, where we killed him, and brought him aboord. The breadth of his forefoot from one side to the other was foureteene inches over. They were very fat, so as we were constrained to cast the fat away. We saw a raven upon Mount Raleigh. We found withies also growing like low shrubs & flowers like Primroses in the sayd place. The coast is very mountainous, altogether without wood, grasse, or earth, and is onely huge mountaines of stone ; but the bravest stone that ever we saw. The aire was very moderate in this countrey. The 8 we departed from Mount Raleigh, coasting along the shoare, which lieth Southsouthwest, and Eastnortheast. The 9 our men fell in dislike of their allowance, because it was too small as they thought: wherupon we made a new proportion; every messe being five to a messe should have foure pound of bread a day, twelve wine quarts of beere, six Newland fishes; and the flesh dayes a gill of pease more: so we restrained them from their butter and cheese. [III. 102.] The 11 we came to the most Southerly cape of this land, which we named The Cape of Gods mercy, as being the place of our first entrance for the discovery. The weather being very foggy we coasted this North land; at length when it brake up, we perceived that we were shot into a very faire entrance or passage, being in some places twenty leagues broad, and in some thirty, altogether void of any pester of ice, the weather very tolerable, and the water of the very colour, nature and quality of the maine ocean, which gave us the greater hope of our passage. Having sailed Northwest sixty leagues in this entrance we discovered certaine Islands standing in the midst thereof, having open passage on both sides. Wherupon our ships divided themselves, the one sailing on the North side, the other on the South side of the sayd Isles, where we stayed five dayes, having the winde at Southeast, very foggy and foule weather. The 14 we went on shoare and found signes of people, for we found stones layed up together like a wall, and saw the skull of a man or a woman. The 15 we heard dogs houle on the shoare, which we thought had bene wolves, and therefore we went on shoare to kill them. When we came on land the dogges came presently to our boat very gently, yet we thought they came to pray upon us, and therefore we shot at them, and killed two: and about the necke of one of them we found a leatherne coller, wherupon we thought them to be tame dogs. There were twenty dogs like mastives with prickt eares and long bush tailes: we found a bone in the pizels of their dogs. Then we went farther, and found two sleads made like ours in England: the one was made of firre, spruse and oken boords sawen Timber like inch boords: the other was made all of whale bone, sazven< & there hung on the tops of the sleads three heads of beasts which they had killed. We saw here larks, ravens, Fowk. and partridges. The 17 we went on shoare, and in a little thing made like an oven with stones I found many small trifles, as a small canoa made of wood, a piece of wood made like an image, a bird made of bone, beads having small holes An image. in one end of them to hang about their necks, & other small things. The coast was very barren without wood or grasse: the rocks were very faire like marble, full of vaines of divers colours. We found a seale which was killed not long before, being fleane, and hid under stones. Our Captaine and Master searched still for proba- Probabilities bilities of fhe passage, and first found, II that this place firthe passage. was all Islands, with great sounds passing betweene came into any bay before or after; but the waters colour was altered very blackish. THE ENGLISH VOYAGES Secondly, the water remained of one colour with the maine ocean without altering. Thirdly, we saw to the West of those Isles three or foure whales in a skull, which they judged to come from a Westerly sea, because to the Eastward we saw not any whale. Also as we were rowing into a very great sound lying Southwest, from whence these whales came, upon the sudden there came a violent counter-checke of a tide from the Southwest against the flood which we came with, not knowing from whence it was mainteined. Fiftly, in sailing twenty leagues within the mouth of this entrance we had sounding in 90 fadoms, faire grey osie sand, and the further we ran into the Westwards the deeper was the water; so that hard aboord the shoare among these Isles we could not have ground in 330 fadoms. Lastly, it did ebbe and flow sixe or seven fadome up and downe, the flood comming from divers parts, so as we could not perceive the chiefe maintenance thereof. The 18 and 19 our Captaine and Master determined what was best to doe, both for the safegard of their credits, and satisfying of the adventurers, and resolved, if the weather brake up, to make further search. The 20 the winde came directly against us: so they altered their purpose, and reasoned both for proceeding and returning. The 21 the winde being Northwest, we departed from these Islands; and as we coasted the South shoare we saw many faire sounds, whereby we were perswaded that it was no firme land but Islands. The 23 of this moneth the wind came Southeast, with very stormy and foule weather: so we were constrained to seeke harborow upon the South coast of this entrance, where we fell into a very faire sound, & ankered in 25 fadoms greene osie sand. Here we went on shore, where we had manifest signes of people where they had made In this place we their fire, and layed stones like a wall. reissue. A PDF can be downloaded from the web address given on page iv saw foure very faire faulcons; and M. Bruton tooke Faukons. from one of them his prey, which we judged by the wings and legs to be a snite, for the head was eaten off. The 24 in the afternoone, the winde comming somethis road, purposing by what faire, we departed from Gods grace to returne for England. The 26 we departed from sight of the North land of Their returne. this entrance, directing our course homewards untill the tenth of the next moneth. The 10. of September wee fell with The land of desola- September tion, thinking to goe on shoare, but we could get never tI IL !°3'J a good harborough. That night wee put to sea againe thinking to search it the next day: but this night arose a very great storme, and separated our ships, so that we lost the sight of the Mooneshine. The 13. about noone (having tried all the night before They saiie fr°JTheland with a goose wing) we set saile, & within two houres r to 1 • arter we had sight or the Mooneshine againe: this day England In we departed from this land. 14. dayes. of desolation iv/r -i -i 1 r • i i i The 27. of this moneth we fell with sight of England. This night we had a marveilous storme and lost the Mooneshine. The 30. of September wee came into Dartmouth, the Mooneshine being come in not where wee found two houres before. The second voyage attempted by M. John Davis with others, for the discovery of the Northwest passage, in Anno 1586. He 7. day of May, I departed from the port of Dartmouth for the discovery of the Northwest passage, with a ship of an hundred and twentie tunnes named the Mermayd, a barke of 60. tunnes named the Sunneshine, a barke of 35. tunnes named the Mooneshine, and a pinnesse of tenne tunnes named the North starre.