T he discoverie of the Isles of Frisland, Iseland, [in. 121.] forsaken & left in this distresse referring my self to the mercifull providence of God, I shaped my course for England, & unhoped for of any, God alone releeving me, I arrived at Dartmouth. By this last discovery it seemed most manifest that the passage was free & without impediment toward the North: but by reason of the Spanish fleet & unfortunate time of M. Secretaries death, the voyage was omitted & never sithens attempted. The cause why I use this particular relation of all my proceedings for this discovery, is to stay this objection, why hath not Davis discovered this passage being thrise that wayes imploied ? How far I proceeded & in what forme this discovery lieth, doth appeare upon the Globe which M. Sanderson to his very great charge hath published, for the which he deserveth great favor & com- mendations. Engroneland, Estotiland, Drogeo and Icaria: made by two brethren, namely M. Nicholas Zeno, and M. Antonio his brother: Gathered out of their letters by M. Francisco Marcolino. IN the yere of our Lord 1200 there was in the Citie of Venice a famous Gentleman, named Messer Marino Zeno, who for his great vertue and singular wisedome, was called and elected governour in certaine common wealths of Italy: in the administration whereof he bore himselfe so discretly, that he was beloved of all men, and his name greatly reverenced of those that never knew or saw his person. And amongst sundry his worthy workes, this is recorded of him, that he pacified certaine grievous civile dissentions that arose among the citizens of Verona: whereas otherwise, if by his grave advise and great diligence they had not bene prevented, the matter was likely to breake out into hot broyles of warre. He was the first Podesta, or Ruler, that the Common wealth of Venice appointed in Constantinople in the yeere 1205 when our state had rule thereof with the French Barons. This Gentleman had a sonne named Messer Pietro, who was the father of the Duke Rinieri, which Duke dying without issue, made his heire M. Andrea, the sonne of M. Marco his brother. This M. Andrea was Captaine Generall and Procurator, a man of great reputation for many rare partes, that were in him. He had a sonne M. Rinieri, a worthy Senatour and prudent Counsellour: of whom descended M. Pietro Captaine Generall of the league of the Christians against the Turkes, who was called Dragon, for that in his shield, in stead of a Manfrone which was his armes at the first, he bare a Dragon. He was father to M. Carlo II grande the famous Procurator and Captaine generall against the Genowayes in those cruell warres, when as almost all the cheife Princes of Europe did to overthrow our Empire and oppugne and seeke libertie, wherein by his great valiancie and prowesse, as Furius Camillus delivered Rome, so he delivered his country from the present perill it was in, being ready to become a pray and spoile unto the enemie: wherefore he was afterward surnamed the Lyon, and for an eternall remembrance of his fortitude and valiant exploits he gave the Lyon in his armes. M. Carlo had two brethren5 M. Nicolo, the knight and M. Antonio, the father of M. Dragon, of whom issued M. Caterino, the father M. Pietro da i Grocecchieri. This M. Pietro had sonnes M. Caterino, that died the last yere, being brother unto M. Francisco, M. Carlo, M. Battista, and M. Vincenzo: Which M. Caterino was father to M. Nicolo, that is yet living. Now M. Nicolo, the knight, being a man of great courage, after this aforesaid Genouan warre of Chioggia that troubled so our predecessours, entred into a great desire and fansie to see the fashions of the worlde and to travell and acquaint himselfe with the maners of sundry nations and languages, whereby learne their afterwards upon occasions he might be the better able to doe service to his countrey, and purchase to himselfe credite and honour. Wherefore he caused a ship to be made, and having furnished her at his proper charges (as he was very wealthy) he departed out of our seas, and passing the straites of Gibraltar, he sailed for certaine dayes upon the Ocean, keeping his course still to the Northwards, with intent to see England and Flanders. Where being assalted in those Seas by a terrible tempest, he was so tossed for the space of many dayes with the sea and winde, that he knew not where he was, till at length he discovered land, and not being able any longer to susteine the violence of the tempest the ship was cast away upon the Isle of The ship of Friseland. The men were saved, and most part of the Mm Nm Zeno goods that were in the ship. And this was in the yere ^pon^ruland 1380. The inhabitants of the Island came running in in Anno great multitudes with weapons to set upon M. Nicolo 1380. and his men, who being sore weather-beaten and overlaboured at sea, and not knowing in what part of the world they were, were not able to make any resistance at all, much lesse to defend themselves couragiously, as it behooved them in such a dangerous case. And they should have bene doubtlesse very discourteously intreated and cruelly handled, if by good hap there had not beene dforraine hard by the place a prince with armed people. Who Prince haP*in& J r understanding great ship cast away upon the Island, came runing at armed meny the noyse and outcryes that they made against our whenM.Zeno poore Mariners, and dryving away / J the inhabitants, 5Uffereds^P' ? wracke there ,. A, spake in JLatine and asked them what they were and cam unt0 ^m from whence they came, and perceiving that they came and spake from Italy and that they were men of the said Countrey, Latine. he was surprised with marvelous great joy. Wherefore promising them all, that they should receive no discourtesie, and that they were come into a place where they should be well used and very welcome, he tooke 447 1 f there was even at that present a ianiwith . that to be m Fns• T *.- 1 J xiT 1 ,. r prince of Porland or Duke of Zorani. [III. 122.] Frisland the King of Norwayes. THE ENGLISH VOYAGES them into his protection upon his faith. This was a great Lord, and possessed certaine Islands called Porland, lying on the South side of Frisland, being the richest and most populous of all those parts, his name was Zichmni: and beside the said little Islands, he was Duke of Sorani, lying over against Scotland. Of these North parts I thought good to draw the copie of a Sea carde, which amongst other antiquities I have in my house, which although it be rotten through many yeeres, yet it falleth out indifferent well: and to those that are delighted in these things, it may serve for some light to the understanding of that, which without it cannot so easily be conceived. Zichmni being Lord of those Sygnories (as is said) was a very warlike and valiant man and above all things famous in Sea causes. And having the yere before given the overthrow to the king of Norway, who was Lord of the Island, being desirous to winne fame by feates of armes, hee was come on land with his men to give the attempt for the winning of Frisland, which is an Island much bigger then Ireland. Wherefore seeing that M. Nicolo was a man of judgement & discretion, and very expert both in sea matters and martiall affaires, hee gave him commission to goe aboord his Navy with all his men, charging the captaine to honour him and in all things to use his counsaile. This Navy of Zichmni was of thirteene vessels, whereof two onely were rowed with oares, the rest small barkes and one ship, with the which they sayled to the Westwards and with little paines wonne Ledovo and Ilofe and divers other small Islands: and turning into a bay called Sudero, in the haven of the towne named Sanestol, they tooke certaine small barks laden with fish. And here they found Zichmni, who came by land with his armie conquering all the countrey as he went: they stayed here but a while, and led on their course to the Westwards till they came to the other Cape of the gulfe or bay, then turning againe, they found certaine Islandes and broken lands which they reduced al unto the Signorie & possession of Zichmni. These seas, forasmuch as they sailed, were in maner nothing but sholds & rocks, in so much that if M. Nicolo and the Venetian mariners had not bene their Pilots, the whole fleete in judgement of all that were in it, had bene cast away, so small was the skill of Zichmnis men, in respect of ours, who had bene trained up in the arte and practise of Navigation all the dayes of their life. Now the fleete having done such things as are declared, the Captaine, by the counsaile of M. Nicolo, determined to goe a land, at a towne called Bondendon, to understand what successe Zichmni had in his warres: where they heard to their great content, that he had fought a great battell and put to flight the armie of his enemie: by reason of which victory, they sent Embassadours from all parts of the Island to yeeld the countrey up into his handes, taking downe their ensignes in every towne and castle: they thought good to stay in that place for his comming, it being reported for certaine that hee would be there very shortly. At his comming there was great congratulation and many signes of gladnesse shewed, as well for the victory by land, as for that by sea: for the which the Venetians were honoured and extolled of all men, in such sort that there was no talke but of them, and of the great valour of M. Nicolo. Wherefore the prince, who was a great favourer of valiant men and especially of those that could behave themselves well at sea, caused M, Nicolo to be brought before him, and after having commended him with many honourable speeches, and praysed his great industrie and dexteritie of wit, by the which two things he acknowledged himselfe to have received an inestimable benefite, as the saving of his fleet and the winning of many places without any great trouble, he made him knight, and rewarded his men N. Zeno, with many rich & bountiful gifts. Then departing from made knight thence they went in tryumphing maner toward Frisland, 449 y ZtcAmni VII with fish at Fris/and,/or Flanders, Britain, England, Scotland, Norway and Denmarke. But not to be proved that ever any came thence. Alettersentby M. N. Zeno, from Frisland to his brother M. Antonio in Venice, The end of the first letter. [III. 123.] THE ENGLISH VOYAGES the chiefe citie of that Island, situate on the Southeast side of the Isle, within a gulfe, as there are many in that Island. In this gulf or bay there is such great abundance of fish taken, that many ships are laden therewith to serve Flanders, Britain, England, Scotland, Norway, and Denmarke, and by this trade they gather great wealth. And thus much is taken out of a letter, that M. Nicolo sent to M. Antonio his brother, requesting that he would seeke some meanes to come to him. Wherefore he who had as great desire to travaile as his brother, bought a ship, and directed his course that way: & after he had sailed a great while and escaped many dangers, he arrived at length in safetie with M. Nicolo, who received him very joyfully, for that he was his brother not onely in flesh and blood, but also in valour and good qualities. M. Antonio remained in Frisland and dwelt there for the space of 14 yeres, 4 yeres with M. Nicolo, and 10 yeres alone. Where they came in such grace and favour with the Prince, that he made M. Nicolo Captaine of his Navy, and with great preparation of warre they were sent forth for the enterprise of Estland, which lyeth upon the coast betweene Frisland and Norway, where they did many dammages: but hearing that the king of Norway was coming towardes them with a great fleet, they departed with such a terrible flaw of winde, that they were driven upon certaine sholds: were a great part of their ships were cast away, the rest were saved upon Grisland, a great Island but dishabited. The king of Norway his fleete being taken with the same storme, did utterly perish in those seas: Whereof Zichmni having notice, by a ship of his enemies that was cast by chance upon Grisland, having repayred his fleet, and perceiving himself Northerly neere unto the Islands, determined to set upon Island, which together with the rest, was subject to the king of Norway: but he found the countrey so well fortified and defended, that his fleete being so small, and very ill appointed both of weapons and men, he was glad to retire. And so he left that enterprise without performing any thing at all: and in the same chanels he assaulted the other Isles called Islande, which are seven, Talas, Broas, Iscant, Trans, Mimant, Dambere, and Bres: and having spoyled them all, hee built a fort in Bres, where he left M. Nicolo, with certaine small barkes and men and munition. And now thinking he had done wel for this voyage, with those few ships which were left he returned safe into Frisland. M. Nicolo remaining no we in Bres, determined in the spring to go forth and discover land: wherefore arming out three small barkes in the moneth of July, he sayled to the Northwards, and arrived in Engroneland. Where he found a Monasterie of Engronehnd. Friers, of the order of the Predicators, and a Church P/*a^JSaint dedicated to Saint Thomas, hard by a hill that casteth j%mas. **"* forth fire, like Vesuvius and Etna. There is a fountaine of hot burning water with the which they heate the Church of the Monastery and the Fryers chambers, it commeth also into the kitchin so boyling hot, that they use no other fire to dresse their meate : and putting their breade into brasse pots without any water, it doth bake as it were in an hot oven. They have also smal gardens covered over in the winter time, which being watered with this water, are defended from the force of the snow and colde, which in those partes being situate farre under the pole, is very extreme, and by this meanes they produce flowers and fruites and herbes of sundry sorts, even as in other temperate countries in their seasons, in such sort that the rude and savage people of those partes seeing these supernaturall effects, doe take those Fryers for Gods, and bring them many presents, as chickens, flesh, and divers other things, and have them all in great reverence as Lords. When the frost and snowe is great, they heate their houses in maner beforesaid, and wil by letting in the water or opening the windowes, at an instant temper the heate and cold at their pleasure. In the buildings of the Monasterie they use no other matter but that which is them, whereby ing stones that are cast out as it were sparkles or cinders at the fierie mouth of the hill, and when they are most enflamed, cast water upon they are dissolved and become excellent white lime and so tough that being contrived in building it lasteth for ever. And the very sparkles after the fire is out of them doe serve in stead of stones to make walles and vautes: for being once colde they wil never dissolve or breake, except they be cut with some iron toole, and the vautes that are made of them are so light that they need no sustentaccle or prop to holde them up, and they will endure continually very faire and whole. By reason of these great commodities, the Fryers have made there so many buildings and walles that it is a wonder to see. The coverts or roofes of their houses for the most part are made in maner following: first they rayse up the wall up to his full height, then they make it enclining or bowing in by little and litle in fourme of a vaut. But they are not greatly troubled with raine in those partes, because the climate (as I have saide) is extreme colde: for the first Winter of 9. snow being fallen, it thaweth no more for the space of moneths. n j ne m o n e t h s, for so long dureth their winter. They feede of the flesh of wilde foule and of fish: for wheras the warme water falleth into the sea, there is a large and wide haven, which by reason of the heate of the water, doeth never freeze all the winter, by meanes whereof there is such concourse and flocks of sea foule and such aboundance of fish, that they take thereof infinite multitudes, wherby they maintaine a great number of people round about, which they kepe in continuall worke, both in building and taking of foules and fish, and in a thousand other necessarie affaires and busines about the Monasterie. Their houses are built about the hill on every side, in forme round, and 25 foote broad, and in mounting upwards they goe narower and narower, leaving at the top a litle hole, whereat the aire commeth in to give light to the house, and the flore of the house is so hot, , 1 • 1 1 1 1. rVi j. • Norway and that being within they feele no cold at all. Hither in the Summer time come many barkes from the Islands their about, and from the cape above Norway, and from Trondon, and bring to the Friers al maner of things that Trade in summay be desired, taking in change thereof fish, which they ™rtlfefr™ dry in the sunne or in the cold, & skins of divers kindes Thomas Friers of beasts. For the which they have wood to burne and in Groneland. timber very artificially carved, and corne, and cloth to Resort of make them apparell. For in change of the two aforesaid Fnersfrm commodities all the nations bordering round about them Sueden,to the covet to trafficke with them, and so they without any Monastery in travell or expences have that which they desire. To Engroneland, this Monasterie resort Fryers of Norway, of Suetia and calledS' Tho' of other countreys, but the most part are of Islande. There are continually in that part many barks, which are kept in there by reason of the sea being frozen, waiting for the spring of the yere to dissolve the yce. The fishers M. Trobishet taking %°*f**Jjj*se boates are made like unto a weavers shuttle: the skins of fishes, they fashion them with the bones fojthese*1 * of the same fishes, and sowing them together in many parts into doubles they make them so sure and substanciall, that it England, is miraculous to see, howe in tempests they will shut themselves close within and let the sea and winde cary them they care not whether, without any feare either [III. 124.] of breaking or drowning. And if they chance to be driven upon any rocks, they remaine sound without the least bruse in the world: & they have as it were a sleeve in the bottome, which is tyed fast in the middle, and when there commeth any water into the boat, they put it into the one halfe of the sleeve, then fastening the ende thereof with two pieces of wood and loosing the band beneath, they convey the water forth of the boat: and this they doe as often as they have occasion, without any perill or impediment at all. Moreover, the water of the Monastery, being of sulphurious or brimstonie nature, is conveyed into the lodgings of the principall Friers by certaine vesselles of brasse, tinne, or stone, so hot that it heateth the place as it were a stove, not carying with it any stinke or other noysome smell. Besides this they have another conveyance to bring hot water with a wall under the ground, to the end it should not freeze, unto the middle of the court, where it falleth into a great vessel of brasse that standeth in the middle of a boyling fountaine, and this is to heat their water to drinke & to water their gardens, & thus they have from the hill the greatest commodities that may be wished: and so these Fryers employ al their travaile and studie for the most part in trimming their gardens and in making faire and beautifull buildings, but especially handsome and commodious: neyther are they destitute of ingenious and paineful artificers for the purpose; for they give very large payment, and to them that bring them fruits and seedes they are very bountifull, and give they care not what. So that there is great resort of workemen and masters in divers faculties, by reason of the good gaines and large allowance that is there. The most of them speake the Latine tongue, and specially the superiours and principals of the Monastery. And this is as much as is knowen of Engroneland, which is all by the relation of M. Nicolo, who maketh also particular description of a river that he discovered, as is to be seene in the carde that I drew. And in the end M. Nicolo, not being used & acquainted with these cruell coldes, fel sicke, and a litle while after returned into Frisland, where he dyed. He left behind him in Venice, two sonnes, M. Giovanni and M. Toma, who had two sonnes, M. Nicolo the father of the famous Cardinal Zeno, and M. Pietro of whom descended the other Zenos, that are living at this day. Now M. Nicolo being dead, M. Antonio succeeded him both in his goods, and in his dignities and honour: and albeit he attempted divers wayes, and made great supplication, he could never obtaine licence to returne into his countrey. For Zichmni, being a man of great 454 In the Monastery of Saint Thomas most of them spake the Latine tongue. The end of the 2. letter. N. Zeno dyed courage and valour, had determined to make himself Lord of the sea. Wherfore using alwayes the counsaile and service of M. Antonio, he determined to send him with certaine barks to the Westwards, for that towards those parts, some of his fishermen had discovred certaine discovery Islands very M. Antonio, in a letter to his brother M. Carlo, recounteth from point to point in this maner, saving that we have changed some old words, leaving the matter entire as it was. and populous: which rich Sixe and twentie yeeres agoe there departed foure fisher boats, the which, a mightie tempest arising, were tossed for the space of many dayes very desperately upon the Sea, when at length, the tempest ceasing, and the wether waxing faire, they discovered an Island called Estotiland, Thediscoverie lying to the Westwards above 1000 Miles from Frisland, °f Estotiland upon the which one of the boats was cast away, and sixe Yixelishermen that were in it were taken of the inhabitants and men taken. brought into a faire and populous citie, where the king of the place sent for many interpreters, but there was none could be found that understood the language of the fishermen, except one that spake Latine, who was also cast by Fishermen of chance upon the same Island, who in the behalfe of the Erisland king asked them what countreymen they were: and so s*ea e understanding their case, rehearsed it unto the king, who willed that they should tary in the countrey: wherefore they obeying his commandement, for that they could not otherwise doe, dwelt five yeres in the Island, & learned Sixe were Jive the language, and one of them was in divers partes of y*eres*n 1- T 1 ^u * -i. • the Island., and reporteths that it is a very rich countrey, Qne ojrthe abounding with all the commodities of the world, z.n& fakers of Fristhat it is litle lesse then Island, but farre more fruitfull, land, reporteth having in the middle thereof a very high mountaine, from °f Estotiland. , - the which there spring roure rivers that passe through r-uh aj?ound_ ing 'with all the whole countrey. u Estotiland Estotiland, atine' i. ^ • u J. R. J J j. ^ ^ r , , . The inhabitants are very wittie people, and have all the commodiartes and faculties, as we have: and it is credible that tiesoftke in time past they have had trafficke with our men, for mr Abundance ofgplde. Trade from Estotiland, to Engroneland: Skins, brimstone, and pitch: golde, come, and beere, or ale. Many cities and castles. [in. 125.] A countrey calledDrogio. The 6 fishermen ofFris- land onely saved, by shewing the maner to take fish. The chiefest of the & fishers, specified before and his companions. their he said, that he saw Latin bookes in the kings Librarie, which they at this present do not understand: they have a peculiar language, and letters or caracters to themselves. They have mines of all maner of mettals, but especial they abound with gold. They have trade in Engroneland, from whence they bring furres, brimstone & pitch: and he saith, that to the Southwards, there is a great populous countrey very rich of gold. They sow corne, and make beere and ale, which is a kinde of drinke that North people do use as we do wine. They have mighty great woods, they make their buildings with wals, & there are many cities and castles. They build small barks and have sayling, but they have not the load stone, nor know not the use of the compasse. Wherefore these fishers were had in great estimation, insomuch that the king sent them with twelve barks to the Southwards to a countrey which they call Drogio: but in their voyage they had such contrary weather, that they thought to have perished in the sea: but escaping that cruell death, they fell into another more cruell: for they were taken in the countrey and the most part of them eaten by the Savage people, which fed upon mans flesh, as the sweetest meat in their judgements that is. But that fisher with his fellowes shewing them the maner of taking fish with nets, saved their lives: and would goe every day a fishing to the sea and in fresh rivers, and take great abundance of fish and give it to the chiefe men of the countrey, whereby he gate himselfe so great favour, that he was very well beloved and honoured of every one. The fame of this man being spread abroad in the countrey, there was a Lord there by, that was very desirous to have him with him, and to see how he used his miraculous arte of catching fish, in so much that he made warre with the other Lord with whom he was before, and in the end prevailing, for that he was more mightie and a better warriour, the fisherman was sent unto him with the rest of his company. And for the st themselves NICHOLAS AND ANTONIO ZENO A.D. c. 1380-90. space of thirteene yeres that he dwelt in those parts, he In the space °f l3yeejes 5 saith, that he was sent in this order to more then 25 Lords, for they had continuall war amongst themselves, £,& Lords f £!* this Lord with that Lord, and he with another, onely Drogio. to have him to dwell with them: so that wandring up and downe the countrey without any certaine abode in one place, he knew almost all those parts. He saith, that it is a very great countrey & as it were a new world: the people are very rude and voide of all goodnesse, they goe all naked so that they are miserably vexed with colde, neither have they the wit to cover their bodyes with beasts skins which they take in hunting, they have no kinde of mettal, they live by hunting, they cary certaine lances of wood made sharpe at the point, they have bowes, ye strings wherof are made of beasts skins: they are very fierce people, they make cruell warres one with another, and eate one another, they have governours & certaine lawes very divers among themselves- But the farther to the Southwestwards, the more civiltie there is, the ayre being somewhat temperate, so that there they have cities and temples to idols, wherein they sacrifice men and afterwards eate them, they have there some knowledge and use of gold and silver. Now this fisherman having dwelt so many yeeres in those countreys purposed, if it were possible, to returne home into his countrey, but his companions despairing ever to see it againe, let him goe in Gods name, and they kept themselves where they were. Wherefore he bidding them farwell, fled through the woods towards Drogio, and was very well received of the Lord that dwelt next to that place ; who knew him and was a great enemie of the other Lord ; and so running from one Lord to another, being those by whom he had passed before, after long time & many travels he came at length to Drogio, where he dwelt three yeres. When as by good fortune he heard by the inhabitants, that there were certaine boates arrived upon the coast: wherefore entring into good hope to accomplish his intent, he went to the sea side, and asking them of what countrey they they answered of Estotiland, whereat he was were; exceeding glad, ,and requested that they would take him in to them, which they did very willingly, and for that he had the language of the countrey, and there was none that could speake it, they used him for their interpreter. And afterward he frequented that trade with them in such sort, that he became very rich, and so furnishing He returned out a barke of his owne, he returned into Frislande, from Estoti- where he made reporte unto this Lord of that wealthy £ * " *" ^untrey. And he is throughly credited because of the mariners, who approve many strange things, that he reporteth to this Lord is resolved to send me be true. Wherfore t ^ t desire to go in the voyage, for the noveltie 1 Zkhmni minded to send forth with a fleet towards those parts, and there are so M. Antonio m a ny .J Zeno with a fleete towards a n d strangenesse of the thing, that I thinke we shall be those parts of very strongly appointed, without any publike expence at Estotiland. all# And this is the tenor of the letter before mentioned, which I have here set downe to give intelligence of another voyage that M. Antonio made, being set out with many barkes, and men, notwithstanding he was not captaine, as he had thought at the first he should: for Zichmni went in his owne person : and concerning that matter I have a letter in forme following. T 1 • 1 r & 1 1 11 , . The 4 letter. One great preparation for the voyage of Estotiland was The fisherman b e g un [n an unlucky houre: for three dayes before our should have departure the fisherman died that should have bene our bene inter- guide: notwithstanding this Lord would not give over the enterprize, but instead of the fisherman tooke certaine preter. Certaine mariners that returned out of the Island with him: and lakenln his so m a k i ng our Navigation to the Westwards, we dissteede, which covered certaine Islands subject to Frisland, and having came with him passed certaine shelves we stayed at Ledovo for the space from Estoti- o f j daies to refresh our selves, and to furnish the fleet with necessarie provision. Departing from thence we arrived the first of July at the Isle of Ilofe : and for that the wind made for us, we stayed not there, but passed 458 forth, and being upon the maine sea, there arose immediately a cruel tempest, wherwith for eight dayes space we were miserably vexed, not knowing where we were: [III. 126.] & a great part of the barks were cast away, afterward the weather waxing faire, we gathered up the broken peices of the barks that were lost, and sayling with a prosperous winde we discovered land at West. Wherefore keeping Zuhmnihis our course directly upon it, we arrived in a good and ^co^epe °f r , , 11 ' r • • c the island sate harborough, where we saw an innnit companie of icaria, people ready in armes, come running very furiously to the water side, as it were for defence of the Island. Wherfore Zichmni causing his men to make signes of peace unto them, they sent 10 men unto us that could speake ten languages, but we could understand none of them, except one that was of Island. He being brought 4* Island before our prince and asked, what was the name of the man tn Icaru Island, and what people inhabited it, & who governed it, answered, that the Island was called Icaria, and that all the kings that reigned there, were called Icari, after the The kings of name of the first king of that place, which as they say was jCa™c£ the sonne of Dedalus king of Scotland, who conquered nam ^^ that Island, left his sonne there for king, and left them first king of those lawes that they retaine to this present, and after that place, this, he desiring to sayle further, in a great tempest that c r arose, was drowned, wherefore for a memonall or his sonnetoDedadeath, they call those seas yet, the Icarian Sea, and the fas king of kings of the Island Icari, and for that they were contented Scots. with that state, which God had given them, neither lcarlan Seawould they alter one jote of their lawes and customes, they would not receive any stranger: wherefore they requested our prince, that hee would not seeke to violate their lawes, which they had received from that king of worthy memory and observed very duly to that present: which if he did attempt, it would redound to his manifest destruction, they being all resolutely bent rather to leave their life, then to loose in any respect the use of their lawes. Notwithstanding, that we should not thinke they did altogether refuse conversation and traffick with other 459 as •? r u* ™p<>rt, was • 11 u th j men, they tolde us they would willingly receive one of our men, & preferre him to be one of the chiefe amongst them, onely to learne my language for conclusion that t en t en °f The people of the Italian tongue, and to be informed of our manners I'/iTf**?™ anc* c u s t o m e s > as t ^y ^ad already received those other s u n d ry nations, that came into their Island. tongue a taU Ten men of To these things our Prince answered nothing at all, but ten sundry causing his men to seke some good harbrough, he made signes as though he would depart, and sayling round nations. about the Island, he espied at length a harbrough on the East side of the Island, where hee put in with all his Fleet: the mariners went on land to take in wood and water, which they did with as great speede as they could, doubting least they should be assaulted by the inhabitants, as it fell out in deed, for those that dwelt therabouts, making signes unto the other with fire and smoke, put Infinite multi- themselves presently in armes and the other comming to tudes of armed faGm^ they came all running downe to the sea side upon our men, with bowes and arrowes, and other weapons, so that many were slaine and divers sore wounded. And we made signes of peace unto them, but it was to no purpose, for their rage increased more and more, as though they had fought for land and living. Wherefore we w e re forced to depart, and to sayle along in a great Zichmni Icaria We™™ c i r c u ^ te about the Islande, being alwayes accompanyed wards. the sea coastes with an the hil tops & upon infinite number of armed men : and so doubling the Cape of the Island towards the North, we found many great sholdes, amongst the which for the space of ten dayes we were in continuall danger of loosing our whole fleet, but that it pleased God all that while to send us faire weather. Wherefore proceeding on till we came to the East cape, we saw the inhabitants still on the hill tops and by the sea coast keepe with us, and in making great outcryes and shooting at us a farre ofF, they uttered their old spitefull affection towards us. Wherefore wee determined to stay in some safe harborough, and see if wee the Islander, but our might speake once againe with determination was frustrate: for the people more like unto beasts then men, stood continually in armes with intent to beat us back, if we should come on land. Wherefore Zichmni seeing he could not prevaile, and thinking if he should have persevered and followed obstinately his purpose, their victuals would have failed them, he departed with a fayre wind and sailed sixe daies to the Westwards, but the winde changing to the Southwest, and the sea waxing rough, wee sayling 4 dayes with the wind the powp, and at length discovering land, were afraid to approch nere unto it, the sea being growen, and we not knowing what land it was: but God so provided for us, that the winde ceasing there came a great calme. Wherefore some of our company rowing to land with oares, returned & brought us newes to our great comfort, that they had found a very good countery and a better harborough: upon which newes we towed our ships and smal barks to land, and being entred into the harborough, we saw a farre off a great mountain, that cast forth smoke, which gave us good hope that we should finde some inhabitants the Island, neither would Zichmni rest, although it were a great way off, but sent 100 souldiers to search the countrey and bring report 100 men sent what people they were that inhabited it, & in the meane t0 dlscrie the time they tooke in wood and water for the provision of comtreythe fleet, and catcht great store of fish and sea foule and found such aboundance of birds egges, that our men that were halfe famished, were filled therewithall. Whiles we were riding here, began the moneth of June, at which time the aire in the Island was so temperate and pleasant [III. 127.] as is impossible to expresse: but when we could see no people at al, we suspected greatly that this pleasant place j The 100 soulJ• 1 u^ in Txr *u 1 * J j was desolate and dishabited. We gave name to the diers returned heaven calling it Trin, and the point that stretched out which had into the sea, we called Capo de Trin. The 100 souldiers bene through that were sent forth, 8 dayes after returned, and brought word that they had bene through the Island and at the ^leVsZo *and mountaine, and that the smoke was a naturall thing pro- found, ^^wfat faint with themselves in caves of the g r o u n d, of there was a spring from which ceding from a great fire that was in the bottome of the issued a hill, and that certaine water like pitch which ran into the sea, and that thereabouts dwelt great multitudes of people halfe wilde, hiding small stature, and very fearefull; for as soone as they saw them they fled into their holes, and that there was a great river and a very good and safe harborough. Zichmni being thus informed, and seeing that it had a holesome and pure aire, and a very fruitfull soyle and faire rivers, with sundry commodities, fell into such liking of the place, that he determined to inhabite it, and built there a citie. But his people being weary and long and tedious travell began to m u r m u r e, saying that they would that the winter was at returne into their countrey, for hand, and they the harborough, into should not be able to come out againe before the next Summer. Wherefore he retaining onely the barks with Oares and such as were willing to stay with him, sent all the rest with the shippes backe againe, and willed that I, M. Antonio Zeno, made therefore (though unwilling) should be their captaine. \f thole ships departing, because I could not otherwise chuse, sayled for the space of twenty dayes to the Eastwards without sight which went back to Fris- of any l a n d; then turning my course towards the Southe a s t5 [n ^ dayes I discovered land, and found my selfe land. the Isle of N e o m e, and knowing the countrey, I upon taking in some perceived I was past Island: wherefore fresh victuals of the inhabitants being subject to Zichmni, I sayled with a faire winde in three dayes to Frisland, where the people, who thought they had lost their prince, because of his long absence, in this our voyage received us very joyfully. they entred if I W h at followed after this letter I know not but by conjecture, which I gather out of a piece of another letter, which I will set downe here u n d e r n e a t h: That Zichmni built a towne in the port of the Island that he discovered, and the countrey very diligently and discovered it all, and also the rivers on 462 both sides of Engroneland, for that I see it particularly described in the sea card, but the discourse or narration is lost. The beginning of the letter is thus. Concerning those things that you desire to know of The 5 letter, me, as of the men and their maners and customes, of the beasts, and of the countries adjoyning, I have made therof a particuler booke, which by Gods help I will bring with me: wherein I have described the countrey, the monstrous fishes, the customes and lawes of Frisland, Island, Estland, the kingdome of Norway, Estotiland, Drogio, and in the end the life of M. Nicolo, the knight our brother, with the discovery which he made, and the state of Groneland. I have also written the life and acts of Zichmni, a prince as worthy of immortall memory, as any that ever lived, for his great valiancie and singuler humanitie, wherein I have described the discovery of Engroneland on both sides, and the citie that he builded. Therefore I will speake no further hereof in this letter, hoping to be with you very shortly, and to satisfie you in sundry other things by word of mouth. All these letters were written by M. Antonio to Messer Carlo his brother: and it grieveth me, that the booke and divers other writings concerning these purposes, are miserably lost: for being but a child when they came to my hands, and not knowing what they were, (as the maner of children is) I tore them, and rent them in pieces, which now I cannot cal to remembrance but to my exceeding great griefe. Notwithstanding, that the memory of so many good things should not bee lost: whatsoever I could get of this matter, I have disposed and put in order in the former discourse, to the ende that this age might be partly satisfied, to the which we are more beholding for the great discoveries made in those partes, then to any other of the time past, being most studious of the newe relations and discoveries of strange counteries, made by the great mindes, and industrie of our ancestours. For the more credite and confirmation of the former Historie of Messer Nicolas and Messer Antonio Zeni (which for some fewe respects may perhaps bee called in question) I have heere annexed the judgement of that famous Cosmographer Abraham Ortelius, or rather the yealding and submitting of his judgement thereunto: who in his Theatrum Orbis, fol. 6. next before the map of Mar del Zur, boroweth proofe and authoritie out of this relation, to shew that the Northeast parte of America called Estotiland, and in the original alwayes affirmed to bee an Islande, was about the yeere 1390 discovered by the aforesayd Venetian Gentleman Messer Antonio Zeno, above 100 yeeres before ever Christopher Columbus set saile for those Westerne Regions; and that the Northren Seas were even then sayled by our Europaean Pilots through the helpe of the loadstone: with divers other particulars concerning the customes, religion and wealth of the Southern Americans, which are most evidently confirmed by all the late and moderne Spanish Histories of Nueva Espanna and Peru. ANd here I shall not (as I suppose) commit any great inconvenience, or absurditie, in adding unto this History of the new world, certaine particulars as touching the first discovery therof, not commonly known. Which discoverie al the writers of our time ascribe (& that not unworthily) unto Christopher Columbus. For by him it was in a maner first discovered, made knowen, and profitably communicated unto the Christian world, in the yeere of our Lord 1492. Howbeit I finde that the North part thereof called Estotiland, (which most of all extendeth toward our Europe and the Islands of the same, namely, Groneland, Island, and Frisland,) was long ago found out by certaine fishers of the Isle of Frisland, driven by tempest upon the shore thereof: and was afterward about the yeere 1390 discovered a new, by one Antonio Zeno a gentleman of Venice ; which sayled thither under the conduct of Zichmni king of the saide Isle of Frisland, a prince in those parts of great 464 [III. 128.] Estotiland first discovered. The second discoverie