assured commodity, then you receive by any other voyage, as yet frequented of so short and safe a course as this hath: dealing herein no otherwise with you for your severall small summes, then I doe with my selfe, both for more of mine owne, then is required of any one of you: besides the hazard and travaile of my person, and the totall imployment of my poore credit, which (I thanke God) hath hitherto passed cleare and unspotted in matters of greater importance and difficultie, then is like to fall out in this matter betweene you and me. Articles set downe by the Committies appointed [ill. 188.] in the behalfe of the Companie of Moscovian Marchants, to conferre with M. Carlile, upon his intended discoverie and attempt into the hithermost parts of America. The names of the Committies. Master Alderman Hart. Master Alderman Spencer. Master Hoddesden. Master William Burrough. Master Slany. Master Towerson. Master Staper. Master John Castelin. Master Leake. Irst the Committies are well perswaded, that the Countrey whereunto this action is intended, is very fruitfull, inhabited with savage people of a milde and tractable disposition. And that of all other places which are unfrequented at this day, it is the onely most fit and most commodious for us to intermeddle withall. The convenientest maner of attempting this enterprise is thought to bee thus: That there should be one hundreth men conveyed thither to remaine there one whole yeere: who with friendly intreatie of the people, may enter into better knowledge of the particular estate of the Countrey, and thereby gather what commoditie may be hereafter, or presently looked for. The furnish- Xhe charge to transport these hundreth men, to victuall %ioQ°men for t^lem5 an(* to furnish them of munition and other needeone yeere will ^1 things, will not be lesse then foure thousand poundes : cost 4000. H. whereof hath bene very readily offered by the Citie of Bristoll one thousand poundes, the residue being three thousande poundes, remaineth to bee furnished by this Citie of London, or any others who will adventure their money in this first preparation. The Committies thinke it convenient that a Privilege should be procured by Master Carlile from her Majesty, by vertue whereof these conditions and Articles following may be effectually provided for. First, that they who shall disbursse their money for the first preparation, shall be named Adventurers, and shall have the one halfe of all such landes, territories, townes, mines of gold and silver, and other metals whatsoever, as shall bee found, gotten, obtained, as conquered by this discovery: yeelding to her Majestie the fift part of all such gold and silver, as shall happen to be had out of any mines that so shall be found. those parties which doe employ themselves personally in the present discoverie, shall be named Enterprisers, and shall have the other halfe of all the Lands, Territories, Townes, Mines of Gold and Silver, and other mettals, yeelding to her Majestie the fift part of the Gold and Silver, as the Adventurers do: The same to bee distributed by the Generall, with the consent of the greatest part of twelve discreete persons to bee chosen out of the whole number of the Enterprisers. That Also, that all trade of Marchandise which shall bee used to and from those partes, which by this discoverie shall bee found out, shall appertaine onely to the Adventurers which first shall disbursse their money for this discovery, with prohibition to all other her Majesties subjects, and other Marchants to deale in the sayd parts, without the consent of the first Adventurers, upon losse of shippe and goods, and punishment of their persons, that so shall adventure in trade of marchandise: or otherwise by imprisonment at the Companies pleasure. That no person shall hereafter adventure in this discoverie as Adventurers for the profits mentioned in the first Articles, but such onely as doe disbursse their money in this first preparation: and they shall not adventure hereafter any greater sum me, then ratably according to their proportion of this their first adventure. Also, the profite which by this discoverie shall be attained unto, either by lande which may bee conquered, or otherwise gotten: as also such profite which by this discoverie shall bee obtained by mines, or otherwise gotten, that eche one shall have his part rate and rate like, according to the proportion of their first adventure, and not otherwise. The Adventurers in this first preparation shall, at their owne free will and libertie, choose whether they will supply hereafter any further charge or not: if there doe fall out any such occasion to require the same. And yet withall shall for ever holde to them the freedome of the trade which shall growe in any of these partes: [III. 189.J notwithstanding their sayd refusall to beare any further charge. That in the Patent which is to bee obteined, be graunted, that all her Majesties subjects may transport themselves thither that shall be contented to goe. And that the Patentee or his assignes may shippe thither from time to time, so many and such persons, men, women, and children, as they shall thinke meete. And the same persons to inhabite or remaine there at their pleasure, any lawe to the contrary notwithstanding, with expresse prohibition, as is mentioned in the third article, against all others, which shall go thither without the licence of the patentee or his assignes first obteined. That it shall not be lawful for any of her Majesties subjects, or any other to inhabite or traffique within one hundred leagues any way of the place, where the Generall shall have setled his chiefest being or residence. A relation of the first voyage and discoverie of for Monsieur the Isle Ramea, made by de La court Pre Ravillon, and Grand Pre, with the ship called the Bonaventure, to kill and make Traine oyle of the beasts called the Morses with great teeth, which we have perfourmed by Gods helpe this yeere 1591. then Or the performance of our said voyage, we departed from S. Malo with the fleete that went for Canada, and kept companie with the ships called The Soudil and the Charles halfe the way, and lost them; a violent wind arising at Northwest, which separated us. After which we had faire wether, and came to the coast of Cape Rase, & had no further knowledge thereof, because the winde was at the Southwest but a scarce gale: and we came to the sounding Southwest of the Isles of S. Peter about 10. leagues, where we found 20. fathoms water, and we sayled Northwest one quarter of the North, and came within 12. leagues of Cape de Rey. The next day being the 6. of May 1591, we were come to Cape de Rey, & saw a ship Southwest off us, and stayed there that night. The next day being the seventh of the sayd moneth, we came to the Isles of Aponas, where we put foorth our boat, because we had not past 8. leagues to our haven, which we kenned very clearly, although the coasts lay very low: and because the night approched, and the wind grew very high, we sought not to seeke our port, because it is very hard to find it when the wind is lofty, because of the shoalds that are about it. 1591. Thefleete of Canada. Cape Rase. The hies ofS. Peter. Cape de Rey. The Isles of