neverthelesse we lost our Admiral with al the men and provision, not knowing certainly the place. Yet for inducing men of skill to make conjecture, by our course and way we held from Cape Race thither (that thereby the flats and dangers may be inserted in sea Cards, for warning to others that may follow the same course hereafter) I have set downe the best reckonings that were kept by expert men, William Cox Master of the Hind, and John Paul his mate, both of Limehouse. Reckonings kept in our course from Cape Race towards Cape Briton, and the Island of Sablon, to the time and place where we lost our Admirall. August 22. West, 14. leagues. West and by South. 25 Westnorthwest, 25. Westnorthwest, 9Southsouthwest, 10. Southwest, 12. Sou th so u th wes t, 10. Westnorthwest. 12. Here we August 29. Westnorthwest. lost our Admiral. Summe of these leagues, 117. The reckoning of John Paul Masters mate from Cape Race. August 22. 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 14 leagues. West, Northwest and by West, 9. Southwest and by South, 5. 40. West and by South, 7. West and by North, 3. Southwest, 9. Southwest, 7. Southwest, 7. Westsouthwest, Northwest and by West, 20. Here we lost our Admirall. Summe of all these leagues, 121. Our course we held in clearing us of these flats was [III. 156.] Eastsoutheast, and Southeast, and South 14 leagues with a marveilous scant winde. The maner how our Admirall was lost. UPon Tewsday the 27 of August, toward the evening, August 27. our Generall caused them in his frigat to sound, who found white sande at 35 fadome, being then in latitude about 44 degrees. The evening was faire and pleasant, yet not without Predictions to ensue, and most part of this hefore the Wednesday toward night the wind came South, and wee bare with the land all that night, Westnorthwest, contrary to the mind of master Cox: neverthelesse wee followed the Admirall, deprived of power to prevent a mischiefe, which by no contradiction could be brought they could not make to hold other course, alleaging the ship to worke better, nor to lie otherwaies. token of storme Wednesday night, like the Swanne that singeth before her death, they in the Admiral, or Delight, continued in sounding of Trumpets, with Drummes, and Fifes: also winding the end of their jolitie, left with the battell and ringing of dolefull knels. the Cornets, Haughtboyes: and in Towards the evening also we caught in the Golden Hinde a very mighty Porpose, with a harping yron, having first striken divers of them, and brought away part of their flesh, sticking upon the yron, but could recover onely that one. These also passing through the Ocean, in heardes, did portend storme. I omit to recite frivolous reportes by them in the Frigat, of strange voyces, the same night, which scarred some from the helme. Thursday the 29 of August, the wind rose, and blew vehemently at South and by East, bringing withal raine, and thicke mist, so that we could not see a cable length before us. And betimes in together runne and folded in amongst flats and sands, ddmirall amongst which we found shoale and deepe in every three 65 the morning we were al- Losseofour VIII 