A relation of Richard Clarke of Weymouth, master of the ship called the Delight, going for the discovery of Norembega, with Sir Humfrey Gilbert 1583. Written in excuse of that fault of casting away the ship and men, imputed to his oversight. llEparting out of Saint Johns Harborough in the Newfound land the 20. of August unto Cape Raz, from thence we directed our course unto the He of Sablon or the Isle of Sand, which the Generall Sir Humfrey Gilbert would willingly have seene. But when we came within 1 -r 1 twentie leagues of the Isle of Sablon, we fell to contro- 2O- Leagues versie of our course. The Generall came up in his-^????*^ Frigot and demanded of mee Richard Clarke master of the Admirall what course was best to keepe: I said that Westsouthwest was best: because the wind was at South and night at hand and unknowen sands lay the land. The Generall comoff a great way from I told him againe manded me to go Westnorthwest. that the Isle of Sablon was Westnorthwest and but 15. [m- l64-J leagues off, and that he should be upon the Island before *J' L??gu T , & from the Isle rr*\ day, it hee went that course. The Generall sayd, my ofsabkn. reckoning was untrue, and charged me in her Majesties HereinClarke name, and as I would shewe my selfe in her Countrey, untruely c^ar^hstr to follow him that night. 1 -/ because he presented her Majesties person, aid follow Gilbert. his commaundement, and about seven of the clocke in The ship cast the morning the ship stroke on ground, where shee away on was cast away. Then the Generall went off to Sea, the y?rs~? course that I would have had them gone before, and of August saw the ship cast away men and all, and was not able 1583. to save a man, for there was not water upon the sand for either of them much lesse for the Admirall, that drew fourteene foote. Now as God would the day 85 I fearing his threatnings, r J- J r 11 Humfrey i T v es, 11 n 1 1 before it was very calme, and a Souldier of the ship had killed some foule with his piece, and some of the company desired me that they might hoyse out the boat to recover the foule, which I granted them : and when they came aboord they did not hoyse it in againte that night. And when the ship was cast away the boate was a sterne being in burthen one tunne and an halfe : there was left in the boate one oare and nothing els. Some of the company could swimme, and recovered the boate and did hale in out of the water as many men as they coulde : among the rest they had a care to watch for the Captaine or the Master : They happened on my selfe being the master, but could never see the Captaine : Then they hailed into the boate as many men as they could in number 16. whose names hereafter I will rehearse. And when the 16. were in the boate, some had small remembrance, and some had none : for they did not make account to live, but to prolong their lives as long as it pleased God, and looked every moment of an houre when the Sea would eate them up, the boate being so little and so many men in her, and so foule weather, that it was not possible for a shippe to brooke halfe a coarse of sayle. Thus while wee remayned two dayes and two nights, and that wee saw it pleased God our boate lived in the Sea (although we had nothing to helpe us withall but one oare, which we kept up the boate withall upon the Sea, and so went even as the Sea would drive us) there was in our company one master Hedly that put foorth this question to me the Master. I doe see that it doth please God, that our boate lyveth in the Sea, and it may please God that some of us may come to the land if our boate were not overladen. Let us make sixteene lots, and those foure that have the foure shortest lots we will cast overboord preserving the Master among us all. I replied unto him, saying, no, we will live and die together. Master Hedly asked me if my remembrance were good : I answered I gave God prayse it was good, and knewe how farre I was off the 86 Sixteene gate into the shipboate. Master Hedlyes ungodly land, and was in hope to come to the lande within two they were but threescore or three dayes, and sayde leagues from the lande, (when they were seventie) all to put them in comfort. Thus we continued the third and fourth day without any sustenance, save onely the weedes that swamme in the Sea, and salt water to drinke. The fifth day Hedly dyed and another moreover : then wee desired all to die : for in all these five dayes and five nights we saw the Sunne but once and the Starre but one night, it was so foule weather. Thus we did remaine the sixt day : then we were very weake and wished all to die saving onely my selfe which did comfort them and promised they should come soone to land by the helpe of God : but the company were very importunate, and were in doubt they should never come to land, but that I promised them the seventh day they should come to shore, or els they should cast me over boord : which did happen true the seventh day, for at eleven of the clocke wee had sight of the land, and at 3. of They came on the clocke at afternoone we came on land. All these ^d the 1 day seven dayes and seven nights, the wind kept continually If the wind had in the meane time shifted upon South. any other point, wee had never come to land : we were no sooner come to the land, but the wind came cleane contrary at North within halfe an houre after our arrivall. But we were so weake that one could scarcely helpe another of us out of the boate, yet with much adoe being come all on shore we kneeled downe upon our knees and gave God praise that he had dealt so mercifully with us. Afterwards those which were strongest holpe their fellowes unto a fresh brooke, where we satisfied our selves with water and berries very well. There The fruitfulwere of al sorts of berries plentie, & as goodly a Coun- ^ °^of trey as ever I saw: we found a very faire plaine 'newfound Champion ground that a man might see very farre every land. way : by the Sea side was here and there a little wood with goodly trees as good as ever I saw any in Norway, able to mast any shippe, of pyne trees, spruse trees, 87 firre, and very great birch trees. Where we came on land we made a little house with boughes, where we rested all that night. In the morning I devided the company three and three to goe every way to see what foode they could find to sustaine themselves, and appointed them to meete there all againe at noone with such foode as they could get. As we went aboord we found great store of peason as good as any wee have in England : a man would thinke they had bene sowed there. We rested there three dayes and three nights and lived very well with pease and berries, wee named the place Saint Laurence, because it was a very goodly river like the river of S. Laurence in Canada, and we found it very full of Salmons. When wee had well rested our selves wee rowed our boate along the shore, thinking to have gone to the Grande Bay to have come home with some Spanyards which are yeerely there to kill the Whale : And when we were hungry or a thirst we put our boate on land and gathered pease and berries. Thus wee rowed our boate along the shore five dayes : about which time we came to a very goodly river that ranne farre up into the Countrey and saw very goodly growen trees of all sortes. There we happened upon a [III. 165.] Biskay to an Harborough called The Passage. The Foureteene of ship of Saint John de Luz, which ship brought us into our men brought out of ,, Newfound Master or the shippe was our great friend, or else we land in a ship had bene put to death if he had not kept our counsayle. of St. John de For when the visitors came aboord, as it is the order LuZm c . , . / ° . & rj t in Spaine, they demaunding what we were, he sayd we were poore fishermen that had cast away our ship in Newfound land, and so the visitors inquired no more of the matter at that time. Assoone as night was come he put us on land and bad us shift for our selves. Then had wee but tenne or twelve miles into France, which we went that night, and then cared not for the Spanyard. And so shortly after we came into England