one hundred leagues any way of the place, where the Generall shall have setled his chiefest being or residence. A relation of the first voyage and discoverie of for Monsieur the Isle Ramea, made by de La court Pre Ravillon, and Grand Pre, with the ship called the Bonaventure, to kill and make Traine oyle of the beasts called the Morses with great teeth, which we have perfourmed by Gods helpe this yeere 1591. then Or the performance of our said voyage, we departed from S. Malo with the fleete that went for Canada, and kept companie with the ships called The Soudil and the Charles halfe the way, and lost them; a violent wind arising at Northwest, which separated us. After which we had faire wether, and came to the coast of Cape Rase, & had no further knowledge thereof, because the winde was at the Southwest but a scarce gale: and we came to the sounding Southwest of the Isles of S. Peter about 10. leagues, where we found 20. fathoms water, and we sayled Northwest one quarter of the North, and came within 12. leagues of Cape de Rey. The next day being the 6. of May 1591, we were come to Cape de Rey, & saw a ship Southwest off us, and stayed there that night. The next day being the seventh of the sayd moneth, we came to the Isles of Aponas, where we put foorth our boat, because we had not past 8. leagues to our haven, which we kenned very clearly, although the coasts lay very low: and because the night approched, and the wind grew very high, we sought not to seeke our port, because it is very hard to find it when the wind is lofty, because of the shoalds that are about it. 1591. Thefleete of Canada. Cape Rase. The hies ofS. Peter. Cape de Rey. The Isles of the Isle of Brion & the Isle of The Isle of And we thought to keepe our course untill the next morning between Aponas. But there arose so great a tempest at the BmnSouthwest, that without the helpe of God we had bene in great danger among these Isles. And we traversed up and downe eleven dayes, making our prayers unto God to ende the tempest and to send us faire weather, that we might obteine our haven: which of his goodnesse he gave us. The last of May we ranged the Isle The Isle °f Ramea on the Northnorthwest side, unto the contrary amea> part of the land, where it trendeth to the Southsoutheast: and seeing no land on the West side, wee ranged the sayd land to the East one quarter to the North at the least 15. leagues, and being from the shore some eight leagues, we found 15 fathoms water, and passed betweene the Isle of Duoron and the Isle of Ramea, where goeth The lsle °f a chanell of 3. leagues bredth; in the midst whereof you shall have 7. 8. and 9. fathoms water. And the lowe poynt of the Isle Ramea, and the Isle Duoron lie Northnortheast, and Southsouthwest. And take heede you come not neere the low point of the Isle Ramea by a great league, for I have sounded it at 3. fathoms water. The Isle is marked. And the harbour of the Isle Ramea lyeth Northeast and Southwest, one quarter to the East and West. And if you would enter the sayd harbour, keepe you a league off the shoare: for often times there is great danger. uoronAnd that you may know the sayd haven, to the The markes of f/J^^ff Eastnortheast of the sayde Isle there are high lands appearing to them that are without on all sides like a number of Islands, but in very deede they are all firme land: and if you come on the South and Southwest side, you shall see a hill divided into 3. parts, which I called The three hillockes, which is right within the haven. And for another better marke of the sayd harbour, you shall see an Isle like unto a Floure de lice, Enisle like a distant from the sayd haven 6. leagues at the least: and a quarter to the North and South. And on the sayd Isle there is good pebble stone to drie fish upon: But to the west thereof there is a very faire countrey: and A banke of sand. [III. 190.] From the sayd there is a banke of sand, which runneth the length of a c abi ej having not past one fathom water upon it. Isle along the firme land the coast lyeth East and West, and you shall see as it were a great forrest running eastward: and the Easterne Cape is called Cape du Chapt, and is great and red toward Cape du Chapt. t j ie gea> ^ n ( j betweene the sayd lands you shall see as it were a small Island, but it joyneth to the firme land on the Southwest part: and there is good shingle to drie fish on. And you must coast the shore with boates and not with ships, by reason of the shallowes The maim a of the sayd coast. For I have seene without Cape du shold coast. Chapt in faire weather the ground in two fathoms water, neere a league and an halfe from shore, and I judged by reason of the highnesse of the land, that there had bene above thirtie fathoms water, which was nothing so: and I have sounded comming neere the shore, in more or lesse depth. The coast stretcheth three leagues to the Lisle Blanche. West from Lisle Blanch, or the white Isle, unto the h^^h entrance of a river, where we slewe and killed to the killed 1500. number of Morses. fifteene hundred Morses or Sea oxen, accounting small and great, where at full sea you may come on shoare with boates, and within are two or three fathoms water. From thence the coast trendeth foure leagues to the West \ to the Northwest unto the I sl e Hupp, which is twentie leagues in circuit, and is like the edge of a knife: upon it there is neither wood there are Morses upon it, but they bee nor grasse: hard to be taken. From thence the coast trendeth to the Northwest and Northnorthwest; which is all that I have seene, to wit, the two sides and one ende of the Isle. And if I had had as good lucke as my Masters, when I was on the Northwest side with my shippe, I would have adventured to have sayled South-southeast, to have discovered the Easterne shoare of the sayd Isle. The Isle In your returne to the East, as you come from the Sands and toward ground. haven of Cape du Chapt unto the sayde haven, are sholdssandes and sholds. And three good leagues from Cape f^*a du Chapt there is a small Island conteining about a ieague of league of ground : where there is an haven the Southeast: and as you enter into the sayd haven on the starreboord side, a dented Cape all of redde land. And you cannot enter into the said haven but A hard haven. with the flood, because of a barre which lieth halfe a the poynts of the sayd haven. The league without tydes are there at Southeast and Northwest; but when the wind is very great, it bloweth much into the haven at halfe flood. But ordinarily it floweth five foote and an halfe. The markes to enter into the sayd haven Markes to are to leave the Isle Blanche or White Island at your c°h™™t0 the comming in on the starreboord; and the poynt of the haven towarde the West hath a thick Island, which you shall see on the other side, and it hath a little round Buttresse, which lyeth on the East side of the Island. There are also two other buttresses more easie to bee seene then hidden: these are not to the East but to the West, and they have markes on them. Here you shall not have above two fathom and an halfe at a full sea upon this barre. And the sounding is stone and rough ground. At your entring in, when you shall finde white sand which lyeth next the Southeast of the Cape, then you are upon the barre: and bee not afrayd The Barre. to passe up the chanell. And for markes towarde the West athwart the barre, when you have brought an Island even, which lyeth to the westward without, with the thicke part of the high land which lyeth most to the West, you shall bee past the barre: and the chanell runneth due North. And for your anchoring The best anthe sayd haven, see that you carefully seeke the c&°raie- in in the middest of the sayd Thicke land, which lyeth bottome of the sayd haven: for you must anchor betweene two bankes of sand, where the passage is but trance. The Isle of Cormorants. a great tyde: for the Sea runneth there as swiftly and . There is good ground and ankormore then in age here: and you shall ride in three fathom water. And within the sayde haven there is nothing to hurt you, for you are free from all winds. And if by chance you should be driven Westward of the sayd against the small Island named before, which is called The Isle of Cormorants; and you may enter in there as at the other haven at a full sea: And you must passe upon the West side, and you shall finde on the Barre at a full sea fourteene foote water, and great depth when you are entred in: for the Sea runneth very swiftly in that place: and the entrie thereof lyeth Southeast and Northwest. Right over against you on the other side, you may passe with boates at a full sea. And all these entrances make all but one haven, which is good within. I say this, because I have passed into the maine Sea by the one and the other passage. And the said Isle is not past two leagues over in the middest. It is but two bankes of sande, whereof one is like to that of S. Malo, which let the Sea from passing through the middest of all the Isle: But the two endes are high mountaines with Islands altogether cut and separated with streames and rivers. To anker in the sayd harbour, you must not ride farther then five or sixe cables length from the sayd