Here followeth the course from Belle Isle, Carpont, and the Grand Bay in Newfoundland up the River of Canada for the space of 230. leagues, observed by John Alphonse of Xanctoigne chiefe Pilote to Monsieur Roberval, 1542. Elles Isles are in 51 degrees and §. Belles Belle Isle. Isles and Carpont are Northnorthwest and Southsoutheast, and they are ten leagues distant. Carpont is in 52 de- Carpont in grees. Carpont and Bell Isle from the ^-de&'eesGrand Bay are Northeast and Southwest, and the distance from Bell Isle to the Grand Bay is 7 leagues. The midst of the Grand Bay is The Grand in 52 degrees and a halfe, and on the Northside therof Bayn V"jf there is a rocke: halfe a league from the Isle, over against ** an Carpont toward the East there is a small flat Island, and on the side toward the Northeast there is a flat rocke. Aflatte rocke. And when thou commest out of the harborough of Carpont thou must leave this rocke on the starreboord side, and also on the larboord side there are two or three small Isles: and when thou commest out on the Northeast side, ranging along the shore toward the West about two pikes length in the midway there is a shold which lieth on thy starboord side: and saile thou by the North coast, and leave two partes of the Grand Bay toward the South; because there is a rocke which runneth 2 or 3 leagues into the sea. And when thou art come athwart the haven of Butes, run along the North shore about one league or Butes. an halfe off, for the coast is without all danger: Bell Isle in the mouth of the Grand Bay, and the Isles of Blanc The Isle of Sablon, which are within the Grand Bay, neere unto the North shore lie Northeast, West and Southwest, & the distance is 30 leagues. The Grand Bay at the entrance The overall is but 7 leagues broad from land to land untill it come *"****#*** J 7 ^^ 1. & Errand Bay. over against the Bay des Chasteaux: and from thence forward it hath not past 5 leagues in breadth. And 2. / ir parts. The Isles de la Damoiselle fourtk'parts*' Many Isles y good harbors. Cape Tienot one part. THE ENGLISH VOYAGES t he I s l es de la a j ^e of against Blanc Sablon it is 8 leagues broad from land to land. And the land on the South shore is all low land along the sea coast. The North shore is reasonable high land, Blanc Sablon is in 5 if degrees. The Isles of Blanc S a b l on & Damoiselle, are Northeast, Wests o u t } l w e s tj a n (j t3^e t j ie Westsouthwest, and they are distant $6 leagues: these lies are in 50. deg. £. ^nd ^^^ ' 1S a gOO(j haven : & -you may enter by an high Cape which lieth along toward the Northeast, and within the distance of a pike & an half, because of a rocke which lieth on your larrebord side, & you may ancre in 10 fathome water over against a litle nooke: and from the great headland unto the place where thou doest ancre there is not above the length of 2 Cables. And if thou wouldest go out by the West side, thou must saile neere the Isle by the starrebord, & give roome unto the Isle on the larbord at the comming forth : and when thou art not past a cables length out thou must saile hard by the Isles on the larbord side, by reason of a suncken flatte which lieth on the starrebord, and thou shalt saile so on to the Southsouthwest, untill thou come in sight of a rocke which shineth, which is about halfe a league in the sea distant from the Isles, and thou shalt leave it on the larrebord: (and from the Isles of Damoiselle unto Newfoundland the sea is not in bredth above 36. leagues, because that Newfoundland even unto Cape Briton runneth not but Northnortheast & Southsouthwest.) Between the Isles de la Damoiselle and the Isles of Blanck Sablon there be many Isles and good harbours: ancj Qn t^s coast there are faulcons & haukes, and certaine foules which seeme to be feasants. The Isles de la Damoiselle & Cape Tienot are Northeast & Westsouthwest & take a little of the Northeast and southwest, & they are distant 18 leagues. Cape Tienot is in 50. deg. a nd 4- A nd broadest. And it may be to the end or Newfoundland, which is at the entrance of Cape Briton 70 leagues, which is the greatest bredth of the sea. And there are 6 or 7 Isles between the Isles de 276 t he s ea Is la Damoiselle & Cape Tienot, Cape Tienot hath in ye sea 5 or 6 leagues distant from it a sunken Hand dangerous for ships. The Cape Tienot and the midst of the Isle of Ascension are Northeast and southsouthwest, & they are 22. leagues distant, the midst of the Isle of Ascension is The Isle JJ^°^on in 49 deg. & \. " The said Isle lieth Northwest and Southeast, the Northwest end is in 50. degrees of latitude or^Nat^otec. and the Southeast end is in 48. degrees and a halfe and it [ni. 238.J is about 25. leagues long and 4. or 5. leagues broad: and from the Northwest end of the Isle unto the firme land of the North side the Sea is not above seven leagues broad, but unto the firme land on the South side are about 15. leagues. Cape Tienot and the end of the Isle of Ascention toward the Southeast are Northeast and Southwest, and are distant 30. leagues. The said Cape of Tienot and the Northwest end of the Isle of Ascension are East and West, and take a little of the Northeast and Southwest, and they are distant 34. leagues. The Isle of The comAscension is a goodly Isle, and a goodly champion land mene[atlon' °f A the Isle of jscentiQ^ ., , ,.,? { A- 11 u-i. 1 without any miles, standing all upon white rocks and Alablaster, all covered with trees unto the Sea shore, and there are al sorts of trees as there be in France: and there be wild beasts, as beares, Luserns, Porkespicks. And From Cape from the Southeast end of the Isle of Ascension unto the ^rkon t0 the entrance of Cape Briton is but 50. leagues. The North- ^ / ^ / / J Z /S west end of the Isle & the Cape des Monts nostre Dame, Ascention is which is on the maine land towards the South, are North- but$0leagues. east and Westsouthwest, and the distance betweene them ^ CaPe °f is 15. leagues. The Cape is in 49. degrees, which is a D™J£ nostre very high land. The Cape and end of the Isle of Ascension toward the Southeast are East and West and there is 15. leagues distance betweene them. The Bay of Molves The Bay of or Gaspay is in 48. degrees, and the coast lyeth North Molves or and South, and taketh a quarter of the Northeast and Southwest unto the Bay of Heate: and there are 3. Isles, one great one and two smal: from the Bay of Heate The Bay de untill you passe the Monts nostre Dame al the land is C^^ror^ high and good ground al covered with trees. Ognedoc 277 Ognedoc. T HE E N G L I SH V O Y A G ES it is a g o od i s a good Bay and lyeth Northnorthwest and Southsouth Harbour : and you must saile along e a s t) a nd the shore on the Northside by reason of the low point at the entrance therof: and when you are passed the poynt bring your selfe to an ancre in 15. or 20. fathoms of water toward the South shore, and here within this Haven are two rivers, one which goeth toward the Northwest, and . j XT J JI ° , Greater store the other to the Southwest. And on this coast there is t filing for Coddes and other fish, where there is and better fish then in New- ° ru r . foundland. more store then is in Newfoundland, and better nsn. And here is great store of river foule, as Malards, wild Fouks. Geese, and others: And here are all sorts of trees, Rose Trees. trees, Raspesses, Filbird trees, Apple trees, Peare trees, and it is hotter here in Sommer then in France. The Isle of Ascension and the 7. Isles which lie on the North shore lie Southeast and Westnorthwest, and are distant 24. leagues. The Cape of Ognedoc and the 7. Isles are Northnorthwest and Southsoutheast, & are distant 35. leagues. The Cape of Monts nostre Dame and the 7. i_ ^x. The mouth of Isles are North and South, and the cut over from the one the river of to ^ twenty five *^ea' a nd from thence upward leagies broad, narrower and narrower. The 7. Isles are in 50. degrees The 7 Isles in and ^. The 7. Isles and the poynt of Ongear lie North^odegreesand e a st a n ( j Southwest and the distance betweene them is 15. ox^^r {525. leagues: and this is the breadth of this to waxe it beginneth a*% The river is ^ues* broad o ne leagues, and betweene them are certaine small Islands: and the point of Ongear and the mountaines Nostre Dame, which are on the South side of the entrance of the river, are North and South: and the cut over from the 1S t en leagues : and this is here the abredth of the Sea. The poynt of Ongear and the river ° f CaCn He EaSt and W e S t> and t h e ? are distant I2' to ^ ot^er atyeesanfa l e ag u e s- And all the coast from the Isle of Ascension hither is very good ground, wherein growe all sortes of quarter. trees that are in France and some fruits. The poynt of The Isle of O n g e ar is in 49- degrees and £. And the river of Caen *T*m2f two third I s le °f Raquelle lye Northeast and Southwest, a nd and they are distant 12. leagues. The Isle of Raquelle is parts. 278 toward in 48. degrees and §. In this river of Caen there is great store of fish. And here the Sea is not past 8. leagues The river % broad. The Isle of Raquelle is a very low Isle, which is k*&*s broad' neere unto the South shore, hard by a high Cape which is called the Cape of Marble. There is no danger there at all. And betweene Raquelle and the Cape of Marble ships may passe. And there is not from the Isle to the South shore above one league, and from the Isle unto the North shore about foure leagues. The Isle of Raquelle and the entrance of Saguenay are Northeast Westsouthwest, and are distant 14. leagues, and there are betweene them two small Islandes neere the North shore. The entrance The entrance of Saguenay is in 48. degrees and ^, and the entrance f $ hath not past a quarter of a league in breadth, and it is dangerous the Southwest: and two or three leagues within the entrance it beginneth to waxe wider and wider: and it seemeth to bee as it were an arme of the Sea: And I thinke that the same runneth into the Sea of Cathay, for it sendeth foorth there a great The sea of current, and there doth runne in that place a terrible rase Catha^ or tyde. And here the river from the North shore to The river not the South shore is not past foure leagues in breadth, and P*** leagues it is a dangerous passage betweene both the lands, because there lie bankes of rockes in the river. The Isle of Raquelle and the Isle of Hares lye Northeast and Southwest, and take J of the East and the West, and they are distant 18. leagues. The entrance of Saguenay and the Isle of Liepueres or Hares lie Northnortheast & Southsouthwest, and are distant 5. leagues. The entrance of Saguenay and the Isle of Raquelle are Northnorthwest, and Southsouthwest, and are distant three leagues. The The hie of ^a™Js£ Isle of Hares is in 48 and A of a degree. From the Mountaines of Nostre Dame unto Canada and unto teenthpart. Hochelaga, all the land on the South coast is faire, a lowe [III. 239.] land and goodly champaigne, all covered with trees unto the brink of the river. And the land on the North side is higher, and in some places there are high mountaines. And from the Isle of Hares unto the Isle of Orleans the Note. river is not past 4 or 5 leagues broad. Betweene the Isle of Hares and the highland on the North side the sea is not past a league and an halfe broad, and it is very deepe, for it is above 100. fathoms deepe in the middest. To the East of the Isle of Hares there are 2 or 3 small Isles and rockes. And from hence to the Isle Des Coudres or of Filbeards, all is nothing but Isles and rockes on the South shore: and towards the North the sea is fayre and deepe. The Isle of Hares and the Isle of Filbeards lie northeast, West and Southwest, and they are distant 12 leagues. And you must alwayes run along the high land on the north shore; for on the other shore there is nothing but rocks. And you must passe by the side of the Isle of Filbeards, and the river there is not past a quarter of a league broad, and you must sayle in the middest of the chanel: and in the middest runneth the best passage either at an hie or a low water, because the sea runneth there strongly, and there are great dangers of rocks, and you had neede of good ancre and cable. The isle of Filbeards is a small isle, about one league long, and halfe a league broad, but they are all banks of sand. The isle of The isle of Filberds stands in 47. deg. and §. The isle Filbeards in *and T^quar- ters. of Filberds and the isle of Orleans lie northeast and southwest, and they are distant 10 leagues, and thou must passe by the high land on the northside about a quarter of a league, because that in the midst of the river there is nothing but sholds and rocks. And when thou shalt bee over against a round Cape, thou must take over to the South shore southwest, and a quarter toward the South; and thou shalt sayle in 5. 6 and 7 fathoms: and there the The be&nning river of Canada beginneth to bee fresh, and the salt water of the fresh endeth. And when thou shalt be athwart the point of motet. t j ie j gj e o£- Orleans, where the river beginneth to be fresh, thou shalt sayle in the midst of the river, and thou shalt leave the isle on the starreboord, which is on the right The river but hand: and here the river is not past a quarter of a league VV'L" broad> a nd h a th 2O a nd 3° f a t h o ms water. And towards sOuth shore there is a ledge of Isles all covered with ^ trees, and they end over against the point of the Isle of Orleans. And the poynt of the isle of Orleans toward The Isle of the Northeast is in 47 degrees and one terce of a degree. Orleans in 47 And the Isle of Orleans is a fayre Isle, all covered with * # « ' ** . , . . J 1 , . one third part, . , trees even unto the rivers side : and it is about 5 leagues long, and a league and an halfe broade. And on the North shore there is another River, which falleth into the mayne River at the ende of the Island: and Shippes may very well passe there. From the middest of the Isle unto Canada the River runneth West; and from the place of Canada unto France-Roy the river turneth West Southwest : and from the West ende of the Isle to Canada is Canada 1 but one league; and unto France-Roy 4 leagues. And league to the when thou art come to the end of the Isle, thou shalt ^f*** see a great River which falleth fifteene or twenty fathoms or/JL. downe from a rocke, and maketh a terrible noyse. The The Fort of Fort of France-roy stands in 47 degrees, and one sixt Trance-Roy part of a degree. ££# _ The extension or all these lands, upon just occasion one sixt part, ^ is called New France. For it is as good and as temperate as France, and in the same latitude. And the reason Whythecounwherefore it is colder in the Winter is, because the fresh River is naturally more colde then the Sea; and it is also broad and deeper and in some places it is halfe a league and above in breadth. And also because the A second realand is not tylled, nor full of people, and is all full of son* Woods, which is the cause of colde, because there is not store of fire nor cattel. And the sunne hath his Meridian as high as the Meridian at Rochel: and it is noone here when the Sunne is at South Southwest at Rochel. And here the North starre by the compasse The variation standeth North northeast. And when at Rochel it is "fvcompasse, noone, it is but halfe an houre past nine at France-Roy. From the sayde place unto the Ocean sea and the coast of New France, is not above 50 leagues distance. And from the entrance of Norumbega unto Florida are 300 leagues: and from this place of France-Roy to Hochelaga, are about 80 leagues: and unto ye Isle of Rasus 30 of France Roy of the Grand Bay 230 leags. Gold and silver like to be found in Canada. A Bay in 4 2. degrees giving some hope of a passage. [III. 240.] Trees. Redde plums. Fowle. Come. IVheate to be sowen in March. THE ENGLISH VOYAGES leagues. And I doubt not but Norumbega entreth into the river of Canada, and unto the Sea of Saguenay. And from the Fort of France-Roy untill a man come foorth of the Grande Bay is not above 230 leagues. And the course is Northeast and West Southwest not above 5 degrees and \ difference: and reckon 16 leagues and an halfe to a degree. By the nature of the climate the lands toward Hochelaga are still better and better, and more fruitfull. And this land is fitte for Figges and Peares. And I thinke that golde and silver will be found here, according as the people of the countrey say. These landes lye over against Tartarie, and I doubt not but that they stretch toward Asia, according to the roundnesse of the world. And therefore it were good to have a small Shippe of 70 tunnes to discover the coast of New France on the backe side of Florida: for I have bene at a Bay as farre as 42 degrees betweene Norumbega and Florida, and I have not searched the ende thereof, and I knowe not whether it passe through. And in all these Countreys there are okes, and bortz, ashes, elmes, arables, trees of life, pines prussetrees, ceders, great wall nut trees, and wilde nuts, hasel-trees, wilde peare trees, wilde grapes, and there have bene found redde plummes. And very faire corne groweth there, and peason grow of their owne accord, gooseberries and strawberries. And there are goodly Forrests, wherein men may hunt. And there are great store of stagges, deere, porkepicks, and the Savages say there bee Unicornes. Fowle there are in abundance, as bustards, wilde geese, cranes, turtle doves, ravens, crowes, and many other birds. All things which are sowen there, are not past 2. or 3. dayes in comming up I have tolde in one eare of corne an out of the ground. hundred and twenty graines, like the corne of France. And ye neede not to sowe your Wheate untill March, and it will be ripe in the middest of August. The waters are better and perfecter then in France. And if the Countrey were tilled and replenished with people, it would be as hotte as Rochel. And the reason why it snoweth there oftener then in France is, because it raineth The cause of into ^ often snmthere but seldome: for the raine is converted snowes. All things above mentioned, are true. John Alphonse made this Voyage with Monsieur Roberval. There is a pardon to be seene for the pardoning of Monsieur de Saine terre, Lieutenant of the sayd Monsieur de Roberval, given in Canada in the presence of the sayde John Alphonse. T he Voyage of John Francis de la Roche, knight, Lord of Roberval, to the Countries of Canada, Saguenai, and Hochelaga, with two hundred persons, three both men, women, and children, begun in remayned April, 1542. the same summer, and all the next winter. In which parts he tall Ships, and Ir John Francis de la Roche knight, lord of Roberval, appoynted by the king as his Lieutenant general in the countreis of Canada, Saguenay, and Hochelaga, furnished 3. tall Ships, chiefly at the kings cost: And having in his fleete 200. persons, aswel men as women, accompanied with divers gentlemen of qualitie, as namely with Monsieur Saineterre his lieutenant, l'Espiney his Ensigne, captain Guinecourt, Monsieur Noire fontaine, Dieu lamont, Frote, la Brosse, Francis de Mire, la Salle, and Roieze, and John Alfonse of Xanctoigne an excellent pilot, set sayle from Rochel the 16. of April 1542. The same day about noone we came athwart of Chefe de boys, where we were enforced to stay the night following. On Munday the seventeenth of the sayde Moneth wee departed from Chefe de-boys. The winde served us notably for a time: but within fewe dayes it came quite contrary,