the Savages of the Countrey came not any more about our Fort as they were accustomed, to bring us fish, and that they were in a wonderful doubt and feare of us. Wherefore our Captaine, having bene advertised by some of our men which had bene at Stadacona to visite them, A very great that there were a wonderfull number of the Countrey number of Savages assem- f bled together. people assembled together, caused all things in our forr t r e s se * i to b ee s et in g°°d order: &c. ^ • ° o JJ & The rest is wanting. A letter written to M. John Growte student in Paris, by Jaques Noel of S. Malo, the nephew of Jaques Cartier, touching the foresaid discovery. that I hold Aster Growte, your brother in law Giles Walter shewed me this morning a Mappe printed at Paris, dedicated to one M. Hakluyt an English Gentleman : wherein all the West Indies, the kingdome of New Mexico, and the Countreys of Canada, Hochelaga and Saguenay are the River of Canada which contained. is described in that Mappe is not marked as it is in my booke, which is agreeable to the booke of Jaques Cartier: and that the sayd Chart doth not marke or set downe The great Lake, which is above the Saults, according as the Savages have advertised us, which dwell at the sayd Saults. In the foresayd Chart which you sent me hither, the Great Lake is placed too much toward the North. The Saults or falles of the River stand in 44. degrees of latitude: it is not so hard a matter to passe easte them, as it is thought: The water falleth not downe from any high place, it is nothing else but that in the middest It were best to build of the River there is bad ground. The Saults are in 44. d tf'™d e But5.leagues b o at es above the Saults: and it is easie to march or Twe^thei Saults. travel! by land to the end of the three Saults: it is not I have bene upon the toppe above five leagues journey. t of a mountaine, which is at the foot of the Saults, where I have seene the sayd River beyond the sayd Saultes, which shewed unto us to be broader then it was where we passed it. The people of the Countrey advertised us, that there are ten dayes journey from the Saults unto Ten dayes this Great Lake. We know not how many leagues they > ^ / ™f the Saults to 1 • make to a dayes journey. At this present 1 cannot write this great unto you more at large, because the messenger can stay Lake, no longer. Here therefore for the present I will ende, saluting you with my hearty commendations, praying God to give you your hearts desire. For S. Malo in haste this 19 day of June. 1587. . J A T j Your loving Friend, JAQUES NOEL. COsin, I pray you doe me so much pleasure as to send mee a booke of the discovery of New Mexico, and one of those new Mappes of the West Indies dedicated to M. Hakluyt the English Gentleman, which you sent to your brother in law Giles Walter. I will not faile to informe my selfe, if there be any meane to find out those descriptions which Captaine Cartier made after his two last voyages into Canada. Underneath the aforesaid unperfite relation that which followeth is written in another letter sent to M. John Growte student in Paris from Jaques Noel of S. Malo, the grand nephew of Jaques Cartier. Can write nothing else unto you of any thing that I can recover of the writings of Captaine Jaques Cartier my uncle disceased, although I have made search in all places that I could possibly in this Towne : saving of a certaine booke made in maner of a sea Chart, which was drawne by the hand of my said uncle, which is in the possession of master Cremeur: which booke is passing 273 VIII 