The voyage of Monsieur Roberval from his Fort in Canada unto Saguenay, the fifth of June, I543Onsieur Roberval the kings Lieutenant generall in the Countries of Canada, Saguenay, and Hochelaga, departed toward the said province of Saguenay on the Tuesday the 5. day of June 1543. after supper : and he with all his furniture was imbarked to make the sayd voyage. But upon a certaine occasion they lay in the Rode over against the place before mentioned : but on the Wednesday about sixe of the clocke in the morning they set sayle, and sayled against the streame: in which voyage their whole furniture was of eight barks, aswell great as small, and to the number of threescore and ten persons, with the aforesayd Generall. The Generall left behinde him in the aforesayde place and Fort thirtie persons to remayne there untill his returne from Saguenay, which hee appoynted to bee the first of July, or else they should returne into France. And hee left there behinde him but two Barkes to cary the sayde thirtie persons, and the furniture which was there, while hee stayed still in the Countrey. And for effectuating hereof, he left as his Lieutenant a gentleman named Monsieur de Royeze, to whom he gave commission, and charged all men to obey him, and to be at the commandement of the sayd lieutenant. The victuals which were left for their mayntenance untill the sayd first day of July, were received by the sayd Lieutenant Royeze. On Thursday the 14. of June Monsieur de FEspiney, la Brosse, Monsieur Frete, Monsieur Longeval, and others, returned from the Generall, from the voyage of Saguenay. And note that eight men and one Barke were drowned 288 The 5. of June. The 6. of June. Monsieur de Royeze. The 14 of and lost, among whom was Monsieur de Noire fontaine, and one named la Vasseur of Constance. On Tuesday the 19. of June aforesayd, there came Thei^of the Generall, Monsieur de Villeneufue, Talebot, Jun€m from and three others, which brought sixescore pounds weight of their corne, and letters to stay yet untill Magdalen- Maiz. tyde, which is the 22. day of July. JJ * 2- °f The rest of this Voyage is wanting. the English P n- H3-] together with to Virginia, and T he Voyages and Navigations of nation the severall discoveries therof chiefly at the charges of the honourable Sir Walter Ralegh knight, from 33 to 40 degrees the of latitude : English colonies there planted : as likewise a description of the Countrey, with the Inhabitants, and the manifold commodities. Whereunto are annexed the patents, letters, discourses, &c. to this part belonging. the successe of T he letters patents, granted by the Queenes Majestie to M. Walter Ralegh, now Knight, for the discovering and planting of new lands the space of 6. to continue and Countries, yeeres and no more. Lizabeth by the grace of God of England, France and Ireland Queene, defender of the faith, &c. To all people to whom these presents shal come, greeting. Know ye that of our especial grace, certaine science, & meere motion, we have given and granted, and by these presents for us, our heires and successors doe give and grant to our trusty and welbeloved servant Walter Ralegh Esquire, and to his heires and assignes for ever, free liberty & licence 289 VIII 