t of a mountaine, which is at the foot of the Saults, where I have seene the sayd River beyond the sayd Saultes, which shewed unto us to be broader then it was where we passed it. The people of the Countrey advertised us, that there are ten dayes journey from the Saults unto Ten dayes this Great Lake. We know not how many leagues they > ^ / ™f the Saults to 1 • make to a dayes journey. At this present 1 cannot write this great unto you more at large, because the messenger can stay Lake, no longer. Here therefore for the present I will ende, saluting you with my hearty commendations, praying God to give you your hearts desire. For S. Malo in haste this 19 day of June. 1587. . J A T j Your loving Friend, JAQUES NOEL. COsin, I pray you doe me so much pleasure as to send mee a booke of the discovery of New Mexico, and one of those new Mappes of the West Indies dedicated to M. Hakluyt the English Gentleman, which you sent to your brother in law Giles Walter. I will not faile to informe my selfe, if there be any meane to find out those descriptions which Captaine Cartier made after his two last voyages into Canada. Underneath the aforesaid unperfite relation that which followeth is written in another letter sent to M. John Growte student in Paris from Jaques Noel of S. Malo, the grand nephew of Jaques Cartier. Can write nothing else unto you of any thing that I can recover of the writings of Captaine Jaques Cartier my uncle disceased, although I have made search in all places that I could possibly in this Towne : saving of a certaine booke made in maner of a sea Chart, which was drawne by the hand of my said uncle, which is in the possession of master Cremeur: which booke is passing 273 VIII [III. 237.] T HE ENGLISH VOYAGES well marked and drawne for all the River of Canada, whereof I am well assured, because I my self have knowledge thereof as farre as to the Saults, where I have bene: The faults are The height of which Saults is in 44. degrees. m the latitude t^ e ^ I found in C h a rt beyond the place where the River is divided in twaine in the midst of both the branches of the said river somewhat neerest that arme which runneth toward the Northwest, these words following written in the hand of Jaques Carrier. By the people of Canada and Hochelaga it was said, That here is the land of Saguenay, which is rich and wealthy in precious stones. And about an hundred leagues under the same I found written these two lines following in the said Carde enclining toward the Southwest. Here in this Countrey are Cinamon and Cloves, which they call in their language Canodeta. Touching the effect of my booke whereof I spake unto you, it is made after the maner of a sea Chart, which I have delivered to my two sonnes Michael and John, which at this present are in Canada, If at their returne, which will be God willing about Magdalene tyde, they have learned any new thing worthy the writing, I will not faile to advertise you thereof. Your loving Friend, JAQUES NOEL.