people of a goodly stature, and well made, they are very white, but they are all naked: and if they were apparelled as the French are, they would bee as white and as fayre : but they paynt themselves for feare of heat and sunne burning. AD. 1542. [ill. 242.] In stead of apparell, they weare skinnes upon them like Their apmantles; and they have a small payre of breeches, where- P&rel1- • ,r ., J. . . . Y J u y So have they an^ witn they cover their privities, as well men as women. ofQmia They have hosen and shooes of lether excellently made. Quivira, and And they have no shirts: neither cover they their heads, Meta Incoghut their hayre is trussed up above the crowne of their mta- heads, and playted or broyded. Touching their victuals, Their vlc' they eate good meate, but all unsalted, but they drye it, and afterward they broyle it, as well fish as flesh. They have no certaine dwelling place, and they goe from place They remove to place, as they thinke they may best finde foode, as fro™Jlace t0 Aloses in one place, and other fish, Salmons, Sturgions, p^[ Mullets, Surmullets, Barz, Carpes, Eeles, Pinperneaux, and other fresh water fish, and store of Porposes. They feede also of Stagges, wilde Bores, Bugles, Porkespynes, Beastes. and store of other wilde beastes. And there is as great store of Fowle as they can desire. Fowk. tua s' Touching their bread, they make very good: and it is Their bread of great myll: and they live very well; for they take care °f&Za*Myl J J J or Maiz. r & , . tor nothing else. J , They drinke Seale oyle, but this is at their great feasts. Drinke of £af They have a King in every Countrey, and are wonder- Tkeir full obedient unto him: and according unto their maner and fashion. And when they government, travayle from place to place, they cary all their goods with them in their boates. they doe him honour feasts* ^r°^e The weomen nurse their children with the breast, and they sit continually, and are wrapped about the bellies with skinnes of furre. Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Notre Dame Law Library, on 30 Aug 2021 at 14:07:22, subject to