How after the departure of the two shippes which were sent backe into Britaine, and that the Fort was begun to be builded, the Captaine prepared two boates to goe up the great River to discover the passage of the three Saults or falles of the River. r r 1 • 1 1 r 11 • two boates an/fa?restof THE sayd Captaine having dispatched two ships to returne to carry newes, according as hee had in charge from the king, and that the Fort was begun to be builded, for preservation of their victuals and other things, determined with the Vicount of Beaupre, [III. 235.] and other Gentlemen, Masters, and Pilots chosen The Vicou^ for counsayle, to make a voyage with furnished with men and victuals to goe as farre as their councelL Hochelaga, of purpose to view and understand the fashion of the Saults of water, which are to be passed The rich to goe to Saguenay, that hee might be the readier in the count™y °f spring to passe farther, and in the Winter time to make .f^fy? f, A situatedbe1- all things neederull in a readinesse for their businesse. yOndthe The foresaid boates being made ready, the Captaine and Saults which Martine de Painpont, with other Gentlemen and the are *n 44remnant of the Mariners departed from the sayd place J& ^ye^ of Charlesburg Royal the seventh day of September in Charlesburg the yeere aforesayd 1540. And the Vicount of Beaupre Royal the 7. stayed behind for the garding and governement of all ofSeptem. things in the Fort. And as they went up the river, the Captaine went to see the Lord of Hochelay, which dwelleth betweene Canada and Hochelaga: which in the former voyage had given unto the said Captaine a little girle, and had oftentimes enformed him of the treasons which Taignoagny and Domagaya (whom the Captaine in his former voyage had caried into France) would have wrought against him. In regard of which his curtesie the said Captaine would not passe by without visiting of him, and to let him understand that the Captaine thought himselfe beholding unto him, hee gave unto him two yong boyes, in red cloth. The 11 of September. The Towne ofTutonaguy. Bad ground and a great current. A Towne of friendly people. Another village of good people which dwell over against the second Sault. THE ENGLISH VOYAGES and left them with him to learne their language, and bestowed upon him a cloake of Paris red, which cloake was set with yealow and white buttons of Tinne, and small belles. And withall hee gave him two Basins of Laton, and certaine hachets and knives: whereat the sayde Lord seemed highly to rejoyce, and thanked the Captaine. This done, the Captaine and his company departed from that place: And wee sailed with so prosperous a wind, that we arrived the eleventh day of the moneth at the first Sault of water, which is two leagues distant from the Towne of Tutonaguy. And after wee were arrived there, wee determined to goe and passe as farre up as it was possible with one of the boates, and that the other should stay there till it returned: and wee double manned her to rowe up against the course or streame of the sayde Sault. And after wee had passed some part of the way from our other boate, wee found badde ground and great rockes, and so great a current, that wee could not possibly passe any further with our Boate. And the Captaine resolved to goe by land to see the nature and fashion of the Sault. And after that we were come on shore, wee founde hard by the water side a way and beaten path going toward the sayde Saultes, by which wee tooke our way. And on the sayd way, and soone after we found an habitation of people which made us great cheere, and entertained us very friendly. And after that he had signified unto them, that wee were going toward the Saults, and that wee desired to goe to Saguenay, foure yong men went along with us to shewe us the way, and they brought us so farre that wee came to another village or habitation of good people, which dwell over against the second Sault, which came and brought us of their victuals, as Pottage and Fish, and offered us of the same. After that the Captaine had enquired of them as well by signes as wordes, how many more Saults wee had to passe to goe to Saguenay, and what distance and way it was thither, this people shewed us and gave us to understand, that wee were at the second Sault, and that there was but one more to passe, They were at that the River was not navigable to goe to Saguenay, and that the sayd Sault was but a third part farther then T£e ^ mf we had travailed, shewing us the same with certaine little navigable to stickes, which they layd upon the ground in a certaine passe to ^aguedistance, and afterward layde other small branches be- **> tweene both, representing the Saults. And by the sayde marke, if their saying be true, it can be but sixe leagues by land to passe the sayd Saults. t^a^md Here after followeth the figure of the three Saults. AFter that we had bene advertised by the sayde people, of the things abovementioned, both because the day was farre spent, and we had neither drunke nor eaten the same day, we concluded to returne unto our boats, and we came thither, where we found great store of people to the number of 400. persons or thereabout, which 400 persons seemed to give us very good entertainment and to re- aj?outthe*tr r & • A J ir r^ J. ' boates. Joyce or our comming: And therefore our Laptaine gave eche of them certaine small trifles, as combs, brooches of tynne and copper, and other smal toyes, and unto the chiefe men every one his litle hatchet & hooke, Like those of whereat they made certaine cries and ceremonies of joy. new ^^ion But a man must not trust them for all their faire ceremonies and signes of joy, for if they had thought they had bene too strong for us, then would they have done their best to have killed us, as we understood afterward. The This being done, we returned with our boats, and passed are¥,*? ts" semblers. . r by the dwelling of the Lord of Hochelay, with whom the Captaine had left the two youths as hee came up the river, thinking to have found him: But hee coulde find no body save one of his sonnes, who tolde the Captaine that hee was gone to Maisouna, as our boyes also told t1.11: 236-] - T T ii & n. • 1 11 IT , / n i t ) , . 1 . I J ^ J T* Maisouna. us, saying, that it was two dayes since he departed. But The Samges in truth hee was gone to Canada to conclude with Agona, conspire towhat they should doe against us. And when we were getter against arrived at our Fort, wee understoode by our people, that the Frenchthe Savages of the Countrey came not any more about our Fort as they were accustomed, to bring us fish, and that they were in a wonderful doubt and feare of us. Wherefore our Captaine, having bene advertised by some of our men which had bene at Stadacona to visite them, A very great that there were a wonderfull number of the Countrey number of Savages assem- f bled together. people assembled together, caused all things in our forr t r e s se * i to b ee s et in g°°d order: &c. ^ • ° o JJ & The rest is wanting. A letter written to M. John Growte student in Paris, by Jaques Noel of S. Malo, the nephew of Jaques Cartier, touching the foresaid discovery. that I hold Aster Growte, your brother in law Giles Walter shewed me this morning a Mappe printed at Paris, dedicated to one M. Hakluyt an English Gentleman : wherein all the West Indies, the kingdome of New Mexico, and the Countreys of Canada, Hochelaga and Saguenay are the River of Canada which contained. is described in that Mappe is not marked as it is in my booke, which is agreeable to the booke of Jaques Cartier: and that the sayd Chart doth not marke or set downe The great Lake, which is above the Saults, according as the Savages have advertised us, which dwell at the sayd Saults. In the foresayd Chart which you sent me hither, the Great Lake is placed too much toward the North. The Saults or falles of the River stand in 44. degrees of latitude: it is not so hard a matter to passe easte them, as it is thought: The water falleth not downe from any high place, it is nothing else but that in the middest It were best to build of the River there is bad ground. The Saults are in 44. d tf'™d e But5.leagues b o at es above the Saults: and it is easie to march or Twe^thei Saults. travel! by land to the end of the three Saults: it is not I have bene upon the toppe above five leagues journey. 