The Preface of M. Rene Laudonniere. Here are two things, which according to mine opinion have bene the principall causes, in consideration whereof aswell they of ancient times, as those of our age have bene induced to travell into farre and remote regions. The first hath beene the naturall desire which wee have to search out the commodities to live happily, plentifully, and at ease: be it whither one abandon his naturall Countrey altogether to dwell in a better, or bee it that men make voyages thither, there to search out and bring from thence such things as are there in to be found, and are in greatest estimation and most request in our Countreys. The second cause hath bene the multitude of people too fruitefull in generation, which being no longer able to dwell in their native soyles, have entred upon their neighbours limites, and oftentimes passing further have pearced this sort the even unto the uttermost regions. After [III. 304.] North climate, a fruitfull father of so many nations hath oftentimes sent foorth this way and that way his valiant people, and by this meane hath peopled infinite Countreys: so that most of the nations of Europe drawe their originall from these parts. Contrariwise the more Southerne regions, because they bee too barren by reason of their insupportable heate which raigneth in them, neede not any such sending forth of their inhabitants, and have bene oftentimes constrained to receive other people more often by force of armes then Italie can also willingly. All Afrike, Spaine, and testifie the same, which never so abounded with people that they had neede to send them abroad to inhabite elsewhere: as on the contrary Scythia, Norway, Gotland, and France have done. The posterity of which nations remaineth yet not only in Italy, Spaine & Afrike, but also in fruitful and faire Asia. Neverthelesse I find that the Romans proceeding further, or rather adding unto these two chiefe causes aforesaid, (as being most curious to plant not onely their ensignes and victories, but also their lawes, customes, & religion in those provinces which they had conquered by force of armes) have oftentimes by the decree of their soveraigne Senate Planting of sent forth inhabitants, which they called Colonies (think- Coloniesing by this way to make their name immortall) even to the unfurnishing of their own Countrey of the forces which should have preserved the same in her perfection: a thing which hindred them much more, then advanced them to the possession of the universal monarchy, whereunto their intention did aspire. For it came to passe that their Colonies here and there being miserably sacked by strange people did utterly ruin and overthrow their Empire. The brinks of the river of Rhene are yet red, those of Danubius are no lesse bloody, and our France became fat with their blood which they lost. These are the effects and rewards of al such as being pricked forward with this Romane and tyrannical ambition will goe about thus to subdue strange people: effects, I say, contrary to the profit which those shall receive, which onely are affectioned to the common benefite, that is to say, to the generall policie of all men, and endevour to unite them one with another as well by trafficke and civill conversations, as also by military vertues, and force of When force of armes, when as the Savages will not yeeld unto their endevours so much tending unto their profit. a™jsistobe For this cause princes have sent forth out of their Dominions certaine men of good activity to plant themselves in strange Countreys, their to make their profite to bring the Countrey to civilitie, and if it might be, to reduce the inhabitants to the true knowledge of our God: an end so much more commendable, as it is farre from all tyrannicall and cruell governement: and so they have alwayes thrived in their enterprises, and by little and little gained the heartes of them which they have conquered or wonne unto them by any meanes. Hereof required in conquests of Countreys newly discovered. Nota. America unknowen to all antiquity. THE ENGLISH VOYAGES wee may gather that sometimes it is good, yea very expedient to send forth men to discover the pleasure and commoditie of strange Countreys: But so, that the Countrey out of which these companies are to passe remaine not weakned, nor deprived of her forces: And againe in such sort that the company sent forth be of so just & sufficient number, that it may not be defeited by strangers, which every foote endevour nothing else but to surprise the same upon the sudden. As within these few daies past the French have proved to my great griefe, being able by no means possible to withstand the same, considering that the elements, men, and all the favours which might be hoped for of a faithfull and Christian alliance fought against us: which thing I purpose to discover in this present historie with so evident trueth, that the Kings Majesty my soveraigne prince shall in part be satisfied of the diligence which I have used in his service, and mine adversaries shall their false reports, find themselves so discovered in that they shall have no place of refuge. But before I begin, I will briefly set downe the situation and description of the land whereunto we have sailed and where the yeere 1561. unto sixty we have inhabited from five, to the ende that those things may the more easily be borne away, which I meane to describe in this discourse. T he description of the West Indies in generall, but chiefly and particularly of Florida. Hat part of the earth which at this day we call the fourth part of the world, or America, or rather the West India, was unknowen unto our ancestours by reason of the great distance thereof. In like maner all the Westerne Islands and fortunate Isles were not discovered but by those of our age. Howbeit there have bin some the which have said that they were discoverd in 