Certaine Voyages to Florida, and the later and more perfect Discoveries thereof, to wit, of all the Seacoasts, Rivers, Bayes, Havens, Isles, and Maine Landes farre up into the Countrey, and a Report of some Colonies and Fortes there planted and displanted, with a Description of the Government, Disposition and Qualitie of the Naturall Inhabitants, and a Declaration of the Temperature of the Climate, and of the manifolde good Commodities found in those Regions. To the most Christian King of France, Francis the first. The relation of John de Verrazzano a Florentine, of the land by him discovered in the name of his Majestic Written the eight of July, in Diepe 1524. Wrote not to your Majesty, most Christian king, since the time we suffered the tempest in the North partes, of the successe of the foure Shippes, which your Majestie sent forth to discover new lands by the Ocean, thinking your Majestie had bene already duely enformed thereof. Now by these presents I will give your Majestie to understand, how by the violence of the windes we were forced with the two ships, the Norman and the Dolphin (in such evill case as they were) to land in Britaine. Where after wee had repayred them in all poynts as was needefull, and armed them very well, we tooke our course along by the coast of Spaine, which your Majestie shall understand by the profite that we received thereby. Afterwards with the Dolphin alone we determined to make discoverie of new Countries, to prosecute we had already begun, which I purpose at to recount u n to your Majestie whole proceeding of the matter. t he navigation this present the to m a ke manifest furnished provided & the yeere 1524. by the grace T he 17. of January of God we departed from the the dishabited rocke by isle of Madura, apperteining to the k i ng of P o r t u g a l, with 50. men, with victuals, weapons, and other shipmunition very well 8. m o n e t h s: A nd sayling Westwards with a faire Easterly the 20. winde, in 2 5. dayes we ran 500. leagues, and of Februarie we were overtaken with as sharpe and terrible a tempest as ever any saylers suffered: whereof with the divine helpe and mercifull assistance of Almighty God, and the goodnesse of our shippe, accom- panied with the good happe of her fortunate name, we were delivered, and with a prosperous winde followed our course W e st and by N o r t h. A nd in other 2 5. leagues more, where we dayes we made above 4 0 0. for the first fires sight the Sea coast, that the place, we sayled r u n ne it either ancient or moderne, and at low, b ut being within a quarter of a seemed somewhat that we league of it, we perceived by the great it was inhabited: and saw saw by In seeking that the lande stretched to the Southwards. to some convenient H a r b o r o u gh wherein to anchor and leagues have knowledge of in vaine, and seeing the to Southwards, we resolved to returne backe againe towards the N o r t h, where wee found our selves troubled with the like difficultie. At length being in despaire to finde any Port, wee cast anchor upon sent our Boate to shore, where we saw great store of people which came to the Sea s i d e; and seeing us approch, they fled away, and stand still and looke backe, beholding us with great a d m i r a t i o n: b ut that afterwards being animated and assured with signes t he Sea we made them, some of sometimes would the coast, and fiftie still land the to to them came hard 424 The hie of Madera. [III. 296.] They discover discovered a new land, never before seene of any m an side, seeming to rejoyce very much at the sight of us, and marvelling greatly at our apparel, shape and whitenesse, shewed us by sundry signes where we might most comm odiously come aland with our Boat, offering us also of their victuals to eate. Now I wil briefly declare to your Majestie their life and maners, as farre as we could have notice thereof: These people goe their altogether naked, except only that they cover privie parts with certaine skins of beasts like unto Marterns, which they fasten unto a narrow girdle made of grasse very artificially wrought, hanged about with tayles of divers other beastes, which round about their bodies hang dangling downe to their knees. Some of them weare garlands of byrdes feathers. The people are of colour russet, and not much unlike the Saracens: their hayre blacke, thicke and not very long, which they tye together in a knot behind and weare it like a litle taile. They are well featured in their limbes, of meane stature, and commonly somewhat bigger then we: broad breasted, strong armed, their legs and other parts of their bodies well fashioned, and they are disfigured in nothing, saving that they have somewhat broade visages, and yet not all of them: for we saw many of them wel favoured, having blacke and great eyes, with a cheerefull and steady looke, not strong of body, yet sharpe witted, nymble and exceeding great runners, as farre as we could learne by experience, and in those two last qualities they are like to the people of the East partes of the world, and especially to them of the uttermost parts of China. We could not learne of this people their maner of living, nor their particular customs, by reason of the short abode we made on the shore, our company being but small, and our ship ryding farre off in the Sea. And not farre from these wee found another people, whose living wee thinke to be like unto I wil declare unto your Majestie) shewing at this present the situation and nature of the foresayd land. The shoare 425 is all covered with small sand, and so ascendeth upwards for the space of 15. foote, rising in forme of litle hils about 50. paces broad. And sayling forwards, we found certaine small Rivers and armes of the Sea, that fall downe by certaine creekes, washing the shoare on both sides as the coast lyeth. And beyond this we saw the open Countrey rising in height above the sandie shoare with many faire fields and plaines, full of mightie great woods, some very thicke, and some thinne, replenished with divers sorts of trees, as pleasant and delectable to behold, as is possible to imagine. And your Majesty may not thinke that these are like the woods of Hercynia or the wilde deserts of Tartary, and the Northerne coasts full of fruitlesse trees: But trees, Bay trees, and high they are full of Palme Cypresse trees, and many other sortes of trees unknowen in Europe, which yeeld most sweete savours farre from the shoare, the propertie whereof we could not learne for the cause aforesaid, and not for any difficulty to passe through the woods, seeing they are not so thicke but that a man may passe through them. Neither doe we thinke the East world round about them, are altogether voyd of drugs or spicery, and other riches of golde, seeing the colour of the land doth so much argue it. And the land is full of many beastes, as Stags, Deere and Hares, and likewise of Lakes and Pooles of fresh water, with great plentie of Fowles, convenient for all kinde of that they partaking of with good and wholesome ayre, temperate, betweene hot and colde, no vehement windes doe blowe in those Regions, and those that doe commonly reigne in those coasts, are the Northwest and West windes in tfce summer season, (in the beginning whereof we were there) the skie cleere and feire with very litle raine : and if at any time the ayre be cloudie and mistie with the Southerne winde, immediatly it is dissolved and waxeth cleere and fayre againe. The Sea is calme, not 426 1 ^ i_ r ^ boysterous, the waves gentle: and although all the shore be somewhat sholde and without harborough, yet is it not dangerous to the saylers, being free from rocks and deepe, so that within 4 or 5. foote of the shore, there is 20. foote deepe of water without ebbe or flood, the depth still increasing in such uniforme "proportion. There is very good ryding at Sea : for any ship being shaken in a tempest, can never perish there by breaking of her cables, which we have proved by experience. For in the beginning of March (as it is usuall in all regions) being in the Sea oppressed with Northerne windes, and ryding there, wee found our anchor broken before the earth fayled or mooved at all. We departed from this place, stil running along the The coast ^n^hto coast, which we found to trend toward the East, & we East in 34. r saw every where very great fires, by reason of the ^egrees If multitude of the inhabitants. While we rode on that latitude, coast, partly because it had no harborough, and for that we wanted water, we sent our boat ashoare with 25. men : where by reason of great and continuall waves that beat against the shoare, being an open Coast, without succour, none of our men could possibly goe ashoare without loosing our boate. Wee saw there many people which came unto the shoare, making divers Courteous and signes of friendship, and shewing that they were content &entle PeoPlewe should come aland, and by trial we found them to be very courteous and gentle, as your Majestie shal understand by the successe. To the intent we might send them of our desire and esteeme, as sheetes of paper, glasses, bels, and such like trifles ; we sent a young man one of our Mariners ashoare, who swimming towards them, & being within 3. or 4. yards of the shore, not trusting them, cast the things upon the shoare: but seeking afterwards to returne, he was with such violence of the waves beaten upon the shore, that he was so bruised that he lay there almost dead : which the Indians perceiving, ranne to catch him, and drawing him out, they 427 the Indians commonly [III. 297.] caried him a litle way off from the sea. The yong man perceiving they caried him, being at the first dismaied, began then greatly to feare, and cried out piteously: likewise did the Indians which did accompany him, going about to cheere him and to give him courage, and then setting him on the ground at the foote of a litle hil against the sunne, they began to behold him with great admiration, mar veiling at the whitenesse of his flesh : And putting off his clothes, they made him warme at a great fire, not without our great feare which remayned in the boate, that they would have rosted him at that fire, and have eaten him. The young man having recovered his strength, and having stayed a while with them, shewed them by signes that he was desirous to returne to the ship : and they with great love clapping him fast about with many imbracings, accompanying him unto the sea, and to put him in more assurance, leaving him alone, went unto a high ground and stood there, beholding him untill he was entred into the boate. This yong man observed, as we did also, that these are of colour inclining to Blacke as the other were, with their flesh very shining, of meane stature, handsome visage, and delicate limmes, and of very litle strength, but of prompt wit: farther we observed not. They run 50 Departing from hence, following leagues far- ther' the shore which t r e nded somewhat toward the North, in 50. leagues space we came to another land which shewed much more faire and ful of woods, being very great, where we rode at anker : and that we might have some knowledge thereof, wee .sent 20. men aland, which entred into the countrey about 2. leagues, and they found that the people were fled to the woods for feare. They saw onely one olde woman with a young maide of 18. or 20. yeeres olde, which seeing our company, hid themselves in the grasse for feare : the olde woman caried two Infants on her shoulders, and behind her necke a child of 8. yeeres olde. The young woman was laden likewise with as many: but when our men came unto them, the women cried out: the olde woman made signes that the men were fledde unto the woods. Assoone as they saw us to quiet them and to winne their favour, our men gave them such victuals as they had with them, to eate, which the old woman received thankfully : but the yong woman disdained them all, & threw them disdainfully on the ground. They tooke a child from the olde woman to bring into France, and going about to take the yong woman which was very beautiful and of tall stature, they could not possibly, for the great outcries that she made, bring her to the sea : and especially having great woods to passe thorow, and being farre from the ship, we purposed to leave her behind, bearing away the child onely. We found those folkes to be more white then those that we found before, being clad with certaine leaves that hang on boughs of trees, which they sewe together with threds of wilde hempe : their heads were trussed up Wilde after their the same maner as the former were : ordinary foode is of pulse, whereof they have great store, differing in colour and taste from ours ; of good and pleasant taste. Moreover they live by fishing and fowling, which they take with ginnes, and bowes made of hard wood, the arrowes of Canes, being headed with the bones of fish, & other beasts. The beasts in these parts are much wilder then in our Europe, by reason they are continually chased and hunted. We saw many of their boats made of one tree 20. foote long, and 4. foote broad, which are not made with yron or stone, or any other kind of metall (because that in all this countrey for the space of 200. leagues which we ranne, we never saw one stone of any sort:) themselves with fire, burning so much of the tree as is ^h ' make sufficient for the hollownesse of the boat; the like hollow their they dot in making the sterne & the forepart, untill it Comas with be fit to saile upon the sea. The land is in situation $re% goodnes and fairenesse like the other : it hath woods 429 like the other, thinne and full of divers sorts of trees: is more but not so sweete, because Northerly and colde. the country We saw Fines like those of Lorn- naturally, which growing up, tooke holde of the trees ar Um this Countrey many Vines growing in as they doe in Lombardie, which if by husbandmen they were dressed in good order, without all doubt they would yeeld excellent wines: for having oftentimes seene the fruit thereof dryed, which was sweete and pleasant, and not differing from ours, wee thinke that they doe esteeme the same, because that in every place where they growe, they take away the under branches growing round about, that the fruit thereof may ripen the better. We found also roses, violets, lilies, and many sorts of herbes, and sweete and odoriferous flowers different from ours. We knewe not their dwellings, because they were farre up in the land, and we judge by many signes that we saw, that they are of wood & of trees framed together. [III. 298.] We doe beleeve also by many conjectures and signes, that many of them sleeping in the fields, have no other covert then the open sky. Further knowledge have we not of them : we thinke that all the rest whose countreys we passed, live all after one maner. Having made our aboade three dayes in this country, and ryding on the coast for want of harboroughs, we concluded to depart from thence, trending along the shore betweene the North and the East, sayling onely in the day-time, In the space of 100. \oo Leagues and riding at anker by night. sayling, leagues sayling we found a very pleasant place situated amongst certaine litle steepe hils: from amidst the which A mighty hils there ran downe into the sea an exceeding great streme of water, which wfc in the mouth was very deepe, river. the sea to the mouth of the same with ye & from tide which we found to rise 8. foote, any great ship laden may passe up. But because we rode at anker in a place well fenced from the wind, we would not venture our selves without knowledge of the place : and we passed up with our boat onely into the sayd River, and saw the countrey very well peopled. The people are almost like unto People clad the others, and are clad with the feathers of fowles of ^/efher divers colours : they came towards us very cheerefully, making great showts of admiration ; shewing us where we might come to land most safely with our boat. We entred up the said river into the land about halfe a league, where it made a most pleasant lake about 3. leagues in compasse : on the which they rowed from the one side to the other to the number of 30. of their small boats, wherein were many people which passed from one shore to the other to come and see us. And behold upon the sudden (as it is woont to fall out in sayling) a contrary flaw of wind comming from the sea, we were inforced to returne to our ship, leaving this lande to our great discontentment, for the great commodity and pleasantnesse thereof, which we The pleasantthe hils neJs*nd nches suppose of the 1 land. shewing minerall matters in them. We weyed anker, The coast and sayled toward the East, for so the coast trended, trendeth to the and so alwayes for 50. leagues being in thereof, we discovered an Hand in forme of a triangle, T.he ielc^~j. ttonofClaudia - IT ... 1 distant from the maine land 10. leagues, about the nana> tenne bignesse of the Hand of the Rhodes : it was full of leagues from hils covered with trees, well peopled, for we saw fires the mayne. the coast : wee gave it the name of your all along A /r • Majesties mother, not staying there by reason of the pranciSm weather being contrary. is not without some riches, all 1 TTT the sight Eastt' AA mother of king clafdia™5 - ii ' r ^i_ 1 -i i_ 1 1 • 1 t • • And we came to another land being 15. leagues 4passing the Hand, where we found a passing gf^d haven. distant from good haven, wherein being entred, we found about 20. small boats of the people, which with divers cries and wondrings came about our ship, comming no neerer then 50. paces towards us : they stayed and the artificialnesse of our ship, our shape & beheld loud showt together, apparel: then they all made a them with declaring that they rejoyced. When we had something their gestures, they came so animated them, using neere us, that we cast them certaine bels and glasses, -and many toyes, which when they had received, they laughing, and came without looked on these feare aboard our ship. There were amongst people 2. kings of so goodly stature and shape as is possible to declare : the eldest was about 40. yeeres of age, the second was a yong man of 20. yeeres olde. Their apparell was on this maner : the elder had upon his naked body a Harts skin wrought artificially with divers branches like damaske : his head was bare with the hayre tyed up behind with divers knots : about his necke he had a large chaine, garnished with divers stones of sundry colours : the yong man was almost apparelled after ye same maner. This is the goodliest people, & of the fairest conditions that we have found in this our voyage. They exceed us in bignes : they are of the colour of brasse, some of them incline more to whitenesse : others are of yellow colour, of comely visage, with long and blacke haire, which they are very careful trim and decke up : they are blacke and quicke eyed, and of sweete and pleasant countenance, imitating much the old fashion. I write not to your Majestie of the other parts of their body, having al such proportion as apperteineth to any handsome man. The women are of the like conformitie and beautie : very handsome and well favoured, of pleasant countenance, and comely to behold : they are as wel manered and continent as any women, and of good education : they are all naked save their privy partes, which they cover with a Deeres skin branched or embrodered as the men use : there are also of them which weare on their armes very rich skinnes of Luzernes : their heads with divers ornaments made of their owne haire, which hang downe before on both sides their brestes : others use other kinde of dressing themselves like unto 432 they adorne the women of Egypt and Syria, these are of the elder they are maried, they weare divers sort : and when toyes, according to the usage of the people of the East, aswell men as women. Among whom we saw many plates of wrought Copper more est^ed things the colour they beheld, they make no account of, for then golde, which copper, which they esteeme more for that among all other it is counted the basest : they make most account of Azure and Red. The that those which we gave they esteeme most of all them, were bels, christal of Azure colour, and other toyes to hang at their eares or about their necke. They did not desire cloth of silke or of golde, much lesse of any other sort, neither cared they for things [III. 299.] made of steele and yron, which wee often shewed them in our armour which they made no wonder at, and in beholding them they onely asked the arte of making them : the like they did at our glasses, which when they suddenly laught and gave them us againe. They are very liberall, for they give that which they have : wee became great friends with into the Haven with these, and one day we entred our ship, whereas before we rode a league off at Sea by reason of the contrary weather. They came in great companies of their small boats unto the ship with their faces all bepainted with divers colours, shewing us that it was a signe of joy, bringing us of their victuals, they made signes unto us where we might safest ride in the Haven for the safegard of our ship keeping still our company: and after we to an anker, wee bestowed 15 dayes in were come providing our selves many necessary things, whither every day the people repaired to see our ship bringing their wives with them, whereof they were very jelous : and they themselves entring abord the ship & staying there a good space, caused their wives to stay in their boats, and for all the intreatie we could make, offring to give them divers things, we could never obtaine that 433 VIII for their pleasure the cries and noyses of they would suffer them to come abord our ship. And oftentimes one of the two kings comming with his queene, and many gentlemen to see us, they all stayed on the shore 200 paces from us, sending a small boat to give us intelligence of their comming, saying they would come to see our ship : this they did in token of safety, and assoone as they had answere from us, they came immediatly, and having staied a while to behold it, they wondred the mariners. at hearing The queene and her maids stayed in a very light boat, at an Hand a quarter of a league off, while the king abode a long space in our ship uttering divers conceits with gestures, viewing with great admiration all the furniture of the ship, demanding the property of every thing particularly. He tooke likewise great pleasure in beholding our apparell, and in tasting our meats, & so courteously taking his leave departed. And sometimes our men staying 2 or 3 daies on a litle Hand neere the ship for divers necessaries (as it is the use of seamen) he returned with 7 or 8 of his gentlemen to see what we did, & asked of us oftentimes if we meant to make any long abode there, offring us of their provision : then the king drawing his bow and running up and down with his gentlemen, made much sport to gratifie our men : we were oftentimes within the land 5 or 6 leagues, which we to declare, very apt ^or a n y ^n<^ °^ husbandry of corne, wine and oyle : for that there are plaines 25 or 30 leagues broad, open and without any impediment, of trees of such fruitfulnesse, that any seed being sowen therein, wil bring forth most excellent fruit. We entred afterwards into the woods, which we found so great and thicke, that any army were it never so great might have hid it selfe therein, the trees whereof are okes, cipresse trees, and other sortes unknowen in Europe. We trees, and nut trees, and found Pomi appii, damson 434 Most pleasant found as pleasant as is possible many other sorts of fruit differing from ours : there are beasts in great abundance, as harts, deere, luzerns, & other kinds which take with their nets & they bowes which are their chiefe weapons : the arrowes which they use are made with great cunning, and in stead of yron, they head them with flint, with jasper stone & hard marble & other sharp stones which they use in stead of yron to cut trees, & to make their boates of one whole piece of wood, making it hollow with great and wonderful art, wherein 10. or 12. men may sit commodiously : their oares are short and broad at the end, and they use them in the sea without any danger, and by maine force of armes, with as great speedines as they list themselves. We saw their houses made in circular or round forme 10 The fashion of or 12 paces in compasse, made with halfe circles of thetr housestimber, separate one from another without any order of building, covered with mattes of straw wrought together, which save them from the wind cunningly and raine : and they had the order of building and perfect skil of workmanship as we have, there were no doubt but that they would also make eftthe sea soones great & stately buildings. coasts are ful of cleare and glistering stones, & alablaster, and therefore it is full of good havens and The coast full harboroughs for ships. They moove houses from one place to another according to the the place & season wherin they wil commodity of m^ke their abode, and only taking off the mattes, incontinent. The they have other houses builded in one father and house in great number : in some of them we saw 25 or 30 persons. They feed as the other doe aforesaid of pulse which grow in that Countrey with better order of husbandry then in the others. They observe in their sowing the Moone and the rising of certaine starres, and divers other customes live by spoken of by antiquity. Moreover the whole family dwell together foresaid °fg°odha^n^ the course of For all they the if hunting and fishing. They live long, & are seldome if they chance to fall sicke at any time, sicke, and charitable towards their neighbours, they make Their curing they heale themselves with fire without any phisitian, and aFC V C I7 p i t I " Wand Tetfum t h e ? **? t h at t h e ^ d ie foT Y& V *&' ^ an perjumes. ^ their adversitie : and in their lamentations great miserie, the kinred reckon up all their felicitie. At their departure out of life, they use mourning mixt [III. 300.] with singing, which continueth for a long space. This is asmuch as we could learne of them. This land is in They 41. degrees & situated in the Paralele of Rome, in 41. degrees and 2. tierces. 2 t e r c e s . b ut somewhat more colde by accidentall causes and not of nature, (as I will declare unto your highnesse elsewhere) describing at this present lieth the situation of East and West, I say that the mouth of the Haven lieth open to the South halfe a league broad, and being entred within it betweene the East and the North, it the foresaid Countrey, which The descrip- stretcheth twelve leagues : where it waxeth broader and Notable haven broader, a nd maketh a gulfe about 20. leagues in in\\.deg. compasse, wherein are five small Islands very fruitfull and 2. tierces, and pleasant, full of hie and broade trees, among the which Islandes any great Navie may ride safe without any feare of tempest or other danger. Afterwards turning towardes the South in the entring into the Haven on both sides there are most pleasant hils, with many rivers of most cleare water falling: into the Sea. In the middest of this entrance there is a rocke of free stone growing by nature apt to build any Castle or Fortresse there, for the keeping of the haven. The fift of May being furnished with all things necessarie, we departed from the said coast keeping along in the 150 leagues, sight thereof, and wee sailed 150. leagues finding it alwayes after one maner: but the land somewhat higher A shew of with certaine mountaines, all which beare a shew of minerall matter, wee sought not to land there in any mtnera . place, because the weather served our turne for sailing: but wee suppose that it was like the former, the coast s^ava e ranne Eastward for the space of fiftie leagues. And The coast runtrending afterwards to the North, we found another *J**f™** land high full of thicke woods, the trees whereof were firres, cipresses and such like as are wont to grow in cold Countreys. The people differ much from the other, Hen the people and looke how much the former seemed to be courteous ^ and gentle : so much were these full of rudenesse and ill maners, and so barbarous that by no signes that ever we could make, we could have any kind of traffike with them. They cloth themselves with Beares skinnes and Luzernes and Seales and other beasts skinnes. Their food, as farre as we coulde perceive, repairing often unto to be by their dwellings, we suppose hunting & fishing, and of certaine fruits, which are a kind of roots which the earth yeeldeth of her own accord. They have no graine, neither saw we any kind or signe of tillage, neither is the land, for the barrennesse If at any time we thereof, apt to beare fruit or seed. desired by exchange to have any of their commodities, they used to come to the sea shore upon certaine craggy rocks, and we standing in our boats, they let downe with a rope what it pleased them to give us, crying continually that we should not approch to the land, demanding the exchange, taking nothing but knives, fishookes, and tooles to cut withall, neyther did they make any account of our courtesie. And when we had nothing left to exchange with them, when we departed from them, the people shewed all signes of discourtesie and disdaine, as were possible for any creature to invent. We were in despight of them 2 or 3 leagues within the land, being in number 25 armed men of us : And when we went on shore they shot at us with their bowes making great outcries, and afterwards fled into the woods. We found not in this land any thing notable, or of importance, saving very great woods and certaine hilles, they may have some minerall matter in them, because wee saw many of them Beades oj have beadstones of Copper hanging at their eares. We copper. immediatly Islands, They ran "degree? 5°" THE ENGLISH VOYAGES the coast, which we thence keeping our course Northeast departed from found more pleasant along champion and without woods, with high mountaines within the land continuing directly along the coast for the space of fiftie leagues, we discovered 32 Islands lying al neere the land, being small and pleasant to the view, high and having many turnings and windings betweene them, making many faire harboroughs and chanels as they doe in the gulfe of Venice in Sclavonia, and Dalmatia, we had no knowledge or acquaintance with the people : we suppose they are of the same maners and nature as the others are. Sayling Northeast for the space of 150. leagues we approched to the land that in times past was discovered by the Britons, which is in fifye degrees. Having now spent all our provision and v^ctua^s> a n ^ having discovered about 700 leagues and v^ c t u a^ s> more of new Countreys, and being furnished with water and wood, we concluded to returne into France. their for want of Touching the religion of this people, which wee have found, language wee could not understand neither by signes nor gesture that they had any religion or lawe at all, or that they did acknowledge any first cause or moover, neither that they worship the heaven or stars the Sunne or Moone or other planets, and much lesse whither they be idolaters, neither could wee learne whither that they used any kind of sacrifices or other adorations, neither in their villages have they any Temples or houses of prayer. We suppose that they have no religion at all, and that they live at their owne libertie. And that all this proceedeth of ignorance, for that they are very easie to be perswaded: and all that they see us Christians doe in our divine service, they did the same with the like imitation as they saw us to doe it.