made himselfe feared of the Spanyard, and acceptable unto the Queene of England for the desert of his vertues. To conclude, he dyed in the yeere 1582, to the great griefe of such as knew him. [III.. 361.] The relation of Pedro Morales a Spaniard, which sir Francis Drake brought from Saint Augustines in Florida, where he had remayned sixe yeeres, touching the state of those partes, taken from his mouth by Master Richard Hakluyt 1586. Wateri a goodly river. burden. Hree score leagues up to the Northwest from Saint Helena are the mountaines of the golde and Chrystall Mines, named Apalatci. The river of Wateri is thirtie leagues from S. Helena Northward, which is able to receive any Fleete of ships of great Wateri and Caiowa are two kings, and two rivers to Kings and Rivers to the South of the North of Saint Helena. Oristou, Ahoia, Ahoiaue, lsamacon, Icosa or Dicosa The Spaniards have killed Saint Helena. subjects of Potanou. three hundred of the The greatest number of Spaniards that have bene in Florida this sixe yeeres, was three hundred, and now they were but two hundred in both the Forts. There is a great City sixteene or twentie dayes journey from Saint Helena Northwestward, which the Spaniards call La grand Copal, which they thinke to bee very rich and exceeding great, and have bene within the sight of it, some of them. They have offered in generall to the King to take no 1 12 wages at all of him, if he will give them leave to discover this citie, and the rich mountaines, and the passage to a sea or mighty Lake which they heare to be within foure and twenty dayes travel from Saint Helena, which is in 32. degrees of latitude : and is that river which the French called Port-royal. He saith also that he hath seene a rich Diamond which was brought from the mountaines that lye up in the countrey Westward from S. Helena. These hils seeme wholy to be the mountaines of Apalatci, whereof the Savages advertised Laudonniere, and it may bee they are the hils of Chaunis Temoatam, which Master Lane had advertisement of. The relation of Nicholas Burgoignon, alias Holy, whom sir Francis Drake brought from Saint Augustine also in Florida, where he had rein mine and Master mayned sixe yeeres, Heriots hearing. is a Casique whose name is lord of His Nicholas Burgoignon sayth, that betweene S. Augustine and S. Helen is there Casicola, which thousand Indians, and another casique whose is Dicasca, and another called name the North, and a Touppekyn fourth named Potanou toward the South, and another called Moscita toward the South likewise. Besides these he acknowledgeth Oristou, Ahoia, Ahoiaue, Isamacon, alledged by the Spaniard. toward ten He further affirmeth, that there is a citie Northwestward from S. Helenes in the mountaines, which the Spaniards call La grand Copal, and is very great and rich, and that in these mountains there is great store of Christal, golde, and Rubies, and Diamonds : And that a Spaniard brought from thence a Diamond which was worth five thousand crownes, which Pedro Melendes 113 ix 