The arrival ofCaptaine John Ribault at the Fort the 28 of August 1565. Note. [III. 350.] ings, and that I would leave them a boate to ayde their enemies. them withall Which I made as though I would grant unto them, to the end I might alwaies remaine their friend until my last departure. their warre against in T he third voyage of the Frenchmen made by Captaine John Ribault unto Florida. S I was thus occupied in these conferences, the winde and the tide served well to set sayle, which was the eight and twentieth of August, at which instant Captaine Vasseur which commanded in one of shippes, and Captaine Verdier my in the other, now which was chiefe ready to goe foorth, began to descry certaine sayles at sea, whereof they advertised mee with diligence: whereupon I appointed to arme foorth a boate in good order to goe to discrie and know what they were. 1 sent also to the Centinels, which I caused to be kept on a little knappe, to cause certaine men to climbe up the toppe of the highest trees the better to discover them. They descried the great boate of the shippes, which as yet they could not perfectly discerne, which as farre as they could judge, seemed to chase my boate, which by this time was passed the barre of the river : so that we could not possibly judge whether they were enemies which would have caried her away with them: for it was too great a ken to judge the trueth thereof. Upon this doubt I put my men in order and in such array as though they had beene enemies : and indeede I had great occasion to mistrust the same: for my boate came unto their ship about two of the clocke in the afternoone, and sent me no newes all that day long to put me out of doubt who they should be. The next day in the morning about eight or nine of the clocke I saw seven boates (among which mine owne was one) full of souldiers enter into the river, having every man his 82 harquebuze and morion on his head, which marched all in battaile along the cliffes where my centinels were, to whom they would make no kind of answere, notwithstanding all the demandes that were made unto them, insomuch as one of my souldiers was constrained to bestowe a shot at them without doing hurt neverthelesse to any of them, by reason of the distance between him and the boates. The report hereof being made unto me, I placed each of my men in his quarter, with full to defend our selves, if they had bene deliberation enemies, as in trueth wee thought them to have bene: likewise I caused the two small field-pieces which I had left me, to be trimmed in such sort, as if in approching to the Fort they had not cryed that it was Captaine Ribault, I had not failed to have discharged the same upon them. Afterward I understood that the cause why they entred in this maner, proceeded of the false reports False reports which had bene made unto my Lord Admirall by those which were returned into France in the first shippes. ofprancet For they had put in his head, that I played the Lord and the King, and that I would hardly suffer that any other save my selfe should enter in thither to governe there. Thus we see how the good name of the most honest is oftentimes assayled by such, as having no meanes to win themselves credit by vertuous and laudable endevours, thinke by debasing of other mens vertues to augment the feeble force of their faint courage, which neverthelesse is one of the most notable dangers which The danger of may happen in a commonwealth, and chiefly among men of haMttlnZ warre which are placed in government. For it is very hard, yea utterly unpossible, that in governing of a company of men gathered out of divers places and sundry Nations, and namely such as we know them to be in our warres, it is, I say, unpossible, but there will be alwayes some of evill conditions and hard to be ruled, which easily conceive an hatred against him, which by admonitions and light corrections endevoureth to reduce them to the discipline of warre. For they seeke nothing else, but 83 Akibiades banished by backbiters. Laudonnieres receiving of Captaine Ribault. for a small occasion grounded upon a light pretext to sound into the eares of great Lords that which mischievously they have contrived against those, whose execution of justice is odious unto them. And albeit I will not place my selfe in the ranke of great and renowmed Captaines, such as lived in times passed, yet we may judge by their examples, how hurtfull backbiters have beene unto commonwealths. I will onely take Akibiades for witnesse in the commonwealth of the Athenians, which by this meane was cast into banishment, whereupon his citizens felt the smart of an infinite number of mischiefes: insomuch as in the end they were constrained to call him home againe, and acknowledge at length the fault they had committed in forgetting his good services, and rather beleeving a false report, then having had regard unto so many notable exploits which in former time hee had atchieved. But that I loose not my selfe in digressing so farre in this my justification, I will returne againe to my first course. Being therfore advertised that it was Captaine Ribault, I went foorth of the Fort to goe to meete him, and to do him all the honour I could by any meanes, I caused him to be welcommed with the artillery, and a gentle volley of my shot, whereunto he answered with his. Afterward being come on shore and received honourably with joy, I brought him to my lodging, rejoycing not a little because that in this company I knew a good number of my friends, which I intreated in the best sorte that I was able, with such victuals as I could get in the countrey, and that small store which I had left me, with that which I had of the English General. Howbeit I marveiled not a little when as all of them with one voice began to utter unto me these or the like speeches. My Captaine, we praise God that we have found you alive, and chiefly because we know, that the reports which have bene made of you, are false. These speeches mooved me in such sort, that I would needes out of hand know more, mistrusting some evill. Wherefore having accosted Captaine John Ribault, & going both of us aside together out of the Fort, he signified unto me the charge which he had, praying mee not to returne into France, but to stay with him my selfe and my company, and assured me that he would make it well thought of at home. Whereupon I replyed that out of this place I would do him all service: that for the present I could not nor ought not accept this offer, since he was come for no other intent then to occupie the place which I before possessed, that I could have no credite to be there commanded: that my friends would never like of it, and that he would hardly give me that counsaile, if in good earnest I should demand his advise therein. He made me answere, that he would not command me, that we should be companions, & that he would build another fortresse, & that he would leave mine owne unto me. This notwithstanding I fully advertised him that I could not receive a greater comfort then the newes which he brought me to returne into France : and farther that though I should stay there, yet it must needes be that one of us both was to [III. 351.] command with title of the Kings Lieutenant, that this could not well agree together: that I had rather have it cast in my teeth to be the poorest begger in the world, then to be commanded in that place, where I had endured so much to inhabite and plant there, if it were not by some great Lord or Knight of the order: and that in these respects I prayed him very hartily to deliver me the letters which my Lord Admirall had written unto me, which he performed. The contents of those letters were these. CAptaine Laudonniere, because some of them which Letters of the are returned from Florida speake indifferently of LordAdmirall the Countrey, the King desireth your presence, to the end, that according to your tryall, he may resolve to bestow great cost thereon, or wholly to leave i t: and therfore I send Captaine John Ribault to bee governour there, to whom you shall deliver whatsoever you have 85 unto Laudon-