the French lost Florida. The French Fleete cast away on the coast of Florida. THE ENGLISH VOYAGES were there present. I will plainly say one thing, That the long delay that Captaine John Ribault used in his embarking, and the 15. daies that he spent in roving along the coast of Florida, before he came to our fort Caroline, were the cause of the losse that we susteined. For he discovered the coast the 14 of August, and spent the time in going from river to river, which had bene sufficient for him to have discharged his ships in, and for me to have embarked my selfe to returne into France. I wote well that al that he did was upon a good intent: yet in mine opinion he should have had more regard unto his charge, then to the devises of his owne braine, which sometimes hee printed in his head so deeply, that it was very hard to put them out : which also turned to his utter undoing : for hee was no sooner departed from us, but a tempest tooke him, which in fine wrackt him upon the coast, where all his shippes were cast away, and he with much adoe escaped drowning, to fall into their hands which cruelly massacred him and all his company. The fourth voyage of the Frenchmen into Florida, under the conduct of Captaine Gourgues, in the yeere, 1567. ptaine Gourgues a Gentleman borne in the Countrey neere unto Bourdeaux incited with a desire of revenge, to repaire the honour of his nation, borowed of his friends and sold part of his owne goods to set forth and furnish three ships of indifferent burthen with all things necessary, having in them an hundred and fiftie souldiers, and fourescore chosen Mariners under Captaine Cazenove his lieutenant, and Francis Bourdelois Master over the Mariners. He set forth the 22 of August 1567. And having endured contrary winds and stormes for a season, at length hee arrived and went them with on shore in the Isle of Cuba. From thence he passed to the Cape of Saint Antony at the end of the He of Cuba, about two hundred leagues distant from Florida, where the captaine disclosed unto them his intention which hitherto he had concealed from them, praying and exhorting them not to leave him being so neere the enemie, so well furnished, and in such a cause : which they all sware unto him, and that with such courage that they would not stay the full Moone to passe the chanell of Bahama, but speedily discovered Florida, Thechanellof two Canon ^hamaJe]da where the Spanyards saluted shot from their fort, supposing that they had beene of anj t^e jsjes their nation, and Gourgues saluted them againe to enter- o/Lucayos. taine them in this errour, that hee might surprise them at more advantage, yet sailing by them, & making as though he went to some other place until he had sailed out of sight of the place, so that about evening, hee landed 15 leagues from the fort, at the mouth of the The FrenchRiver Tacatacouru, which the Frenchmen called Seine, because they thought it to bee like Seine in France. %acatacouru Afterward perceiving Savages with their bowes and arrowes, (besides the signe [III. 357.] of peace and amitie which he made them from his ships) he sent his Trumpetter, to assure them, that they were come thither for none other ende but to renew the amitie and ancient league of the French with them. The Trumpetter did his message so well (by reason he had bene there before under Laudonniere) that he brought backe from king Satourioua, the greatest of all the other kings, a kidde and other meat to refresh us, besides the offer of his friendship and amitie. Afterward they retired dansing in signe of joy, to adver- tise all the kings Satouriouaes kinsmen to repaire thither the next day to make a league of amitie with the Frenchmen. Whereupon in the meane space our generall went about to sound the chanel of the river to bring in his ships, and the better to traffike and deale with the Savages, of whom the chiefe the next day in the morning IOI the shore to bee covered with kings. The kings seate. Complaints of the Savages against the Spaniards. Two chaines of silver given to Gourgues. THE ENGLISH VOYAGES presented themselves, namely the great king Satourioua, Tacatacourou, Halmacanir, Athore, Harpaha, Helmacap6, Helicopil6, Molloua, and others his kinsmen and allies, with their accustomed weapons. Then sent they to intreate the French general to come on shore, which he caused his men to do with their swords and harquebusies, which he made them leave behind them, in token of mutuall assurance, leaving his men but their swords only, after that the Savages complaining thereof had left and likewise sent away their weapons at the request of Gourgues. This done Satourioua going to meet him, caused him to sit on his right hand in a seat of wood of lentisque covered with mosse made of purpose like unto his owne. Then two of the eldest of the company pulled up the brambles & other weeds which were before them, and after they had made the place very cleane, they all sate round about them on the ground. Afterward Gourgues being about to speake, Satourioua prevented him, declaring at large unto him the incredible wrongs, and continuall outrages that all the Savages, their wives and children had received of the Spanyards since their comming into the Countrey and massacring of the Frenchmen, with their continuall desire if we would assist them throughly to revenge so shamefull a treason, aswell as their owne particular griefes, for the firme good will they alwayes had borne unto the Frenchmen. Whereupon Gourgues giving them his faith, and making a league betweene them and him with an othe gave them certaine presents of daggers, knives, looking glasses, hatchets, rings, belles, and such other things, trifles unto us, but precious unto these kings : which moreover, seeing his great liberality, demanded eche one a shirt of him to weare onely on their festivall dayes, and to be buried in at their death. Which things after that they had received, and Satourioua had given in recompense to Captaine Gourgues two chaines of silver graines which hung about his necke, and ech of the kings certaine deere skinnes dressed after their manner, they retired i i i i & o • r r 1 ^ & 1° above In themselves dansing and very jocond, with promise to keep all things secret, and to bring unto the sayd place good companies of their subjects all well armed to be avenged throughly on the Spanyards. the meane space Gourgues very narrowly examined Peter de Br6 Peter deBri borne in Newhaven, which being but a yong stripling ha*ltv*d two escaped out or the tort into the woods while the Span- »eeres m-^ yards murdered the rest of the French, & was afterward Satourioua. brought up with Satourioua, which at that time bestowed him on our generall, whose advise stoode him in great steade: Whereupon he sent to discover the fort and the estate of the enemies by certaine of his men, being guided by Olotacara Satouriouaes nephew which hee had given him for this purpose and for assurance of Estampes a gentleman of Cominges, and others which he sent to discry the state of the enemies. Moreover he gave him Three pledges a sonne of his starke naked as all of them are, and his dQ*v*redtOr wife which he loved best of all the rest, of eighteene sJtourioua. yeeres olde, apparelled with the mosse of trees, which for 3 dayes space were in the ships, untill our men returned from discrying the state of the enemie, and the kings had furnished their preparation at their rendevous. Their marching being concluded, and the Savages rende-vous being appointed the river Salinacani, of our men called Somme, they all dranke The river of with great solemnitie their drinke called Cassine, made S^ff1** them beyond i m • / I ^ L ^L r J ^ • J. J. called Somme r of the juice of certaine hearbs (as they are wont to do, t,ytfo French when they go to any place of danger,) which hath such force, that it taketh from them hunger and thirst for 24 houres, and Gourgues was faine to make as though he drank thereof for company. Afterward they lift up their handes and sware all that they would never forsake him. Olotocara followed him with pike in hand. Being all met at the river of Sarauahi, not without great The river of trouble, by reason of the raine and places full of water which they must needes passe, which hindred their passage, they were distressed with famine finding nothing by the way to eat, their Bark of provision being not arrived, 103 which was to come unto him from the ships, the oversight and charge whereof he had left unto Burdelois with the The estate of r e st of the Mariners. Now he had learned that the ^ [III. 358.] The river of *™carhor oarauakt. SPanyarc^s w e re f ° u re hundred strong, devided into three forts builded and flanked, and well fortified upon the river of May, the great fort especially begunne by the French, and afterward repaired by them : upon the most dangerous and principall landing place whereof, two leagues lower and neerer towarde the Rivers mouth, they had made two smaller Forts, which were defended, the river passing betweene them, with sixe score souldiers, good store of artillery and other munition, which they ha(j }n fas same. From Saracary unto these smal forts w as two leagues space, which he found very painful, because of the bad waies and continual raines. Afterward he departed from the river Catacouru with 10, shot, to view the first fort, and to assault it the next day in the morning by the breake of day, which hee could not doe, because of the foule weather, and darknesse of the night. King Helicopile seeing him out of quiet in that he had failed of his purpose there, assured him to guide him a more easie way, though it were farther about. Insomuch as leading him through the woods, he brought him within sight of the fort, where he discerned one quarter which was but begun to bee entrenched. Thus after he had sounded the small river that falleth downe the thereby, hee stayed untill ten of the clock in morning for an ebbe water, that his men might passe over there, unto a place where he had seene a litle grove between the river & the fort (that he might not be seene to passe and set his souldiers in array) causing them to fasten their flasks to their Morions, & to hold up their swords and kalivers in their hands, for feare least the water, which reached up to their girdles, should not wet them : where they found such abundance of great oysters, and shels which were so sharpe, that many had their legs cut with them, and many their shoes. Notwitstanding assoone as others lost c 1 1 n 1 • 1 the first tort. time, Olotocara, which had not The valure °f they were passed over, with a French courage they prepared themselves to the assault on the Sunday eve next after Easter day, in Aprill 1568. Insomuch that Gourgues to employ the ardent heat of this good affection, gave twenty shot to his Lieutenant Cazenove, and ten Mariners laden with pots and balles of wild fire to burne the gate : and then he assaulted the Fort The assault on another side, after he had made a short speech unto a!!dia *n§ °{ 1 • 1 his men or the strange treasons which the Spanyards had plaid their companions. But being discried as they came holding downe their heads within two hundred paces from the Fort, the Gunner being upon the terrace of the Fort, after he had cried, Arme, Arme, these be French men, discharged twise upon them a colverine, whereon the Armes of France were graven, which had bin taken from Laudonniere. But as he went about to charge it the third learned to keepe his ranke, or rather moved with rage, lept on the platforme, and thrust him through the bodie with his pike and slew him. Whereupon Gourgues advanced forward, and after he had heard Cazenove cry, that the Spaniards which issued out armed at the cry of the alarme, were fled, hee drew to that part, and so hemmed them in betweene him and his Lieutenant, that of threescore there escaped not a man, saving only fifteene reserved unto the same death which they had put the French unto. The Spanyards of the other fort in the meanewhile ceased not to play with their ordinance, which much annoied the assailants : although to answere them they had by this placed and oftentimes pointed the foure pieces found in the first Fort. Where- The assault upon Gourgues being accompanied with fourescore shot aJ! ^^/^ went abord the barke which met him there to good purpose to passe into the wood neere unto the Fort, out of which he supposed the Spanyards would issue to save themselves thorow the benefit of the woods in the great fort, which was not past one league distant from ye same. Afterward the Savages not staying for the returne of the bark, lept al into the water holding up their bowes The savages & arrowes in one hand, & swimming with the other, so t h at t he Spaniards seing both ye shores covered with so great swim- great a number of men, thought to flee towards the woods : but being charged by the French, and afterward repulsed by the Savages, toward whom they would have retired, they were sooner then they would bereft of The Spaniards their of the second tortaltslawe. J lives. To conclude they al there ended their jayes saving ic of those which were reserved to be i r 1 T T T1 Note. r for that he * •§ the example of others. Wherupon executed Captaine Gourgues having caused al found in the second fort to be transported unto the first, where he ment to strengthen himselfe to take resolution against the great Fort, the state whereof hee did not understand : in fine a Sergeant of a band one of the prisoners assured him that they might be there very neere 300 wel furnished under a brave Governor, which had fortified there, attending farther succours. Thus having obtained of him the platforme, the height, the fortification and passages unto it, and having prepared eight good lathers, and raised all the Countrey against the Spanyard, that he neither might have newes, nor succours, nor retract on any side, he determined to march forward. In the meane while the Governour sent a Spanyard disguised like a Savage to spie out the state of the French. And though he were discovered by Olotocara, yet he used all the cunning he could possibly to perswade them that he was one of the second fort, out of which having escaped, and seeing none but savages on every side, he hoped more in ye Frenchmens then their mercy, unto whom he came to yeeld himself disguised like a savage, for feare lest if he should have bin knowen, he should have bin massacred by those Barbarians : but the spie being brought face to face with the sergeant of the band, & convicted to be one of the great fort, \fas reserved until an other time : after that he had assured that he had 2000 Gourgues [III. 359.] Frenchmen with him for feare of whom the 200 and the bruit was A notable that threescore Spaniardes which remained in the great fort, were greatly astonied. Whereupon Gourgues being resolved to set upon them, while they were thus amazed, and leaving his Standard-bearer and a Captaine with fifteene shot to keepe the Fort, and the entry of the River, he caused the Savages to depart by night to lye in ambush within the woods on both sides of the river, then he departed in the Morning, leading the Sergeant and the spy fast bound along with him, to shew him that in deede, which they had only made him understand before in paynting. As they marched Olotocara a resolute Savage which never left the Captaine, said unto him, that he had served him faithfully, and done whatsoever hee had commaunded him, that he was assured to dye in the conflict at the great Fort, wherein neverthelesse he would not faile, though it were to save his life : but he prayed him to give that unto his wife, if hee escaped not, which he had meant to bestow on him, that shee might bury the same with him, that thereby hee The cause why might be better welcome unto the village of the soules ^ ^f™™ or spirits departed. To whom Captaine Gourgues gpods answered, after he had commended his faithfull valour, them, the love toward his wife, and his noble care of immortall honour, that he desired rather to honour him alive then dead, and that by Gods helpe he would bring him home againe with victorie. After the discoverie of the Fort, the Spanyards were no niggards of their Canon shotte, nor of two double Colverines, which being mounted upon a Bulwarke, commaunded all along the River, which made captaine Gourgues to get to the hill covered with wood, at the foot whereof the Fort beginneth, and Note. the forrest or wood continueth and stretcheth foorth beyond it: so that he had sufficient coverture to approch thereunto without offence. He purposed also to remaine there untill the Morning, wherein hee was resolved to assault the Spaniards by scaling their walles on the side toward the hill, where the Trench seemed not sufficiently flanked for the defence of the courtains, and from whence part of his men might draw them that were besieged, which should shew themselves to defend the rampart while the rest were comming up. But the Governour hastened his unhappy destinie, causing threescore shotte to sallie foorth, which passing through the Trenches, advanced forward to descrye the number and valour of the French, whereof twentie under the conduct of Cazenove, getting betweene the Fort and them which now were issued foorth, cut off their repassage, while Gourgues commanded the rest to charge them in the Front, but not to discharge but neere at hand, and so that they might be sure to hitte them, that afterward with more ease they might cut them in pieces with their swordes. So that turning their backs assoone as they were charged and compassed in by his Lieutenant, they The slaughter remayned all slaine upon the place. Whereat the rest °fthe 8Pa*~ that were besieged were so astonied, that they knew none ^hird Fort other meane to save their lives, but by fleeing into the Wooddes adjoyning, where neverthelesse being incountred againe by the arrowes of the Savages which lay in wayte there for them (whereof one ranne through the target and body of a Spanyard, which therewithall fell downe starke dead) some were constrayned to turne to dye by the hand of the backe, choosing rather French, which pursued themselves, them : assuring that none of them could finde any favour neyther with the one nor the other Nation, whom they had alike and so out of measure cruelly intreated, saving those which were reserved to be an example for the time to come. The taking of The Fort when it was taken, was found well provided the third Fort. Qf ajj necessaries : namely of five double Colverines, and foure Mynions, with divers other small pieces of all sorts, and eighteene grosse cakes of gunnepowder, all sorts of weapons, which Gourgues caused with speede to be imbarked, saving the powder and other moveables, by reason it was all consumed with fire through the negligence of a Savage, which in seething of his fish, set fire on a traine of powder which was made and hidden by g d g h ii in hi I d h&*w*r the Spanyardes, to have feasted the French at the first assault, thus blowing up the store house, and the other houses buylt of Pine trees. The rest of the Spaniards being led away prisoners with the others, after that the Generall had shewed them the wrong which they had done without occasion to all the French Nation, were all hanged on the boughes of the same trees, whereon the French hung: of which number five were hanged by one Spaniard, which perceiving himselfe the like miserable estate, confessed his fault, and the just judgement which God had brought upon him. But in stead of the writing which Pedro Melendes had hanged over The writings h S ih i them, importing these wordes in Spanish, I doe not this & as unto French men, but as unto Lutherans, Gourgues ^ Spaniards caused to be imprinted with a searing iron in a table of siaine \n Firrewood, I doe not this as unto Spaniardes, nor as unto Florida. Mariners, but as unto Traitors, Robbers, and Murtherers. Afterward considering he had not men inough to keepe his Forts which he had wonne, much lesse to store them, fearing also lest the Spaniard which hath Dominions neere adjoyning should renew his forces, or the Savages should prevaile against the French men, unlesse his Majestie would send thither, hee resolved to raze them. And indeede, after he had assembled, and in the ende perswaded all the Savage kings so to doe, they caused [III. 360.] their subjects to runne thither with such affection, that they overthrew all the three Forts flatte even with the The three ground in one day. This done by Gourgues, that hee Fort$ razedmight returne to his Shippes which were left in the River of Seyne called Tacatacourou, fifteene leagues distant from thence, he sent Cazenove and the artillery by water: afterward with fourescore harquebusiers, armed with corslets, and matches light, followed with fortie Mariners bearing pikes, by reason of the small confidence he was to have in so many Savages, he marched by land alwayes in battell ray, finding the wayes covered with Savages, Greathonour done by the , . 1 -Ii_ 1 • & 1 j. 1 J which came to honour him with presents and prayses, as Ravages to the deliverer of all the countries round about adjoyning. Gourgues. An old woman among the rest sayd unto him, that now she cared not any more to dye, since she had seene the Frenchmen once againe in Florida, and the Spaniards chased out. Briefly being arrived, and finding his ships set in order, and every thing ready to set sayle, hee counselled the kings to continue in the amitie and ancient league which they had made with the king of France, which would defend them against all Nations: which they all promised, shedding teares because of his departure. Olocotara especially: for appeasing of whom he promised them to returne within twelve Moones, (so they count the yeeres) and that his king would send them an army, and store of knives for presents, and all other things necessary. So that after he had taken his leave of them, and assembled his men, he thanked God of all his successe since his setting foorth, and prayed to him for an happy returne. The third of May 1568, all things were made ready, the Rendez-vous appoynted, and the Ankers weighed to set sayle so prosperously, that in seventeene dayes they ranne eleven hundred leagues: continuing which course they arrived at Rochel the sixt of June, the foure and thirtieth day after their departure from the River of May, having lost but a small Pinnesse and eight men in it, with a few gentlemen and others which were slaine in the assaulting of the Forts. After the cheere and good intertainment which he received of those of Rochel, hee sayled to Burdeaux to informe Monsieur Monluc of the things above mentioned, albeit hee was advertised of eighteene Pinnesses, and a great Shippe of two hundred Tunnes full of Spanyardes, which being assured of the defeat in Florida, and that he was at Rochel, came as farre as Che-de Bois, the same day that he departed thence, and followed him as farre as Blay (but he was gotten already to Bordeaux) to make him yeeld another account of his voyage, then that, wherewith hee made many Frenchmen right glad. The Catholicke king being afterward informed that Gourgues could not easily be taken, offered a great summe of no Knives in great estimation. The third of May. The arrival! of Gourgues at Rochel, the sixt of June. money to him that could bring him his head, praying moreover king Charles to doe justice on him as of the authour of so bloody an act contrary to their alliance and good league of friendshippe. In so much as comming to Paris to present himselfe unto the King, to signifie unto him the successe of his Voyage, and the meanes which hee had to subdue this whole Countrey unto his obedience, (wherein hee offered to imploy his life, and all his goods) hee found his entertainment and answere so contrary to his expectation, that in fine hee was constrayned to hide himselfe a long space in the Court of Roan, about the yeere 1570. And without the assistance of President Marigny, in whose house he remayned certaine dayes, and of the Receiver of Vacquieulx, which alwayes was his faithfull friend, hee had beene in great danger. Which grieved not a litle Dominique de Gourgues, considering the services which hee had done aswell unto him as to his predecessours kings of France. Hee was The birth, borne in Mount Marsan in Guyenne, and imployed for lifi an^ the service of the most Christian Kings in all the Armies Q^MUS made since these twentie five or thirtie yeeres: at last he had the charge and honour of a Captaine, which in a place neere unto Siene, with thirtie Souldyers sustayned the brunt of a part of the Spanish Armie, by which beeing taken in the assault, and having all his men cutte in pieces, hee was put into a Galley in token of the good warre and singular favour which the Spanyard is woont to shew us. But as the Galley was going toward Sicillie, beeing taken by the Turkes, ledde away to Rhodes, and thence to Constantinople, it was shortly afterwarde recovered by Romeguas, commaunder over the Armie of Malta. By this meane returning home, hee made a Voyage on the coast of Africa, whence hee tooke his course to Bresil, and to the South Sea. At length beeing desirous to rapayre the honour of France, he set upon Florida with such successe as you have heard. So that being become by his continuall warlike actions both by Land and Sea no lesse valiant Captaine then skilfull Mariner, hee hath made himselfe feared of the Spanyard, and acceptable unto the Queene of England for the desert of his vertues. To conclude, he dyed in the yeere 1582, to the great griefe of such as knew him. [III.. 361.] The relation of Pedro Morales a Spaniard, which sir Francis Drake brought from Saint Augustines in Florida, where he had remayned sixe yeeres, touching the state of those partes, taken from his mouth by Master Richard Hakluyt 1586. Wateri a goodly river. burden. Hree score leagues up to the Northwest from Saint Helena are the mountaines of the golde and Chrystall Mines, named Apalatci. The river of Wateri is thirtie leagues from S. Helena Northward, which is able to receive any Fleete of ships of great Wateri and Caiowa are two kings, and two rivers to Kings and Rivers to the South of the North of Saint Helena. Oristou, Ahoia, Ahoiaue, lsamacon, Icosa or Dicosa The Spaniards have killed Saint Helena. subjects of Potanou. three hundred of the The greatest number of Spaniards that have bene in Florida this sixe yeeres, was three hundred, and now they were but two hundred in both the Forts. There is a great City sixteene or twentie dayes journey from Saint Helena Northwestward, which the Spaniards call La grand Copal, which they thinke to bee very rich and exceeding great, and have bene within the sight of it, some of them. They have offered in generall to the King to take no 1 12