hundred of the subjects of Potanou. One Potassi is neighbour to Potanou. Oratina is he which the French history calleth Olata Outina. Calauai is another casique which they knowe. to all situate in new Spaine, Sundry Voyages made from Nueva Galicia, and Nueva Viscaia the 15. Provinces of new Mexico, and to Quivira and of on Cibola, Guastecan, Florida, and Virginia, as farre as 37. degrees of Northerly latitude: with a description of the rivers, lakes, cities, townes, in nations, fertile soyle, and those partes; and most certaine notice of many exceeding rich silver mines, and other principall commodities. temperate ayre backeside the A discourse of the famous Cosmographer John Baptista Ramusius, three voyages of Frier Marco de Nica, Francis Vasquez de Coronado, and Ferdinando Alorchon next taken out of his third volume of Navigations and Voyages. concerning following: the He right honourable Don Antonio de Mendo9a being sent by Charles the Emperour to be viceroy of Mexico and Nueva Espanna, and having understood that Don Ferdinando Cortez had sent many ships along the coast of Nueva Espanna to discover countries, and to find out the Isles of the Malucos, began himselfe to desire to do the like, as viceroy of Nueva Espanna; and hereupon they fell out: for Cortez said that he was general and discoverer of the South sea, and that those voyages. On it belonged to him to set forth the Emperour. Don Antonio the other side, the lord Don Antonio alledged that it belonged to him to make that discovery, as being viceroy of Nueva Espanna. So that they fell at great variance, and Cortez returned into Spaine to complaine unto the meane season having obteined knowledge of the voiage, which Andrew Dorantez (who was one of the company of Pamphilo Narvaez that escaped, as you may reade in the relation of Alvaro Nunnez, called Cabe9a de Vaca) made; sent Frier Marco de Ni9a with a Negro of that country. Which the said Dorantez to discover Frier Marco de Ni?a being returned, & having informed his lordship of all his discovery, he sent captain Francis Vasquez de Coronado with many Spaniards on horsebacke and Indians on foot: likewise he sent a fleete by sea, whereof Ferdinando Alorchon was captaine, as may be seene in the relations following. An extract of a letter of captaine Francis Vasques de Coronado, written to a Secretary of the right noble Don Antonio de Mendo9a, viceroy of Nueva Espanna. Dated in Culiacan, the 8. of March 1539. H] saith that Frier Marcus de Niga arrived in the Province of Topira, where he found all the Indians fled unto the mountaines for feare of the Christians, and that for his sake they came all downe to see him, with great joy & boldnesse. They are men of good making, and whiter then others, and their women the neighbourare more beautifull provinces. There are no great cities there, yet are the houses built of stone, and are very good, and in them then others of ^ i* j o st because they know not what use to put it to. Store ofgolde, they have great store of gold, which is as it were silver, and stones precious in Topira. T he P e o F e weare Emeralds and other precious jewels [III. 363.] upon their bodies: they are valiant, having very strong armour made of silver, fashioned after divers shapes 116 J ^ .^ T ,, . , , 