The second voyage unto Florida, made and written by Captaine Laudonniere, which fortified and inhabited there two Summers and one whole Winter. Fter our arrivall at Diepe, at our comming home, from our first voyage (which was the twentieth of July 1562) we found the civil warres begun, which was in The chill g part the cause why our men were not 1^ 1 J 1 1 succoured, as Laptaine John Kibault had -Frenchmen promised them : whereof it followed that were not supwarres ^e h ^ • • wfy Me T 1 T 1 -r>-i -r>-i h /- /- warres cause cause j j J j j 1 1 -^ j_ 1 Captaine Albert was killed by his souldiers, and the pfod9 which country abandoned, as heretofore we have sufficiently w^re. left h?~. j htnde in their j. discoursed, and as it may more at large be understood by those men which were there in person. After the peace was made in France, my Lord Admiral De Chastillon shewed unto the king, that he heard no newes at all of the men which Captaine John Ribault had left in Florida, & that it were pity to suffer them to perish. In which respect, the king was content he should cause 3 ships to be furnished, the one of sixe score tunnes, the other of 100, and the third of 60, to seeke them out, and to succour them. j r st My Lord Admirall therefore being well informed of the faithfull service which I had done, aswell unto his Majestie as to his predecessors kings of France, advertised the king how able I was to doe him service in this voyage, which was the cause that he made me chiefe these 3 shippes, and charged me to Captaine over IX I depart with diligence to performe his commandement, which for mine owne part I would not gainesay, but rather thinking my selfe happy to have bene chosen out among such an infinite number of others, which in my judgement were very well able to have quitted Laudonniers T r ge N H with three we ^ ships the 22 ofAprill 6 themselves in this charge, I embarked my selfe at h f AIU ^ d ^^ neere unto the coast of England: and then I turned towards the South, to sayle directly the fortunate Islands, at this present called the Canaries, the Isle Salvage (because as I one of which called thinke it is altogether without inhabitants) was the first that our ships passed. Sayling therefore on forward, ^ to The Isle of we lancied the next day in the Isle of Teneriffa, o t h e r w i se called the Pike, because that in the middest thereof there is an exceeding high mountaine, neere as high as that of Etna, which riseth up like a pike, into the top whereof no man can go up but from the middest of May untill the middest of August, by reason of the over great colde which is there all the yere: which is a wonderfull strange thing, considering that it is not past 27 degrees and an half distant from the Equator. We saw it all covered over with snow, although it were then but the fift of May. The inhabitants in this Isle being heretofore pursued by the Spaniards, retired themselves into this mountaine, where for a space they made warre with them, and would not submit themselves to their obedience, neither by foule nor faire meanes, they disdained so much the losse of For those which went thither on the their Island. that Spaniards behalfe, not so much as one of to the ende, the inbring newes. Notwithstanding in habitants not able to live in that place according to their nature, or for want of such things as were necessary for the commoditie of their livelyhood, did all die there. After I had furnished my selfe with some fresh water, very good and excellent, which them returned home their carkases there, so sprang out of a rocke at the foote of this mountaine, the West, wherein the I continued my course toward windes favoured me so well, that 15 dayes after our ships arrived safe and sound at the Antilles: and going on land at the Isle of Martinino, one of the Thelskof first of them, the next day we arrived at Dominica, Martinino. r ,. 1 r J - . twelve leagues distant from the former. Dominica an island. they call Ananas. As they Ananas a them fruiti° °f&reat there was one of in some misdoubt of us, went backe e*ce encu' Dominica is one of the fayrest Islands of the West, full of hilles, and of very good smell. Whose to know as we passed, and singularities desiring seeking also to refresh our selves with fresh water, I made the Mariners cast anker, after wee had sayled about halfe along the coast thereof. As soone as we had cast anker, two Indians (inhabitants of that place) sayled toward us in two Canoas full of a fruite of great excellencie which approched unto our Barke, which being againe on land, and fled his way with as much speede as he could possibly. Which our men perceived and [III. 320.] entred with diligence into the other Canoa, wherein they caught the poore Indian, & brought him unto me. But the poore fellow became so astonied in beholding us, that he knew not which way to behave himselfe, because that (as afterward I understood) he the Spaniards hands, feared that he was fallen into of whom he had bene taken once before, and which, as he shewed us, had cut of his stones. At length Indian was secure of us, and discoursed this poore things, wherof we received very unto us of many small pleasure, because we understood not his minde but by his signes. Then he desired me to give him leave to depart, and promised me that he would bring me a thousand presents, whereunto I agreed on condition that he would have patience untill the next day, when I purposed to goe on land, where I suffered him to depart after I had given him a shirte, and certaine small trifles, wherewith he departed very well contented from us. their through fruite which The place where we went on shore was hard by a very high Rocke, out of which there ran a litle river of sweet and excellent good water: by which river we stayed certaine dayes to discover the things which were worthy to be seene, and traffiqued dayly with the Indians: which above all things besought us that none their lodgings nor of our men should come neere their gardens, otherwise that we should give them great cause of jelousie, and that in so doing, wee should they call Ananas, not want of whereof they offered us very liberally, receiving in recompence certaine things of small value. This notwithstanding, it happened on a day that certaine of things in these our men desirous to see some new the woods: and strange countries, walked following still the litle rivers side, they spied two serpents of exceeding bignes, which went side by side overthwart the way. My souldiers went before them thinking to let them from going into the woods: but the serpents nothing at all astonied at these gestures glanced into the bushes with fearful hyssings: yet for all that, my men drew their swords and killed them, long, and as and found them afterward 9 great foote big as a mans leg. During this combate, certaine others more undiscreete went and gathered their Ananas in the Indians gardens, trampling through them withtherewithall contented out any discretion: and not they went toward their dwellings ; whereat the Indians that without regarding any were so much offended, thing them and discharged their they rushed upon shot, so that they hit one of my men named Martine Chaveau, which remained behind. We could not know whether hee were killed on the place, or whether he were taken prisoner: for those of his company had inough to doe to save themselves without thinking of their companion. Whereof Monsieur de Ottigni my Lieuetenant being advertised, sent unto me to know whether I thought good that he should lay an ambush to to charge them with for the Indians which had either taken or killed our their man, or whether hee should go directly dwellings to know the trueth. I sent unto him after good deliberation hereupon, that he should not attempt any thing, and that for divers occasions: but contrariwise that he should embarke himself with al diligence, & consequently al they that were on land: which he did with speed. But as he sayled towards our ships the shore a great number of he perceived along their Indians which began arrowes: hee for his part discharged store of shot against them, yet was not able to hurt them, or by any meanes to surprise them: for which cause he quite them, and came unto our ship. Where forsooke staying untill the next day morning we set sayle following our wonted course, and keeping the same, we discovered diverse Isles conquered by the Spaniards, as the Isles of S. Christopher, and of the Saintes, of Monserrate, and La Redonda: Afterward we passed between Anguilla and Anegada, sayling toward New France. Where we arrived 15 dayes after, on Thurseday the 22 of June about 3 of the clocke J 2 ^ J /^ in the afternoone, and landed neere a litle river which is 30 degrees distant from the Equator, and 10 lagues Cape Francois above Cape Francis drawing toward the South, and being between about thirtie leagues above the River of May. After ***driver-of* wee had strooken sayle and cast anker athwart the tterlver'of River, I determined to goe on shore to discover the May, maketh same. Therefore being accompanied with Monsieur thedistance 30 3 p O ii Ottigni, with Monsieur de Arlac mine Ensigne, & ^es about, a certaine number of Gentlemen and souldiers, I ™Q iealues embarked my selfe about 3 or 4 of the clocke in overland. the evening. And being arrived at the mouth of the river, I caused the chanell to be sounded, which farther was found to be very shallow, although within the same the water was there found reasonable deepe, which separateth it selfe into two great armes, whereof one runneth toward the South, and the other 5 to witte, His arrival g d Al ih Mi & ^ that r -^ Ei bt land the River, toward the North. Having thus searched to speake with the Indians which I went on waited for us upon the shore, which at our comming on land, came before us, crying with a loude voyce in their Indian language, Antipola Bonassou, which is as much to say, as brother, friend, or some such like thing. After they had made very much of us, they shewed us their Paracoussy, that is to say, their King and Governour, to whom I presented certaine toyes, wherewith he was well pleased. And for mine owne [III. 321.] The great love part, I prayse God continually, for X ^ S if whIch *have found in these Savages> which were the great sory love 011 tans. ^ nothing, but that the night approched, and made us retire unto our ships. For though they endevoured by al meanes to make us tary with them, and shewed by signes the desire that they had to present us with some rare things, yet neverthelesse for many just and reasonable occasions I would not stay on shore all night: but excusing my selfe for all their offers, I embarked my selfe againe and returned toward my ships. Howbeit, before my The river of departure, I named this River, the river of Dolphines, Do!f^oS) 7 because that at mine arrivall, I saw there a great the Savages number of Dolphines, which were playing in the mouth thereof. The next day the 23 of this moneth (because that toward the South I had not found any commodious place for us to inhabit, and to build a fort) I gave commandement to weigh anker, & to hoise our sailes to saile toward the river of May, Their arrivall where we arrived atjhe river of Afterward going on two dayes after, & cast anker. land, with some number of ay* Gentlemen and Souldiers to know for a certaintie the singularities of this place, we espyed the Paracoussy of the countrey, which came towards us (this was the very same that we saw in the voyage of Captaine John Ribault) which having espied us, cryed very far off, Antipola, Antipola: and being so joyful that he could not containe himselfe, he came to meet us, accompanied then with two of his sonnes, as faire and mightie persons as might be found in al the world, which had nothing in their mouthes but this word, Amy, A m y: that is to say, friend, friend: yea, and knowing those which were there in the first voyage, they went principally to them their to use this speech unto trayne a great number of men and women, which stil made very much of us, and by evident signes made us understand how glad they were of our arrivall. This good entertainment past, the Paracoussy prayed me to goe see the pillar which we had erected in the voyage of John Ribault (as we have declared heretofore) as a thing which they made great account of. them. There was in Having yeelded unto him and being come to the place The pillar set Then when they came thither the foote thereof many little where it was set up, wee found the same crowned with ui-^fe ^ crownes of Bay, and at crownedwith baskets full of Mill which they call in their language garlands of Tapaga Tapola. they Laurell and kissed the same with great reverence and besought us tnvtronedwith to do the like, which we would not denie them, to the ^ ofronte ende we might drawe them to be more in friendship worshipped'by with us. This done, the Paracoussy tooke me by the the Savages. hand, as if he had desire to make me understand some great secret, & by signes shewed me very well up within the river the limits of his dominion, and said that he was called Paracoussy Satourioua, which is as much as King Paracoussy Satourioua. His children have the selfe same title of Satou?-ioua. Paracoussy: The eldest is named Athore, a man, I dare say, perfect in beautie, wisedome, and honest sobrietie, shewing by his modest gravitie the name which he beareth, besids that he is gentle and tractable. After we had sojourned a certaine space with them, the Paracoussy prayed one of his sonnes to present unto me a wedge of silver, which hee did & that A wedge oj with a good wil: in recompence whereof I gave him a silvercutting hooke and some other better present: wherewith he seemed to be very well pleased. Afterward we tooke our leave of them, because the night approched, & then 7 returned to lodge in our shippes. Being allured with this good entertainment I failed not the next day to imbarke my selfe againe with my Lieutenant Ottigni and a number of souldiers to returne toward the Paracoussy of the river of May, which of purpose waited for us in the same place, where the day before we conferred with him. We found him under the shadow of an arbour accompanied with fourescore Indians at the least, and apparelled at that time after the Indian fashion, to wit, with a great Harts skinne dressed like Chamois, and painted with devices of strange and divers colours, but of so lively a portrature, and representing antiquity, with rules so justly compassed, that there is no Painter so exquisite that could finde fault therewith : the naturall disposition of this strange people is so perfect and well guided that without any ayd and favour of artes, they are able by the helpe of nature onely to content the eye of artizans, yea even of those which by their industry are able to aspire unto things most absolute. Then I advertised Paracoussy Satourioua, that my desire was to discover farther up into the river, but that this should be with such diligence that I would come againe unto him very speedily: wherewith he was content, promising to stay for me in the place where he was: and for an earnest of his promise, he offered me his goodly skinne, which I refused then, and promised to receive it of him at my returne. For my part I gave him certaine small trifles, to the intent to retaine him in our friendship. [III. 322.] Departing from thence, I had not sayled three leagues up the river, still being followed by the Indians, which coasted me a long the river, crying still, Amy, Amy, that is to say friende, friende: but I discovered an hill of meane height, neere which I went on land, hard by the fieldes that were sowed with mil, at one corner whereof there was an house built for their lodging, which keepe and garde the mill: for there are such numbers of CorGrosses. nish choughes in this Countrey, which continually devoure and spoyle the mill, that the Indians are constrained to keepe and watch it, otherwise they should be deceived of their harvest. 1 rested my selfe in this place for certaine houres, & commanded Monsieur de Ottigni, and Monsieur de my Sergeant to enter into the woodes to search out the OtttSnu dwellings of the Indians: where after they had gone awhile, they came unto a Marish of Reeds, where finding their way to be stopped, they rested under the shadow of a mightie Bay tree to refresh themselves a little and to resolve which way to take. Then they discovered, as it were on the suddaine, five Indians halfe hidden in the woodes, which seemed somewhat to distrust our men, untill they said unto them in the Indian language Antipola Bonassou, to the end that understanding their speech they might come unto us more boldely, which they did incontinently. But because they sawe, that the foure that went the skinne wherewith he that went formost was apparrelled our men imagined that the foremost must needes bee some man of greater qualitie then the rest, seeing that withal they called him Paracoussy, Paracoussy, wherfore, some of our company went towards him, and using him courteously shewed him, Monsieur de Ottigni, their Lieutenant, for whom they had made an harbour with Bay and Palme boughes after the Indian fashion, to the ende that by such signes the Savages might thinke the Frenchmen had compained with such as they at other times. last, bare up traine of the The Indian Paracoussy drew neere to the French, and T&* curtesie began to make him a long Oration, which tended to no °fthe Flor*~ other end, but that he besought the Frenchmen very earnestly to come and see his dwelling and his parents, which they granted him, and straight for pledge of better amitie, he gave unto my Lieuetenant Ottigni, the very skinne that he was clad with. ^ Then he tooke him by the hande, leading him right toward the Marishes, over which the Paracoussy, Monsieur Ottigni, and certaine other of our men were borne the Indians shouldiers: and the rest which could upon t h r o u gh not passe because of the myre and reedes, went the woodes, and followed a narrow path which led t h em foorth untill they came u n to the Paracoussyes d w e l l i n g; out of which there came about fiftie Indians to receive our men gallantly, and to feast them after their manner. After which they brought at their entrance a great vessell of earth, made after a strange fashion full of fountaine water cleafe and very excellent. thereof this water T h is vessell was borne by an Indian, and there was in another another younger which bare of little vessell of wood, and presented to every one to drinke, observing in doing the same, a certaine order and reverence, which hee made to each of them, to whome hee gave drinke. O ur thirst well quenched by refreshed, this meanes, and our men beeing sufficiently the Paracoussy brought lodging, them one of the oldest men that lived upon the earth. O ur to make m u ch of h i m, men regarding his age, began using this speech, A m y, A m y, that friende, friende, whereat the olde sier shewed himselfe very glad. is to say, fathers to his Afterward they questioned with him concerning t he course of his a g e: whereunto he made answere, shewing that he was the first living originall, from whence five generations were descended, as he shewed u n to t h em by that sate directly over against h i m, another olde man Men of ex- which farre exceeded him in age. A nd this man was his ending olde father, which seemed to be rather a dead carkeis then a age' living b o d y: for his sinewes, his veines, his artiers, his bones, and other parts, appeared so cleerely thorow his skinne, that a man might easily tell them, and discerne them one from another. Also his age was so great, that the good man had lost his sight, and could not speake one onely word b ut with exceeding great paine. M o n s i e ur de Ottigni having seene so strange a thing, turned to the yoonger of these two olde men, praying him to vouchtouch- safe to answere him to that which he demanded ing his age. Then the olde man called a company of Indians, and striking twise upon his thigh, and laying his hand upon two of them, he shewed him by signes, that these two were his sonnes: againe smiting upon their thighes, he shewed him others not so olde, which were the children of the two first, which he continued in the same maner until! the fift generation. But though this olde man had his father alive more olde then himselfe, and that both of them did weare their haire very long, and as white as was possible, yet it was tolde them, [III. 323-] that they might yet live thirtie or fortie yeeres more by the course of nature: although the younger of them both was not lesse then two hundred and fiftie yeeres Savages in olde. After he had ended his communication, hee com- maunded two young Egles to be given to our men, which he had bred up for his pleasure in his house. Egles in Hee caused also little Paniers made of Palme leaves full Florida. of Gourds red and blew to bee delivered unto them. For recompence of which presents he was satisfied with French toyes. °™ °f ^ These two olde men caused our men to bee guided backe againe to the place from whence they came, by the young Paracoussy which hath brought them thither. And having taken leave of the Paracoussy, they came and sought me out in the place where I stayed, and rehearsed unto mee all that they had seene, praying mee also that I would rewarde their guide, which so frankely and heartily had received them into his house, which I would not faile to doe by any meanes. Nowe was I determined to search out the qualities of the hill. Therefore I went right to the toppe thereof, Cedars, where we found nothing else but Cedars, Palme, and Palmes> Baytrees of so sovereigne odour, that Baulme smelleth iJl^eete* nothing like in comparison. The trees were environed Abundance rounde about with Vines bearing grapes in such quantitie, of grapes. that the number would suffice to make the place habit- Estuine a able. Besides this fertilitie of the soyle for Vines, a ttff&S man may see Esquine wreathed about the shrubs in the pockes. great quantitie. Touching the pleasure of the place, the Sea may bee seene plaine and open from it, and more then sixe great leagues ofF, neere the River Belle, a man may beholde the medowes divided asunder into lies and Islets enterlacing one another: Briefly the place is so pleasant, that those which are melancholicke would be inforced to change their humour. After I had stayed there a while, I imbarked againe my people to sayle towards the mouth of the River, where wee found the Paracoussy, which according to his promise waited for us. Wherefore to content him, we went on shore, and did him that reverence that on our part was requisite. Then hee gave me the skinne so richly painted, and I recompensed him with somewhat I forgat not to demaund of him the of our marchandise. place whence the wedge of silver came which he had given me before: whereunto he made me a very sudden answere, which notwithstanding I understood not, which Silver certain he well perceived. And then he shewed me by evident dayes journey si£ n es ^at all of it came from a place more within the up within the -^9 river of May. -K^ver by certaine dayes journeyes from this place, and ^1 • 1 r . , . J declared unto us that all that which they had thereof, they gat it by force of armes of the inhabitants of this place, Thimogoamor- named by them Thimogoa, their most ancient and tall enemies to n a t u r a u enemies, as hee largely declared. Whereupon when I sawe with what affection hee spake when hee pronounced Thimogoa, I understoode what he would say. And to bring my selfe more into his favour, I promised him to accompany him with all my force, if hee would fight against them: which thing pleased him in such sorte, that from thenceforth hee promised himselfe the victorie of them, and assured mee that hee would make a voyage thither within a short space, would cause store of Mill to be prepared, and would commaund his men to make ready their Bowes, and furnish themselves with such store of arrowes, that nothing should bee wanting to give battaile to Thimogoa. In fine hee prayed mee very earnestly not to faile of my promise, and in so doing, hee hoped to procure mee Golde and Silver in such good quantitie, that mine afFaires shoulde take efFect according to mine owne and his desire. r • 1 11 1 • 1 The matter thus fully resolved upon, I tooke my leave of him to returne unto my shippes, where after wee had rested our selves all the night following, wee hoysed sayles the next day very earely in the morning, and sayled towarde the River of Seine, distant from the The river of River of May about foure leagues : and there continu- Seineing our course towarde the North, wee arrived at the mouth of Somme, which distant from the River of Seine: where wee cast Anker, and went on shoare to discover that place as wee had done the rest. There wee were gratiously and cour- The courtesie teously received of the Paracoussy of J 1 leagues The river of Smmeis not past sixe the Countrey, °f -i 5*f~ coussy of the which is one or the tallest men and best proportioned r-lver of that may bee founde. His wife sate by him, which Somme. besides her Indian beautie, wherewith shee was greatly endewed, had so vertuous a countenance and modest gravitie, that there was not one amongst us but did greatly commend her ; shee had in her traine five of her daughters of so good grace and so well brought up, that I easily perswaded my selfe that their mother was their Mistresse, and had taught them well and straightly to preserve their honestie. After that the Paracoussy had received us as I have sayde, hee commaunded his wife to present mee with a certaine number of bullets of silver, [III. 324.] for his owne part hee presented mee with his bowe and his arrowes, as hee had done unto Captaine John Ribault in our first voyage, which is a signe of a perpetuall amitie and alliance with those which they honour with such a kinde of present. In our discoursing with one another, wee entred into speach as touching the exercise of armes. Then the Paracoussy caused a corselet to be set on end, and prayed me to make a proofe of our Harguebuzes and their bowes : but this proofe pleased him very little; for assoone as he knew that our Harguebuzes did easily pearce that which all the force of their bowes could not hurt, he seemed to be sorie, musing with himselfe how this thing might bee done. Neverthelesse going about to dissemble in his minde that which his countenance could not doe by any meanes, hee began to fall into another matter, and prayed us very earnestly to stay with him that night in his house or lodging, affirming that no greater happinesse could come unto him then our long abode, which he desired to recompence with a thousand presents. Neverthelesse wee could not grant him this poynt, but tooke our leave of him to returne to our shippes : a s s e m b l e d > w i th Laudonnieres where soone after I caused all my companie to bee Zitfhi!Zm fany where it to consult together of the place whereof wee should might be best make choise to plant our habitation. First I let them for them to understand, howe none of them were ignorant, that the plant. t he Masters and Pilots of my shippes, p a rt which w as towarde the Cape of Florida, was altogether a marish Countrey, and therefore unprofitable for our inhabitation: A thing which could yeelde neither profite to the King, nor any contentment or pleasure to us, if peradventure we would inhabite there. On the other side if wee passed further toward the North to seeke out Port Royall, it would be neither very profitable nor convenient: at the least if wee should give credit to the report of them which remained there a long time, although the Haven were one of the fairest of the West Indies : but that in this case the question was not so much of the beautie of the place, as of things necessary to sustaine life. And that for our inhabiting it was much more needefull for us to plant in places plentifull of victuall, then in goodly Havens, faire, deepe and pleasaunt to the view. In consideration whereof that I was of opinion, if it seemed good unto them, to Gold and si/- seate our selves about the River of May: seeing also that vet found at }n o ur first voyage wee found the same onely among *^™erof all the rest to abounde in Maiz and corne, besides the Golde and Silver that was found there: a thing that put me in hope of some happie discoverie in time to come. After I had proposed these things, every one gave his opinion thereof: and in fine all resolved, namely those which had beene with me in the first voyage, that it was expedient to seate themselves rather on the River of May then on any other, untill they might heare newes out of France. This poynt being thus agreed upon, wee sayled toward the River, and used such diligence, that with the favour of the windes wee arrived there the morrow after about the breake of day, which was on Thursday the 29. of the moneth of June. Hav- June the 29. ing cast anker, I embarked all my stuffe and the souldiers of my companie, to sayle right toward the opening of the River: wherein we entred a good way up, and found a Creeke of a reasonable bignesse, which invited us to refresh our selves a little, while wee reposed our selves there. Afterward wee went on shoare to seeke out a place plaine without trees, which wee perceived from the Creeke. is joyning the River. This place But because wee found it not very commodious for us to inhabite there : wee determined to returne unto the place which wee had discovered before, when wee had sayled up to a mountaine, and it seemed unto us more fit and commodious to build a fortresse, then that where we were last. Therefore we tooke our way towards the forrests being guided therein by the young Paracoussy which had ledde us before to his fathers lodging. Afterward we found a large plaine covered with high Pinetrees distant a little from the other: under which wee perceived an infinite number of Stagges which brayed amidst the plaine, athwart the which we passed: then wee discovered a little hill adjoyning unto a great vale very in forme flat: wherein were the fairest greene and medowes of the world, and grasse to feede cattel. Moreover it is invironed with a great number of brookes Laudonniere. An Hermaphrodite. [in. 325-1 They began their planting with prayer to God. THE ENGLISH VOYAGES more delectable to the eye. After I had taken the viewe thereof at mine ease, I named it at the request of our souldiers, The Vale of Laudonniere. Thus we went forward. Anon having gone a little forward, we met an Indian woman of tall stature, which also was an Hermaphrodite, who came before us with a great vessell full of cleere fountaine water, wherwith she greatly refreshed us. For we were exceeding faint by reason of the ardent heate which molested us as we passed through those high woods. And I beleeve that without the succour of that Indian Hermaphrodite, or rather, if it had not bene for the great desire which we had to make us resolute of our selves, we had taken up our lodging all night in the wood. Being therefore refreshed by this meane, wee gathered our spirits together, and marching with a cheerefuU courage, wee came to the place which wee had chosen to make our habitation in: whereupon at that instant neere the rivers brinke we strowed a number of boughes and leaves, to take our rest on them the night following, which wee found exceeding sweete, because of the paine which before we had taken in our travell. On the morrow about the breake of day, I commaunded a trumpet to be sounded, that being assembled we might give God thankes for our favourable and happie arrivall. There wee sang a Psalme of thankesgiving unto God, beseeching him that it would please him of his grace to continue his accustomed goodnesse toward us his poore servaunts, and ayde us in all our enterprises, that all might turne to his glory and the advancement of our King. The prayer ended, every man began to take courage. Afterward having measured out a piece of ground in forme of a triangle, wee indevoured our selves of all sides, some to bring earth, some to cut fagots, and others to raise and make the rampire, for there was not a man that had not either a shovell, or cutting hooke, or hatchet, as well to make the ground plaine by cutting downe the trees, as for the building of the Fort, which we did hasten wfc such cheerfulnesse, that within few dayes the effect of our diligence was apparant: in which meane space the Paracoussy Satourioua our neerest neighbour, & on whose ground wee built our Fort, came usually accompanyed with his two sonnes and a great number of Indians to offer to doe us all courtesie. And I likewise for my part bestowed divers of our trifles frankely on him, to the end he might know the good will we bare him, and thereby make him more desirous of our friendship, in such sort, that as the dayes increased, so our amitie and friendship increased also. After that our Fort was brought into forme, I began to build a Grange to retire my munition and things necessarie for the defence of our Fort: praying the Paracoussy to command his subjects to make us a covering of Palme leaves, and this to the ende that when that In Florida was done, I might unfraight my shippes, and put under fP™?^ coverture those things that were in them. Suddenly the w-lth P Paracoussy commaunded in my presence all the Indians leaves, of his companie to dresse the next day morning so good a number of Palme leaves, that the Grange was covered in lesse then two dayes: so that businesse was finished. For in the space of those two dayes, the Indians never ceassed from working, some in fetching Palme leaves, others in interlacing of them: in such sort that their Kings commandement was executed as he desired. Our Fort was built in forme of a triangle. The side The forme of toward the West, which was toward the lande, was in- closed with a little trench and raised with turves made in forme of a Battlement of nine foote high : the other side which was toward the River, was inclosed with a Pallisado of plankes of timber after the maner that Gabions are made. On the South side there was a kinde of bastion TheSouthside. within which I caused an house for the munition to be built: it was all builded with fagots and sand, saving about two or three foot high with turfes, whereof the In the middest I caused a great battlements were made. ^FC ix 17 Court to be made of eighteene paces long and broad, in the middest whereof on the one side drawing toward the South I builded a Corps de gard, and an house on the other side toward the North, which I caused to bee raised somewhat too high : for within a short while after the wind beat it down: and experience taught me, that High building we may not build with high stages in this Countrey, "hTcout/0* ^ r e a s on °f t he windes whereunto it is subject. One oun rey. ^ ^ s[fes ^^ i nclOsed my Court, which I made very Nota. faire and large, reached unto the Grange of my munitions : and on the other side towardes the River was mine owne lodging, round about which were galleries all covered. The principall doore of my lodging was in the middest of the great place, and the other was towarde the River. A good distance from the Fort I built an Oven to avoyde the danger against fire, because the houses are of Palme leaves, which will soone be burnt after the fire catcheth holde of them, so that with much adoe a man shall have leasure to quench them. Loe here in briefe the description of our Fourtresse, Caroline. which I named Caroline in the honour of our Prince King Charles. After wee were furnished with that which was most necessarie, I would not lose a minute of an houre, without imploying of the same in some vertuous exercise: therefore I charged Monsieur de Ottigni my Lieutenant, a man in trueth worthy of all honour for his honestie and vertue, to search up within the River, what this Thimogoa might be, whereof the Paracoussy Satourioua had spoken to us so often at our comming on shoare. For [III. 326O execution hereof the Paracoussy gave him two Indians for his guides, which taking upon them to lead him in this voyage, seemed to goe unto a wedding, so desirous they were to fight with their enemies. The first voy Being imbarked they hoised sayle, and having sayled age twentie about twentie leagues, the Indians which still looked on ^jg side and that side to espie some of their enemies, eagues. discovered three Canoas. And immediatly they began to crie Thimogoa, Thimogoa, and spake nothing else but to hasten forward to goe fight with them: which the Captaine seemed to be willing to doe, to content them. When they came to boord them, one of the Indians gat holde of an Halbert, another of an Coutelas in such a rage, that hee would have leapt into the water to have fought with them alone. Neverthelesse Ottigni would not let them doe it, for while hee deferred to boord them, he gave the others respite to turne the prowes of their Canoas toward the shoare, and so to escape into the woods. Againe, the meaning of Ottigni was not to make warre upon them of Thimogoa, but rather to make them friendes, and to make them thenceforth to live in peace one with another if it were possible, hoping by this meane to discover dayly some new thing, & especially the certaine course of the River. For this purpose he caused the barke to retire, wherein were the two Indians his guides, and went with his men towarde the Canoas which were on the Rivers side. Being come unto them, he put certaine trifles into them, and then retired a good way from them, which thing caused the Indians which were fled away to returne to their boats, and to understand by this signe, that those of our Barke were none of their enemies, but rather come onely to traffique with them. Wherefore being thus assured of us, they called to our men to come neere unto them: which they did incontinently and set foote on lande, and spake freely unto them, with divers ceremonies over long to recount. In the ende Ottigni demaunded of them by signes if they had any Golde or Silver among them. But they tolde him they had none as then: and that if he would send one of his men with them, they would bring him without danger into a place where they might have some. Ottigni seeing them so willing, delivered them one of his men which seemed very resolute, to undertake this voyage: this fellow stayed with them untill tenne of the clocke the next morning, so offended with his long stay, sayled ten great leagues further. that Captaine Ottigny somewhat j,en ieagues rich in golde and silver. The second voyage. KingMolloua. Olata Ouae Utina a great king. THE ENGLISH VOYAGES further up the River: although he knew not which way he should goe, yet he went so farre up that hee espied the Boate wherein his souldier was: which reported unto him, that the Indians would have carried him three great dayes journey further, & told him that a King named Mayrra rich in Gold and Silver, dwelt in those quarters, and that for small quantitie of marchandise enough might be had of him : yet that hee would not hazard himselfe without his leave, and that he brought but a very little Golde. This being done, our men returned toward our Fort Caroline, after they had left the souldier with the Indians to enforme himselfe more and more of such things as he might discover more at leasure. Fifteene dayes after this voyage to Thimogoa, I dispatched Captaine Vasseur and my Sergeant also to returne againe into this Countrey, and to seeke out the souldier which remained there in the former voyage. Being therefore imbarked, they sayled two whole dayes: and before they came to the dwelling of the Indians, they found two of them on the Rivers side, which were expresly sent unto that place to descry whether any of their enemies were come to that part, with intention to surprise them, as they did usually. When they perceived Captaine Vasseur, they knew incontinently that he was none of their enemies, and to come neere unto the therefore made no difficultie Barke, and shewed him by signes that the Souldier which they sought was not in that place, but was at that present in the house of King Molloua which was vassall unto another great King named by them Olata Ouae Utina: and that if the Captaine would sayle thitherward, hee should come thither very quickly : wherwith he was content, and caused his men to rowe to that part which the Indians shewed him : whereat they were so glad, that they ranne quickly before by land to declare his arrivall, which was at the lodging of king Molloua, after he had rowed not past halfe a league. While king Molloua had ended intertaining Captaine Vasseur and his men, the souldier came in with five or sixe pounds weight of silver which he had trucked F'lve or sixe #3faJT8*' and traffiqued with Indians. This King caused bread to bee made, and fish to bee dressed after the Indian fashion to feast our men : to whom, while they were at meate, hee made a discourse of divers other Kings his friends & allies, reckoning up to the number of nine of them by name, to wit, Cadecha, Chilili, Eclauou, Enacappe, Calany, Anacharaqua, Omittaqua, Aequara, Moquoso : all which with him to the number of more then fortie, hee assured us to bee the Portie kings vassals of the most renowmed Olata Ouae Utina. ^utina *° This done, hee went about likewise to discover the [ni. 327.] enemies of Ouae Utina, in which number hee placed as the first the Paracoussy Satourioua Monarch of the confines of the river of May, which hath under his obeysance thirtie other Paracoussies, whereof there were ten which were all his brethren, and that therefore hee was greatly esteemed in those partes : then hee named three others no lesse puissant then Satourioua, whereof the first dwelt two dayes journey from his lord Olata Ouae Utina, and ordinarily made warre upon him, whose name was Potanou, a man cruell in warre, but pitifull in the KingPotanou. execution of his furie. For hee tooke the prisoners to mercy, being content to marke them on the left arme with a great marke like unto a seale, and so imprinted as if it had bene touched with an hotte yron, then hee let them goe without any more hurt. The two others were named Onatheaqua, and Houstaqua, being great Lords, and abounding in riches, and principally Onatheaqua, which dwelt neere unto the high mountaines, wherein there was abundance of many rare things, 4n exceeding & infinite quantitie of a kinde of slate stone, wherewith rtchPlace' they made wedges to cleave their wood. The occasion which (as he sayd) mooved Potanou to wage warre against Olata Ouae Utina, was the feare that he had, lest he and his companions should get of that hard stone in his Countrey, wherewith they headed arrowes, and could not get it in any neerer place. their Besides all this, Molloua recited to Captaine Vasseur, that the kings allies the vassals of the great Olata, armed their brests, armes, thighes, legs & foreheads with Large plates l a rg e plates of gold and silver : and that by this meanes °{£and t he a r r o w es t h at w e re discharged upon them could do them no maner of hurt at all, but rather were broken them. Hereupon Captaine Vasseur against inquired the Kings Onetheaqua and Houstaqua were whether like unto us. For by the description that they made they were of Spaniards or no : but Molloua tolde him that they were not, but that they were Indians like the rest, saving to doubt whether them, he began t h at {-j^y painted their faces with blacke, and that the . Some paint the'lr/hiCe$h rest as Molloua, painted them with red. Then my . . y , with blacke, and some with Lieutenant Vasseur, and my Sergeant promised him, red. o , . _ J r that one day I should march with my forces into those Countreys, and that joyning my selfe with his Lord Olata, I would subdue the inhabitants of the highest of those mountaines. Hee was very glad of this speach, and answered that the least of these Kings which hee had named, should present unto the Generall of these succours the height of two foot of gold and silver, which by force of armes they had already gotten of those two Kings, Onatheaqua, and Houstaqua. The good cheere being done, and the discourses ended, my men imbarked themselves againe, with intention to bring mee those good newes unto the Fort Caroline. But after they had sayled a very long while downe the River, and were come within three leagues of us, the tyde was so strong against them, that they were constrained themselves because of the night, unto the dwelling of a certaine Paracoussy named Molona, which shewed himselfe very glad of their arrivall: for hee desired to know some newes of Thimogoa, and thought that the French men went thither for none other occasion but for to invade 22 to goe on lande, and them. Which Captaine Vasseur perceiving, dissembled so wel, that he made him beleeve that he went to Thimogoa with none other intention, but to subdue them, and to destroy them with the edge of the sworde without mercy, but that their purpose had not such successe as they desired, because that the people of Thimogoa being advertised of this enterprise, retired into the woods, and saved themselves by flight: that neverthelesse they had taken some as they were fleeing their away, which carried no newes fellowes. thereof unto The Paracoussy was so glad of this relation, that he interrupted him, and asked Vasseur of the beginning and maner of his execution, and prayed him that hee would shew him by signes howe all things passed. Immediatly Francis la Caille the Sergeant of my band tooke his sword in his hand, saying, that with the point thereof he had thrust through two Indians which ranne into the woods, and that his companions had done no lesse for their partes. And that if fortune had so favoured them, that they had not beene discovered by the men of Thimogoa, they had had a victorie most glorious and worthie of the Paracoussy shewed eternall memorie. Hereupon himselfe so well satisfied, that he could not devise how to gratifie our men, which hee caused to come into his house to feast them more honourably : and having to sit next him, and in his made Captaine Vasseur owne chaire (which the Indians esteeme for the chiefest honour) and then underneath him two of his sonnes, goodly and mightie fellowes, hee commanded all the rest to place themselves as they thought good. This done, the Indians came according to their good custome, to present their drinke Cassine to the Paracoussy, and then to certaine of his chiefest friends, and the Frenchmen. Then hee which brought it set the cup aside, and [III. 328,] drew out a little dagger stucke up in the roofe of the house, and like a mad man he lift his head aloft, and ranne apace, and went and smote an Indian which sate the dagger alone in one of the corners of the hall, crying with a loud voyce, Hyou, the poore Indian stirring not at all for the blowe, which he seemed to endure patiently. He which held the dagger went quickly to put the same in his former place, and began againe to give us drinke as hee did before : but he had not long continued, and had scarce given three or foure thereof, but he left his bowle againe, tooke in his hand, and quickly returned unto him which hee had strocken before, to whom he gave a very sore blow on the side, crying Hyou, as he had done before: and then hee went to put the dagger in his place, and set himselfe downe among the rest. A little while after he that had bene stricken fell downe backwards, stretching out his armes and legs, as if hee had bene ready to yeeld up the latter gaspe. And then the younger sonne of the Paracoussy apparelled in a long white skinne, fell downe at the feete of him that was fallen backward, weeping bitterly halfe a quarter of an houre : after, two other of his brethren clad in like apparell, came about him that was so stricken, and began to sigh pitifully. Their mother bearing a little infant in her armes came from another part, and going to the place where her sonnes were, at the first shee used infinite numbers of outcries, then one while lifting up her eyes to heaven, another while falling downe unto the ground, shee cryed so dolefully, that her lamentable mournings would have moved the most hard and stony heart in the world with pitie. Yet this sufficed not, for there came in a companie of young gyrles, which did never leave weeping for a long while in the place where the Indian was fallen downe, whom afterward they tooke, and with the saddest gestures they could devise, carried him away into another house a little way off from the great hall of the Paracoussy, and continued their weepings and mournings by the space of two long houres : in which meane while the Indians ceassed not to drinke Cassine, but with such silence that one word was not heard in the parlour. Vasseur being grieved that he understood not these ceremonies, demanded of the Paracoussy what these things meant: which answered him slowly, Thimogoa, Thimogoa, without saying any more. Being more displeased then he was before with so sleight an answere, he turned unto another Indian the Paracoussyes brother, who was a Paracoussy as well as his brother, called Malica, which made him a like answere as hee did at the KingMalka. first, praying him to aske no more of these matters, and to have patience for that time. The subtill old Paracoussy prayed him within a while after, to shew him his sword, which he would not denie him, thinking that hee would have beheld the fashion of his weapons: but he soone perceived that it was to another ende: for the old man holding it in his hand, behelde it a long while on every place, to see if he could finde any blood upon it, which might shew that any of their enemies had bene killed : for the Indians are woont to bring their weapons wherewith their enemies have beene defeated, with some blood upon them, for a token of their victories. But seeing no signe thereof upon it, he was upon the point to say unto him, that he had killed none of the men of Thimogoa: when as Vasseur preventing that which hee might object, declared and shewed unto him by signes, the maner of his enterprise, adding, that by reason of the two Indians which he had slaine, his sword was so bloudy, that hee was inforced to wash and make it cleane a long while in the River: which the olde man beleeved to be like to be true, and made no maner of replie thereunto. Vasseur, La Caille, and their other companions went out of the hal to go into the roome whither they had carried the Indian : there they found the Paracoussy sitting upon tapistries made of small reedes, which was Taputry made at meate after the Indian fashion, and the Indian that of small reeds. was smitten hard by him, lying upon the selfe same tapistry, about whom stoode the wife of the Paracoussy, • 1 1 11 T» the lamented . . . I. • their r tor in his Indian was so persecuted T» • the Paracoussies THE ENGLISH VOYAGES instead of napkins to rub 1 the hall; which did nothing else but warme a great deal the Indians side. Qf m o s se T T AD. 1564. They lappe masse about their woundes and use it in Hereupon our men asked the Paracoussy againe stead of nap- what occasion kins. A ceremonie to c a ll to m i nd the death of their ancesters ancestours executed by their enemie Thimogoa : alleaging shine by their moreover, that as often as he himselfe, or any of his enemies. a ^[n(^e o f ceremonie, whereby they would call to minde 1 1 t*le death and persecutions or presence: hee answered, that this was nothing else but and allies returned from the Countrey, without friends they brought the heads of their enemies, or without bringing home some prisoner, hee used for a perpetuall the best memorie of all his predecessors, to beate beloved of all his children with the selfe same weapons wherewith they had bene killed in times past: to the ende that by renewing of the wound their death should be thus informed of those ceremonies, they thanked the Paracoussy for they had received, & so setting saile came to me unto the fort: [III. 329.] where they declared all unto me as I have recited it twentieth of July our The returne of heretofore. The eight and ^owardFrance s ^ P P es departed to returne into France. And within a the 28. of while, about two moneths after our arrivall in Florida, the Paracoussy Satourioua sent certaine Indians unto July. mee to knowe whether I would stande to my promise which I had made him at my first arrivall in that Countrey, which was that I would shewe my selfe friend to his friendes, and enemie unto his -enemies, and also to accompany him with a good number of Harquebuzes, when he should see it expedient, and should finde a fit occasion to goe to warre. Now seeing he rested upon this promise, he prayed mee not to deferre the same : seeing also that making accompt thereof, hee had taken such good order for the execution of his enterprise, that he was ready, and was furnished with all things that were necessary for the voyage : I made him answere, that for his amitie I would not purchase the enmitie of the other, and 26 afresh. Now when intertainement which they were that albeit I would, yet notwithstanding I wanted meanes to doe it. For it behoved mee at that present to make provision of victuals and munition for the defence of my Fort. On the other side, that my Barkes were nothing ready, and this enterprise would require time: Moreover, that the Paracoussy Satourioua might holde himselfe ready to depart within two moneths, and that then I would thinke of fulfilling my promise to him. that The Indians caried this answere to their Paracoussy, which was litle pleased with it, because hee could not deferre his execution or expedition, aswell because all his victuals were ready, as also because tenne other Paracoussies were assembled with him for the performance of this enterprise. The ceremonie which this Savage The ceremonie used before hee embarked his armie deserveth not to be ^ J J ?^ forgotten. For when hee was set downe by the Rivers towarrP side, being compassed about with ten other Paracoussies, hee commaunded water to be brought him speedily. This done, looking up into heaven, he fell to discourse of divers things with gestures that shewed him to be in exceeding great choller, which made him one while shake his head hither and thither, and by and by with I wote not what furie to turne his face toward the Countrey of his enemies, and to threaten to kill them. Hee oftentimes looked upon the Sunne, praying him to graunt him a glorious victory of his enemies. Which when hee had done by the space of halfe an houre, hee sprinkled with his hand a little of the water which hee helde in a vessell upon the heads of the Paracoussies, and cast the rest as it were in a rage and despite into a fire which was there prepared for the purpose. This done, hee cried out thrise, He Thimogoa, and was followed with five hundreth SatouriouafolIndians at the least, which were there assembled, which cried all with one voyce, He Thimogoa. This ceremonie, fijf*Jmttdreth as a certaine Indian tolde mee familiarly, signified nothing else, but that Satourioua besought the Sunne to graunt unto him so happy a victory, that hee might shed his enemies blood, as he had shed that water at his pleasure. 27 ^^with Indians, 1 • •!• -r ,. -r 1 J • r i i Consultation before they assault their enemies. How they use their enemies which they take in warre. Moreover, that the Paracoussies which were sprinckled with a part of that water, might returne with the heads of their enemies, which is the onely and chiefe triumph of their victories. The Paracoussy Satourioua had no sooner ended his ceremonies and had taken a viewe of all his company, but he embarked himselfe, and used such diligence with his Almadies or boates, that the next day two houres before the Sunnes set, he arrived on the territories of his enemies about eight or tenne leagues from their villages. Afterward causing them all to goe on land, hee assembled his counsell, wherein it was agreed that five of the Paracoussies should saile up the River with halfe of the troupes, and by the breake of the day should approche unto the dwelling of their enemie: for his owne part, that hee would take his journey through the woods and forrests as secretly as hee coulde: that when they were come thither, as well they that went by water as hee which went by land should not faile by the breake of the day to enter into the village, and cut them all in pieces, except the women and little children. These things which were thus agreed upon, were executed with as great fury as was possible : which when they had done, they tooke the heades of their enemies which they had slaine, and cut off their haire round about with a piece of their skulles: they tooke also foure and twentie prisoners, which they led away, and retired themselves immediatly unto their Boates which wayted for them. Being come thither, they beganne to singe praises unto the Sunne, to whom they attributed their victorie. And afterwards they put the skins of those heads on the end of their javelings, and went altogether toward the in the company. Being come thither, they devided their prisoners equally to each of the Paracoussies, and left thirteene of them to Satourioua, which straightway dispatched an Indian his subject, to carry newes before of the victory to them which stayed at home to guard their 28 houses, which immediatly beganne to weepe. But assoone as night was come, they never left dancing and playing a thousand gambols in honour of the feast. The next day the Paracoussy Satourioua came home, who before hee entred into his lodging caused all the [III. 330.] hairie skuls of his enemies to bee set up before his doore, and crowned them with branches of Lawrell, shewing by 1fo*r this glorious spectacle the triumph of the victory which °f tnumPh' hee had obtained. Straightway beganne lamentation and mournings, which assoone as the night beganne were turned into pleasures and dances. m maner After that I was advertised of these things, I sent a Souldier unto Satourioua, praying him to sende mee two of his prisoners : which hee denied mee, saying that hee was nothing beholding unto mee, and that I had broken my promise, against the oath which I had sworne unto him at my arrivall. Which when I understoode by my Souldier, which was come backe with speede, I devised howe I might be revenged of this Savage, and to make him know how dearely this bolde bravado of his should cost him : therefore I commanded my Sergeant to provide mee twentie Souldiers to goe with mee to the house of Satourioua : Where after I was come and entered into the hall without any maner of salutation, I went and sate mee downe by him, and stayed a long while without speaking any woorde unto him, or shewing him any signe of friendship, which thing put him deepely in his dumpes: besides that certaine Souldiers remained at the gate, to whom I had given expresse commaundement to suffer no Indian to goe foorth: having stoode still about halfe an houre with this countenance, at length I demaunded where the prisoners were which hee had taken at Thimogoa, and commaunded them presently to bee brought unto me. Whereunto the Paracoussy angry at the heart, and astonied wonderfully, stoode a long while without making any answere, notwithstanding at last hee answered me very stoutly, that being afraide to see us comming thither in such warrelike maner they fled into the woods, and that not knowing which way they were gone, they were not able by any meanes to bring them againe; Then I seemed to make as though I understood not what he saide, and asked for his prisoners againe, and for some of his principall allies. Then Satourioua commaunded his Jtkore. sonne Athore to seeke out the prisoners, and to cause them to be brought into that place, which thing he did within an houre after. After they were come to the lodging of the Paracoussy, they humbly saluted mee, and lifting up their hands before me, they would have fallen downe prostrate as it were at my feet: but I would not suffer them, and soone after ledde them away with me unto my owne Fort. The Paracoussy being wonderfully offended with this bravado, bethought himselfe by all meanes how hee might be revenged of us. But to give us no suspition thereof, and the better to cover his intention, hee sent his messengers oftentimes unto us bringing alwayes with them some kinde of presents. Among others one day hee sent three Indians, which brought us two baskets full of great Excellent pUmpions, much more excellent then those which we umpions. | i a ye j n p r a n C G) anc[ promised me in their Kings behalfe, that during mine abode in that Countrey, I should never want victuals: I thanked them for their Kings good will, and signified unto them the great desire which I had, aswell for the benefit of Satourioua, as for the quiet of his Subjects, to make a peace betweene him and those of Thimogoa: which thing coulde not choose but turne to their great benefite, seeing that being allied with the Kings of those parts, hee had an open passage against Onatheaqua his ancient enemie, which otherwise he could not set upon. Moreover that Olata Ouae Utina was so mightie a Paracoussy, that Satourioua was not able to withstand his forces: but being agreed together they might easily overthrow all their enemies, and might passe the confines of the farthest Rivers that were towards the South. The messengers prayed mee to have patience untill the morowe, to treate of to be diligent therein, promising at what time they would come againe unto me to certifie me of their Lords inclination: which they failed not to doe, advertising me that Paracoussy Satourioua was the gladdest man in the world this accord (although indeed hee was quite contrary) and that he to besought mee observe and performe whatsoever I should agree upon with those of Thimogoa: which things the messengers also rehearsed unto the prisoners which I had ledde away. After they were departed, I resolved within two dayes to sende backe againe the prisoners to Olata Ouae Utina, whose subjects they were: but before I embarked them, I gave them certaine small trifles, which were little knives or tablets of glasse, wherein the image of King Charles the ninth was drawen very lively, for which they gave me very great thankes, as also for the honest entertainment which was given them at the Fort Caroline. After this they embarked themselves, with Captaine Vasseur, and with Monsieur de Arlac mine Ensigne, which I had sent of purpose to remaine a certaine time with Ouae Utina, hoping that the favour of this great Paracoussy would serve my turne greatly to make my discoveries I sent with him also one of my in time to come. Sergeants, and sixe gallant Souldiers. Thus things passed on this maner, and the hatred of Paracoussy Satourioua against mee did still continue, until that on the nine and twentieth of August a lightning [III. 331.| from heaven fell within halfe a league of our Fort, A, ^fd more worthy I beleeve to be wondered at, and to bee ^ put in writing, then all the strange signes which have bene seene in times past, and whereof the histories have never written. For although the medowes were at that season all greene, and halfe covered over with water, neverthelesse the lightning in one instant consumed above five hundred acres therewith, and burned with the ardent heate thereof all the foules which tooke their pastime in the medowes, which thing continued for three dayes space, which caused us not a little to muse, not being able to judge whereof this fire proceeded: for one while wee thought that the Indians had burnt their houses, and abandoned their places for feare of u s: another while wee thought that they had discovered some shippes in the Sea, and that according to their custome they had kindled many fires here and there, to signifie that their Countrey was inhabited : neverthelesse being not assured, I determined to sende to Paracoussy Serrany to knowe ^ thereof. But even as I was upon the point to sende one by boate to discover the matter, sixe Indians truet}1 KingSar- ranay. King Allima- came unto mee from Paracoussy Allimacany, which at cany. their first entrie made unto mee a long discourse, and a very large and ample oration (after they had presented mee with certaine baskets full of Maiz, of Pompions and of Grapes) of the loving amitie which Allimacany desired to continue with mee, and that hee looked from day to day when it would please mee to employ him in my service. Therefore considering the serviceable affection that hee bare unto mee, hee found it very strange, that I The Savages $yUS discharged mine Ordinance against his dwelling, tsfitningto be w^^ c^ had burnt up an infinite sight of greene medowesr discharging 0/ a n d consumed even downe unto the bottome of the the Christians water, and came so neere unto his mansion, that hee Ordinance, thought hee sawe the fire in his house: wherefore hee besought mee most humbly to commaund my men that they would not shoote any more towards his lodging, to otherwise that hereafter he should be constrained abandon his countrey, and to retire himselfe into some place further off from us. Having understood the foolish opinion of this man, which notwithstanding coulde not choose but bee very profitable for us, I dissembled what I thought thereof for that time, and answered the Indians with a cheerefull countenance, that the relation which they made unto mee of the obedience of their Paracoussy did please mee right well, because that before hee had not behaved himselfe in such sort towards mee, especially when I summoned him to sende mee the prisoners of great Olata Ouae made no great accompt, which was the principall cause wherefore I had discharged mine Ordinance against him: not that I meant to reach unto his house (as I might have done easily, if it had pleased me) but that I was content to shoote the halfe way to make him knowe my force: assuring him furthermore, that on condition that Laudonniere he would continue in his good affection, no more ordi- ****&* pnnance should be discharged against him hereafter: and besides that I would become his faithfull protectour against his greatest enemies. ^ ^^ The Indians contented with mine answere returned to assure their Paracoussy, which notwithstanding the assurance withdrewe himselfe from his dwelling twentie or five and twentie leagues off and that for the space of more then two moneths. After that three dayes were expired, the fire was quite extinguished. But for two dayes after there followed such an excessive heate in the aire, that A wonderfull the River neere unto which we planted our habitation, heatebecame so hoat, that I thinke it was almost ready to seeth. For there died so great abundance of fish, and that of so many divers sorts, that in the mouth of the River onely there were founde dead ynough to have loaden fiftie Fiftie cart load Carts, whereof there issued a putrefaction in the aire, offish dead in which bred many dangerous diseases amongst us, inso- ^ ™* much that most of my men fell sicke, and almost ready to ende their dayes. Yet notwithstanding it pleased our mercifull God so to provide by his providence, that all our men recovered their health without the losse of any one of them. Monsieur de Arlac, Captaine Vasseur, and one of my The thirde their tenne Souldiers voyage the Sergeants being embarked with about the tenth of September, to cary backe the prisoners **nth °f September. i TT • M J n- ^i i- r i unto Utina, sailed so rarre up the River, that they discovered a place called Mayarqua distant from our Fort Mayarqua a about fourescore leagues, where the Indians gave them flace 8ogood entertainement, and in many other villages which they found. From this place they rowed to the dwel33 ix c ling of Paracoussy Utina, which after hee had feasted them according to his abilitie and power, prayed Monsieur de Arlac and all his Souldiers to stay a while with him, to ayde and assist him in battaile against one of his KingPatanou. enemies called Potanou, whereunto Monsieur de Arlac consented willingly. And because hee knew not how long he might have occasion to stay in these parts, hee sent mee Captaine Vasseur and the Barke backe againe, which brought home onely five Souldiers with him. The Indians Now because the custome of the Indians is alwayes to manerofwar. wage war by surprise, Utina resolved to take his enemie [III. 332.] Potanou in the morning by the breake of the day: to bring this to passe, hee made his men to travaile all the Two hundreth night, which might be in number two hundred persons, Indians. so w e n advised, that they prayed our French-shot to be in the fore-front, to the ende (as they saide) that the noyse of their pieces might astonish their enemies: notthey coulde not march so secretly, but withstanding the that those of the village of Potanou, distant from dwelling of Utina about five and twentie leagues, were ware of them: which suddenly employed and bestowed t r e e Sj and A village in- all their endevour to defend their village enclosed all in great companies: but issued out dosed with wifa finding themselves charged with shotte, (a thing wherewith they never had bene acquainted) also beholding the Captaine of their bande fall downe dead the beginning of their skirmish, with a shot of an Harquebuse which strooke him in the forehead, discharged by the hande of Monsieur de Arlac, they left the place: and the Indians of Utina gate into the village, taking in Utina getteth men, women, and children prisoners. Thus Paracoussy the victory by the ayde of our men, the victory of Utina obtained ?Mpe°ofthethe w h i ch s l ew m a n y °f h is enemies, and lost in this conflict French, o ne °f &&* companions, wherewith Utina was very much grieved. Eight or tenne dayes after, I sent Captaine to fetch home Vasseur backe againe with a Barke Monsieur de Arlac and his Souldiers, which at their returne brought mee certaine presents from Utina, as some silver, a small quantitie of golde, painted skinnes, silver, and thankes, which the gold, and and other things, with a thousand Paracoussy gave me, which promised that if in any Pa™ted enterprise of importance I should have neede of his / tmeSm men, he would furnish mee with three hundreth and above. While I thus travailed to purchase friends, & to practise one while with one here, an other while with another there, certaine Souldiers of my company were suborned under hand by one named la Roquette of the Countrey La Roquettes of Perigort, which put in their heads that hee was a conspirade. great Magician, and that by the secrets of Art-magicke he had discovered a Mine of golde and silver farre up within the River, whereby (upon the losse of his life,) every Souldier should receive in ready Bullion the value of tenne thousand Crownes, beside and above fifteene hundred thousand which should be reserved for the Kings Majestie : wherefore they allied themselves with La Roquette and another of his confederates, whose name was Le Genre, in whom notwithstanding I had great affiance. This Genre exceeding desirous to enrich Monsieur de himselfe in those parts, and seeking to be revenged, Genre. because I would not give him the carriage of the Paquet into France, secretly enfourmed the Souldiers that were already suborned by La Roquette, that I would deprive them of this great gaine, in that I did set them dayly on worke, not sending them on every side to discover the Countreys: therefore that it were a good deede, after they had made mee understand so much, to seeke meanes to dispatch mee out of the way, and to choose another Captaine in my place, if I would not give them victuals according to their disordinate appetite. Hee also brought Genres mee word hereof himselfe, making a large discourse unto Sj^%i mee of the good affection of the Souldiers, which all be- Souldiers sought mee that I would conduct them to the Countreys name. where the Mine was : I made him answere that all could His answere. not goe thither, and that it was necessary before their departure to settle our Fortresse in such estate, that in securitie against the Indians which might surprise Furthermore, that their maner of proceeding them. seemed strange unto mee, for that they imagined, that the Kings Majestie was at the charges of our voyage for none other ende, but onely to enrich them at their first arrivall, in as much as they shewed themselves much more given unto covetousnesse, then unto the service of their Prince: But seeing mine answere tended unto none other ende but to make our Fortresse strong and defensible, they determined to travaile in the worke, and made an ensigne of olde linnen, which ordinarily they the rampart when they went to woorke, bare upon alwayes wearing their weapons, which I thought they had done to incourage themselves to worke the better. A dangerous But as I perceived afterwards, and that by the confession practice famine*and ^at m a t t e rj hisLieutenant. none other ende, but of Genre sent mee in letters which he writ to mee of these gentle Souldiers did the same for to have killed mee, and my Lieutenant also, if by chance I had given them any hard speeches. About the twentieth of September, as I came home from the woods and coppises to finish the building of my Fort, (and that according to my usuall maner, I marched first to give encouragement unto my Soldiers) I chafed my selfe in such sort, that I fell into a sore and grievous sicknesse, whereof I thought I should have Laudonniers died: During which sicknesse, I called Le Genre often sicknesse, u n to m e e? as o ne j trusted above all others, and tfat of whose conspiracies I doubted not any whit at alL In this meane while assembling his complices, sometime in his chamber and sometime in the woods to consult with them, hee spake unto them to choose another Captaine besides mee, to the intent to put mee to death: but being not able by open force to execute his mis^"tZta'rie c h i eYo us i n t e n t i o n> h ee gate him unto mine Apothecarie [III. 3^3!]' Pr a7i ng h im instantly to mingle in my medicine, which I was to receive one or two dayes after, some drugge that should make mee pitch over the pearch, or at the least that hee would give him a little Arsenike or quicke Silver, which hee himselfe would put into my drinke. But the Apothecary denied him, as did in like maner Master S. which was Master of the fire-workes. Thus The Master of wholly disappointed of both his meanes> hee with certaine the fireworks. others resolved to hide a little barrell of gunne-powder underneath my bed, and by a traine to set it on fire. Upon these practises a Gentleman which I had dispatched to returne into France, being about to take his leave of me, advertised me, that Genre had given him a booke full of all kinde of lewde invectives and slanders against me, against Monsieur de Ottigny, and against the principal of my company : upon which occasion I assembled all my Souldiers Bourdet with all his, which on the fourth of September Bourdet ararrived in the roade, and were come into our River. w*djn In their presence I caused the contents of the booke to Jf$eptemler bee read alowde, that they might beare record of the untruths that were written against mee. Genre, which had gotten him into the woods for feare of being taken, (where he lived for a while after with the Savages by my permission,) writ unto mee often, and in many of his letters confessed unto mee, that hee had deserved death, condemning himselfe so farrefoorth, that he referred all to my mercie and pitie. together, and Captaine Captaine The seventh or eighth day of November, after I had The 4. voyage vmbercaused sufficient provision of such victuals as were neede- the 7- of No- full to bee made, I sent two of my men, to wit, La Roche Ferriere, and an other towarde King Utina, to discover every day more and more of the Countrey: where hee was the space of five or sixe moneths, during which hee discovered many small villages, and among others one named Hostaqua, the King whereof being Hostaqua a desirous of my friendship, sent unto mee a quiver made village. of a Luserns skinne full of arrowes, a couple of bowes, foure or five skinnes painted after their maner, and a In cheine of Silver weying about a pounde weight. recompence of which presents I sent him two whole sutes of apparell, with certaine cutting hookes or hatchets. After these things therefore in this sort passed, about the tenth of this moneth, Captaine Bourdet determined to returne into France. Then I to leave mee and requested him, yea rather was exceeding importunate with him, to carry home with him some sixe or seven Souldiers, whom I coulde not trust by any meanes: which hee did for my sake, and would not charge himselfe with Genre, which offered him a great summe of money, if it would please him to carry him into France: hee transported him onely to the other side of the River. One of his Three dayes after his departure thirteene Mariners which Barks stolne \ j^d brought out of France, suborned by certaine other tmpbjhs Mariners which Captaine Bourdet had left me, stole away my Barkes in maner following. These Mariners of Captaine Bourdet put mine in the head, that if they had such Barkes as mine were, they might gaine very much in the Isles of the Antilles, and make an exceeding profitable voyage. Hereupon they beganne to devise howe they might steale away my Barkes, and consulted that when I should command them to goe unto the The village of village of Sarauahi distant about a league and an halfe SarauahL from o ur FOrt, and situated upon an arme of the River, (whither according to my maner I sent them dayly to seeke clay, to make bricke and morter for our houses) they would returne no more, but would furnish themselves with victuals as well as they might possibly: and then would embarke themselves all in one vessell, Another of his and would goe their way: as indeede they did. And Barks stolne that which was worse, two Flemish Carpenters, which "ZT! l e ft m ™> stole away the other t he s a i de B o u r d et h ad Barke, and before their departure cut the cables of the Barke, and of the shipboate, that it might goe away with the tyde, that I might not pursue them: so that I remained without either Barke or boate, which fell out as unluckily for mee as was possible. For I was they this bootie that oppressed with famine they came unto Ms own counthe principall Towne of the Isle of Cuba: trey men to the ready to imbarke my selfe with all speede, to discover as farre up our River, as I might by any meanes. Nowe my Mariners, (as I understood afterwards) tooke a Barke that was a passenger of the Spaniards neere the Isle of Cuba, wherein they founde a certaine quantitie of golde and silver, which they seazed upon. And One of these having lay a while at Sea, untill ^mdFrancu their victuals beganne to faile them: which was the nf^ betrayed cause, Havana whereupon proceeded that mischiefe which hereafter I ^iardsand will declare more at large. When I saw my Barkes returned not at their wonted houre, and suspecting that which fell out in deed, I commanded my Carpenters with all diligence to make a little boat with a flat bottome, to search those Rivers for some newes of these Mariners. The boate dispatched within a day and a night, by reason that my Carpenters found planks and timber ready sawed to their hands, as commonly I caused my Sawyers to provide it, I sent men to seeke some newes of my thieves: but all was in vaine. Therefore I determined to cause two great A Saw-mill Barkes to be built, eche of which might be thirtie five, necessary here. or thirtie sixe foote long in the keele. And now the worke was very well forwarde which [III. 334.] I set my workemen about, when ambition and avarice, the mother of all mischiefe, tooke roote in the hearts of foure or five souldiers which could not away with the worke and paines taking: and which from hence forward (namely one Fourneaux, and one La Croix, and The thtrde another called Steven le Geneuois, the three principall sedition. authors of the sedition) beganne to practise with the best of my troupe, shewing them that it was a vile thing for men of honest parentage, as they were, to moyle themselves thus with abject and base worke, seeing they had the worlde offered them to make themselves all riche: which was to arme the two Barkes which were in building, and 39 French meane the coast of Carthagena and N ombre de Dios. The captaines charge at his setting forth. THE ENGLISH VOYAGES then to furnish them with good men: and to saile unto Peru, and the other Isles of the Antilles, where every Souldier might easily enrich himselfe with tenne thousand Crownes. And if their enterprise should bee misliked withall in France, they should bee alwayes able, by reason of the great wealth that they should gaine, the heate were to retire themselves into Italy, untill overpassed, and that in the meane season some warre would fall out, which would cause all this to be quite forgotten. they had to goe on stealing, This word of riches sounded so well in the eares of my Souldiers, that in fine, after they had oftentimes consulted of their affaires, they grew to the num- ber of threescore and sixe: which to colour their great they desire which caused a request to bee presented unto mee by Francis de la Caille Sergeant of my company, contayning in sum a declaration of the small store of victuals that that shippes was left to maintaine us, until the time might returne from France: for remedy whereof they thought it necessary to sende to New Spaine, Peru, and all the Isles adjoyning, which they besought mee to be content to graunt. But I made them answere, that when the Barkes were finished, I would take such good order in generall, that by meanes of the Kings marchandise, without sparing mine owne apparell, the wee would get victuals of the Countrey: seeing also that wee had ynough to serve us for foure moneths to come. For I feared greatly, that under pretence of searching victuals, they would enterprise somewhat against the King of Spaines Subjects, which in time to come might justly bee layde to my charge, considering that at our departure out of France, the Queene had charged me very expresly, to doe no kinde of wrong to the King of Spaines Subjects, nor any thing whereof he might conceive any jelousie. inhabitants of They made as though they were content with this answere. But eight dayes after, as I continued in working upon our Fort, and on my Barkes, I fell sicke. Then my seditious companions forgetting all honour and duetie, supposing that they had found good occasion to execute their rebellious enterprise, beganne to practise afresh their former designes, handling their businesse so well, during my sicknesse, that they openly vowed that they would seaze on the Corps de gard, and on the Fort, yea, and force mee also, if I their wicked desire. My woulde not consent unto Lieutenant being hereof advertised, came and tolde mee that he suspected some evill practise: and the next day in the morning I was saluted at my gate with men in complet harnesse, what time my Souldiers were about to play mee a shrewde tricke: then I sent to seeke a couple of Gentlemen whom I most trusted, which brought mee word that the Souldiers were determined to come to me to make a request unto me: But I tolde them that this was not the fashion to present a request unto a Captaine in this maner, and therefore they should send some few unto me to signifie unto mee what the sedition armed with five chiefe authours of Corslets, their Pistolles in their handes already bent, prest into my chamber, saying unto mee, that they would goe to New Spaine to seeke their adventure. Then I warned them to bee well advised what they meant to doe: but they foorthwith replyed, that they were fully advised already, and that I must graunt them this request. Seeing then (quoth I) that I am enforced to doe it, I will sende Captaine Vasseur and my Sergeant, which will make answere and give mee an accompt of every in this voyage: And to content you, I thinke it good take one man out of every chamber, that that you they may accompany Captaine Vasseur and my Sergeant. Whereupon, blaspheming they answered that they must goe thither: and that there 41 they would have. Hereupon thing that shall be done the Name of God, lacked nothing, but that I should deliver them the armour which I had in my custodie, for feare least I might use them to their disadvantage (being so yillanously abused by them:) wherein notwithstanding I would not yeeld unto them. But they tooke all by force, and caried it out of my house, yea and after they had hurt a Gentleman in my chamber, which spake against their doings, they layd hands on mee, and caried mee very sicke, as I was, prisoner into a the middest of the shippe which rode at ancker in Laudonniere River, wherein I was the space of fifteene dayes, fy*l*'{ayL's attended upon with one man onely without permission ^ownTsouldiers. f°r a ny °^ my servants to come to visite mee: from every one of whom, as also from the rest that tooke my part, they tooke away their armour. And they sent mee a passeport to signe, telling me plainely [III. 335.] after I had denied them, that if I made any difficulty, they would all come and cut my throat in the shippe. Thus was I constrained to signe their Passe-port, and them with Trenchant a forthwith to grant them certaine mariners, with Trenskilfull pilot. c h a nt an honest and skilfull Pilot. When the barks were finished, the kings they armed munition, with powder, with bullets, and artillery, asmuch as they needed, and chose one of my Sergeants for their Captain, named Bertrand Conferrent, and for their Ensigne one named La Croix. They compelled Captaine Vasseur to deliver them the flag of his ship. Then having determined to saile unto a place of the Antilles called Leauguave, belonging unto the king of Spaine, and there to goe on land on Christmasse night, the with Masse was sayd after midnight, and to murder all those that they found there, they set saile the eight of December. But because the greatest part of them by this time repented them of their enterprise, and that into mutinies among themnow they began to fall selves, when they came foorth of the mouth of the river, the two barks divided themselves ; the one kept 42 to enter into the Church while right foorth the other went is a kinde of bread made of roots, and yet made °frootsalong the coast unto Cuba, to double the Cape more to passe easily, and athwart the Isles of Lucaya: by reason whereof they mette not untill sixe weeks after their departure. During which time the barke that tooke her way along the coast, wherein one of the chiefe conspiratours named De Orange was Captaine, and Trenchant his Pilot, neere unto a place called Archaha, tooke a Brigantine laden with a certaine quantity of Cassavi, Cassavi,bread which neverthelesse is very white, and good to eat, and some little Wine, which was not without some losse of their men: for in one assault that the inhabitants of Archaha made upon them, two of their men were taken, to wit, Steven Gondeau, and one named Grand Pre, besides two more that were slaine in the place, namely Nicolas Master and Doublet: yet neverthelesse they tooke the Brigantine, wherein they put all their stuflfe that was in their owne Barke, because it was of greater burthen and better of saile then their owne. Afterward they sailed right unto the Cape of Santa Maria nere to Leauguave, where they went on land to calke and In this meane Baracouavilbray their ship which had a great leake. while they resolved to saile to Baracou, which is a vil- kge in the Isle lage of the Isle of Jamaica: where at their arrivall they ofJamakafound a Caravel of fifty or threescore tunnes burden, which they tooke without any body in it: and after they had made good cheere in the village the space of five or sixe dayes, they embarked themselves in it, leaving their second ship : then they returned to the Cape of Tiburon, The cape of where they met with a Patach, which they tooke by Tiburon. force after a long conflict. of Jamaica was taken, with great store of riches, aswell of of Jamaica golde and silver as of merchandise and wine, and many takenother things; wherewith our seditious companions not content, determined to seeke more in their caravell, and their governour of Jamaica also. After they were come to Jamaica, they missed of another caravel which did save 43 it selfe in the haven. The governour being fine and subtile, seeing himselfe brought unto the place which he desired and where he commanded, obtained so much by his faire words, that they which had taken him let him put two little boyes which were taken with him into a little cocke boat, and send them to his wife into the village, to advertise her that she should make provision of victuals to send unto him. But in stead of writing unto his wife, he spake unto the boyes secretly that with all diligence she should send the vessels that were in the havens neere that place to succour and rescue him. Which she did so cunningly, that on a morning about the breake of the day, as our seditious companions were at the havens mouth (which reacheth above two leagues up within the land) there came out of the haven a malgualire which maketh saile both forward and backward, and then two great shippes, which might be ech of them of fourescore or an hundred tunnes a piece, with good store of ordinance, and well furnished with men: at whose comming our mutinous fellowes were surprised, being not able to see them when they came, aswell because of the darknesse of the weather, as also by reason of the length of the haven, considering also they mistrusted nothing. True it is that five or six & twenty that were in the brigantine discovered these ships when they were nere them, which seeing themselves pressed for want of leasure to weigh their anker, cut their cable, and the trumpeter which was in it advertised the rest: whereupon the Spanyards seeing themselves descried, discharged a volley of canon shot against the French men, which they followed by the space of three leagues, and recovered their own ships: the brigantine which escaped away, passed in the sight of the Cape des Aigrettes, and the Cape of S. Anthony situate in the Isle of Cuba, & from thence passed within the sight of Havana; but Trenchant their pilot, and the trumpeter, and certaine other mariners of this brigantine, which were led away by force in this voyage (as elswhere we have declared) desired nothing 44 Malgualire a kinde ofvessell that will saile forward and backward. The Cape of S. Antony in Cuba. more then to returne to me: wherefore these men agreed together (if peradventure the wind served them well) to passe the chanell of Bahama, while their seditious com- The chanell of panions were asleepe: which they did accomplish with Bahama. such good successe, that in the morning toward the breake £111. 336.] of the day about the five and twentieth of March they arrived upon the coast of Florida: where knowing the fault which they had committed, in a kinde of mockery they counterfaited the Judges: but they played not this pranke untill they had tippled well of the Wine which remained yet in their prize. One counterfeited the Judge, another presented my person: one other after he had heard the matter pleaded, concluded thus: Make you your causes as good as it pleaseth you, but if when you come to the fort Caroline the Captaine cause you not to be hanged, I will never take him for an honest man: others thought that my choler being passed, I would easily forget this matter. Their saile was no sooner descried upon our coast, but the king of the place named Patica, dwelling eight leagues distant from our fort, and King Patka. being one of our good friends, sent an Indian to advertise me that he had descried a shippe upon the coast, and that he thought it was one of our nation. Hereupon the The returne of brigantine oppressed with famine, came to an anker at the part ofLaumouth of the river of May, when at the first blush we donnieres sedi- thought they had beene shippes come from France; which nous souldters' gave us occasion of great joy: but after I had caused her to be better viewed, I was advertised that they were our seditious companions that were returned. Therefore I sent them word by Captaine Vasseur and my Sergeant, that they should bring up their brigantine before the fortresse: which they promised to doe. Now there was not above two leagues distance from the mouth of the river where they cast anker unto the fortresse. The next day I sent the same Captaine and Sergeant with thirty souldiers, because I saw they much delayed their comming. Then they brought them: and because certaine of them had sworne at their departure, that they would never come to bring againe within the fort, I was well pleased they should keepe their oth. For this purpose I waited for them at the rivers mouth, where I made my barks to be built, and commanded my Sergeant the foure chiefe authours of the mutiny on shore; whom I caused immediatly to be put in fetters: for my meaning was not to punish the rest, considering that they were suborned, and because my councell expresly assembled for this purpose had concluded that these foure only should die, to serve for an example to the rest. In the same place I made an Oration unto them in this maner. Laudonnieres A TY friends, you know the cause why our king sent oration to his ]\JL us unto this countrey; you know that he is our naturall Prince, whom we are bound to obey according to the commandement of God, in such sort, that we ought neither to spare our goods nor lives to do those things that concerne his service: ye know, or at least you cannot be ignorant, that besides this general and naturall obligation, you have this also joyned thereunto, that in receiving of him reasonable pay and wages, you are bound to follow those whom he hath established over you to be your governours, and to command you in his name, having for this purpose given him an oth of fidelitie, which you cannot by any meanes revoke for any faire apparance which you have to doe the contrary: for this is reason, that seeing you live upon his charges on this condition, (this is reason I say) that you should be faithfull unto him. Notwithstanding you have had more regard unto your unbridled affections then unto vertue, which invited you to the observance of your oth, in such sort that being become contemners of all honesty, you have passed your bonds, and thought that all things were lawfull for you. Whereupon it is fallen out, that while you thought to escape the justice of men, you could not avoid the judgement of God, which as a thing by no meanes to be avoided hath led you, and in spight of you hath made you to arrive in this place, to make you confesse