very good fortune, in that I found Don Luis de Castilia, The port of a nd Augustine Ghenero in the port of Colima : for the Cohma. Galiot of the Adelantado came upon mee, which was there with the rest of his fleet, and commanded me to strike sayle, which seeming a strange thing unto me, and not understanding in what state things were in Nueva Espanna, I went about to defend my selfe, and not to doe it. In the meane while came Don Luis de Castilia in a boate and conferred with mee, and I lay at anchor on the other side of the haven where the saide fleete road, and I gave unto him this relation (and to avoyd striffe I determined to sayle away by night) which relation I caryed about me briefly written; for I alwayes had a purpose to send the same, as soone as I should touch upon Nueva Espanna, to advertize your Lordship of my proceedings. An extract of a Spanish letter written from Pueblo de los Angeles in Nueva Espanna in October 1597, touching the discoverie of the rich Isles of California, being distant eight dayes sayling from the maine. have seene a letter written the eight of October 1597, out of a towne called Pueblo de los Angeles situate eighteene leagues from Mexico, making mention of the Ilands of California situate two or three hundreth leagues from the maine land of Nueva Espanna, in Mar del Sur: as that thither have bene sent before that time some people to conquer them: which with losse of some twentie men were forced backe. After that they had wel visited and found those Islands or countreys to be very rich of gold and silver mynes, and of very fayre Orientall pearles, which were caught in good quantitie upon one fathome and an halfe passing in beautie the pearles of the Island Margarita: the report thereof caused the Viceroy of Mexico to send a citizen of Mexico with two hundreth men to conquer the same. Therein also was affirmed that within eight dayes they could sayle thither from the mayne. T he course which Sir Francis Drake held from [Hi. 440.] to the haven of Guatulco in the South sea on the the backe side of Nueva Espanna, North-west of California as far as fourtie three degrees : and his returne back along the said Coast to thirtie eight degrees : where finding a faire and goodly haven, he landed, and staying there many weekes, and discovering many excellent the countrey and great shewe of rich minerall matter, and the dominion of the countrey being offered by the Lord of the same, hee tooke possession thereof in the behalfe of her Majestie, and named it Nova Albion. things in the Isle of Ee kept our course from Cano (which lyeth in eight degrees of Northerly latitude, and within two leagues of the maine of Nicaragua, where wee calked and trimmed our ship) along the coast of Nueva Espanna, untill we came to the Haven and Towne of Guatulco, which (as we were informed) had but seventeene Spaniards dwelling in it, and we found it to stand in fifteene degrees and fiftie minutes. Assoone as we were entred this Haven we landed, and went presently to the towne, and to the Towne house, where we found a Judge sitting in judgement, he being associate with three other officers, upon three Negroes that had conspired the burning of the Towne : both which Judges, and prisoners we tooke, and brought them a shippeboord, and caused the chiefe Judge to write his letter to the Towne, to command all the Townesmen to avoid, that we might safely water there.