he dyeth. Where he continueth so quietly without being bound, as though hee did something, wherein he tooke great pleasure. And they say that hee is a Saint, and doe worshippe him for that yeere, and sing prayses, and Hymnes unto him, and afterward set up his head with the rest in order within those windowes. Also they sacrifice their prisoners, whom they burne in another deeper ditch, and not with the foresayde ceremonies. The Spanyards which are in Xalisco write, that having good assistance, they hope that those people will become Christians. The Countrey is very good and fruitfull, and hath great store of good and wholesome waters. A Letter of Francis Vazquez de Coronado, Governour of Nueva Galicia, lord Don Antonio de Mendo9a, Viceroy of Nueva Espanna. Dated in Saint Michael of Culiacan the 8. of March, 1539. the to Of the hard passage from Saint Michael of Culiacan to Topira. The description of that Province, and of another neere unto the same, very rich in gold and precious stones. The number of the people which Vazquez caried with him in his journey thither ; and how greatly Frier Marcus of Ni?a is honoured by the Indians of Petatlan. Y the helpe of God I meane to set forward from this City of S. Michael of Culiacan toward Topira the 10. of April: neither can I any sooner set forward, because the powder and match which your Lordship sendeth mee, cannot be brought thither before that time, and I thinke it be now in Compostella. Besides this, I am to passe many leagues over mightie high mountaines, which reach up to the skyes, and over a River, which at this present is so bigge and swolne, that it can in no place be waded over. And if I depart at the time aforesayde, they say wee may wade over it. They tolde mee that from hence to Topira was not above 50. leagues ; and I have learned since that it is above foure score leagues. I doe not remember that I have written to your Lordshippe the information which I have of Topira : and though I had written thereof unto Topira. you, yet because that since that time I have learned something more, I thinke it meete to signifie the same unto your Lordship in these my letters. It may please your honour therefore to understand, that they tell mee, that Topira is a very populous Province, lying betweene two rivers, and that there are above 50. inhabited townes therein. And that beyond the same there is another Another Countrey greater then it, the name whereof the Indians &eatfr 1 J 11 i -i • c • 1 province. 1 T their necks, and are apparelled with paynted ml^Ie could not tell mee, wherein there is great store or victuals of Maiz, French peason, Axi or Pepper, Melons, and Gourds, and great store of Hennes of the countrey. The people weare on their bodies golde, Emeralds, and other precious stones, and are served commonly in golde and silver, wherewith they cover their houses : and the chiefe men weare great chaines of golde well wrought, P11* 364-J about garments, and have store of wilde kine ; and they say the Pintados they enter not into their countrey, because themselves mentioned by have no great store of people : those Indians being Frier Marco many in number, and very valiant. That which here / T I say, 1 learned by two other relations or Indians dwelling neere unto them. I meane to set forward at the time before mentioned, and I carrie with me 150. horsemen, and twelve spare horses, and 200. footmen, crossebowmen, and gunners. I take also with mee live hogs, sheepe, and all such things as I can get for money : assure your Lordship that I meane not to returne to Mexico, until I be able to informe your honour more perfectly, what the state of that place is : and if I find ought that we may doe good in, I will stay there, untill I have advertised your Lordship, that you may command what you will have done : and if it fall out so unluckily, 119 his z. Lnap. iZrl\ r T 11 J- 1 • that there be nothing of importance, I will seeke to discover ioo. leagues farther, wherein (I hope in God) there will be something found in which your Lordship may imploy all these gentlemen, and those which shall come hither hereafter. I thinke I cannot chuse but stay there : and the waters, the seasons, and disposition of the countrey, and other accidents wil direct mee what is best to be done. Frier Marco de Ni$a entred a good way into the country, accompanied with Stephan Dorantez, the 7. of February last past: when I departed from them, I left them with above 100. Indians of Petatlan, and from the time of their comming thither they greatly honoured the father, shewing him all the courtesies they could possibly. I cannot send you, nor describe unto you his entrance among them better then I have done in all my relations which I wrote in my letters from Compostella, and I signified unto you all things to the full from the citie of S. Michael : and though there be but the tenth part of those things, it is a great matter. Herewithall I have sent your Lordship a Letter, which I received from the said father : the Indians tell me, that all the people of the countrey doe greatly reverence him : and I beleeve he in that sort. He may travel many leagues farther saith, that if he finde any good countrey, he will write to me thereof: I will not goe thither without informing your Lordship of my journey. I hope in God, that by one way or other wee shall discover some good thing.