The foresayd Francis Lopez de Gomara in his generall historie of the West Indies, Chap. 215. writeth in maner following of certaine great and strange beasts never seene nor heard of in our knowen world of Asia, Europe, and Africa : which somewhat resembling our oxen, having high bunches on their backes like those on the backes of Camels, are therefore called by him Vacas corcobados, that is to say, Crooke-backed oxen, being very deformed & terrible in shewe, and fierce by nature : which notwithstanding for foode, apparell, and other necessarie uses, are most serviceable and beneficiall to the inhabitants of those countreys. He reported also in the same chapter of certaine strange sheepe as bigge as horses, and of dogs which use to carie burthens of 50. pound weight upon their backes. A LI the way betweene Cicuic and Quivira is a most plaine soyle, without trees and stones, and hath but These are ^f^J** fewe and small townes. The men clothe and shooe them- selves with lether ; and the women which are esteemed Captain Frofor their long lockes, cover their heads and secrets with bisher brought the same. They have no bread of any kinde of graine, 'tnt0 England as they say: which I account a very great matter. f™m M.eta Their chiefest foode is flesh, and that oftentimes they nc0&ma' eate rawe, either of custome or for lacke of wood. They eate the fatte as they take it out of the Oxe, and drinke the blood hotte, and die not therewithall, though the ancient writers say that it killeth, as Empedocles and others affirmed, they drinke it also colde dissolved in water. They seeth not the flesh for lacke of pots, but rost it, or to say more properly, warme it at a fire of Oxe-dung : when they eate, they chawe their meate but little, and raven up much, and holding the flesh with their teeth, they cut it with rasors of stone, which seemeth to be great bestialitie : but such is their maner of living and fashion. They goe together in companies, and moove from one place to TkedescHp- These Oxen are of the bignesse and colour of our Hn£t°en it seemeth another, as the wilde Moores of Barbarie called Alarbes following the seasons and the pasture after their doe, Oxen. Bulles> but theIr ho r n es are not so great- T h e 7 have. a g r e at bunch Up On their fore shoulders, and more haire on their fore part then on their hinder part: and it is like wooll. They have as it were an horse-mane upon their backe bone, and much haire and very long from the knees downeward. They have great tuffes of haire that hanging downe their foreheads, and they have beardes, because of the great store of haire hanging downe at their chinnes and throates. The males have very long tailes, and a great knobbe or flocke at the end : so that in some respect they resemble the Lion, and in some other the Camell. They push with their homes, they runne, they overtake and kill an horse when they are in their rage and anger. Finally, it is a foule and fierce beast of countenance and forme of bodie. The horses fledde from them, either because of their deformed shape, or else because they had never seene them. Their masters have no they eat, they other riches nor substance: of them drinke, they apparel, they shooe themselves: and of their hides they make many things, as houses, shooes, apparell and ropes : of their bones they make bodkins : of their sinewes and haire, threed : of their homes, mawes, and bladders, vessels : of their dung, fire : and of their calves-skinnes, budgets, wherein they drawe and keepe water. To bee short, they make so many things of them as they have neede of, or as many as suffice them in the use of this life. Sheepe as Ug as horses. There are also in this countrey other beastes as big as h o r s e S) which because they have homes and fine wool, they cal them sheepe, and they say that every home of theirs weigheth is fiftie pound weight. . _ Mizhtie dogs 1 • 1 carrying 50. There are also great dogs which will fight with a bull, pound weight and will carrie fiftie pound weight in sackes when they r^-i • 1 -, r -n & 1 1 r , n goe on hunting, or when they remoove from place to place with their flockes and heards. El Viaje que Hizo Antonio de Espejo en el [HI- 383] en tierra todas anno de ochenta y tres : el qual con sus comque una panneros descubrieron hallaron quinze Provincias llenas de pueblos, y de casas de quatro y cinco altos, a quien pusieron por nombre El Nuevo Mexico, por parecerse en muchas cosas al viejo. Esta a la parte del norte, y se cree que por ella, y por poblado, se puede venir del hasta Labrador. que Hainan llegar a tierra la Del Nuevo Mexico, y de su descubrimiento, y lo que del se sabe. A dixe en el titulo del libro, que el anno Nuevo la lo hare con de mil y quinientos y ochenta y tres, se Mexico. avian descubierto quinze Provincias, aquien los inventores Uamaron El nuevo tierra firme de Nueva Mexico en Espanna, y prometi de dar noticia del la descubrimiento, como mayor brevedad que sea possible, porque si uviera de poner diffusamente todo lo que vieron y supieron, fuera menester hazer dello nueva historia. La substancia dello es, que el anno de mil y quinientos y ochenta y uno, teniendo noticia un Religioso de la Orden de sant Francisco, que se morava en el valle de sant Bartholome, por relation Ruyz' de ciertos Indios. Conchos que se comunicavan con otros sus convezinos Uamados Passaguates : que hazia tierra) la parte del Norte (caminando siempre por avia ciertas poblaciones grandes, y nunca sabidas de nuestros Espannoles, ni descubiertas, con zelo de caridad, y de salvacion de las almas, pidio licencia al 169