this towne the foresaid captaine Antony de Espejo made most certaine relation of all that is aforesaid, which relation presently hee sent unto the Conde of Corunna Vizroy of Nueva Espanna, who sent the same to his Majestie, & to the Lords of his royal counsel of the Indies, to the end they might take such order as they thought best, which they have already performed with great care and circumspection. Almighty God vouchsafe his assistance in this busines, that such numbers of soules redeemed by his blood may not utterly perish, of whose good capacitie, wherein they exceed those of Mexico and Peru (as we be given to understand by those that have delt with them) we may boldly presume that they will easily embrace the Gospel, and abandon such idolatrie as now the most of them doe live in : which Almightie God graunt for his honour and glory, and for the increase of the holy Catholique faith. A letter of Bartholomew Cano from Mexico the 30. of May 1590. to Francis Hernandes of Sivil, concerning the speedy building of two strong Forts in S. John de Ullua, and in Vera Cruz, as also touching a notable new and rich discovery of Cibola or New Mexico 400. leagues Northwest of Mexico. T may please you Sir, to be advertised that I have received your letters, whereby I understand that our ship with the treasure is safely arrived, God be praised therefore. The frigate arrived here in safetie which brought the letters of Advise from the King to the Viceroy. She arrived in S. John de Ullua the 29. of May, & departed from S. Lucar in Spaine the 6. of April. By which his Majestie writeth unto the Viceroy, what time the Fleete shall depart from hence, and what course they shall take, not as they had wont for to do ; by reason that there are great store of men of war abroad at the sea, I pray God which meane to encounter with the Fleete. sende them well to Spaine: for here wee were troubled very sore with men of warre on this coast. His Majestie hath sent expresse commandement unto the Marques of The marques Villa Manrique his cosen, Viceroy of Nova Hispania, that immediatly upon sight of his letters he shal command to be builded in S. John de Ullua, & in Vera Cruz two strong Forts for the defence of these countries, of his Majesties charges: And that there shalbe garisons in both the Forts for the defence of the ships which ride there, and for the strength of the countrey. °{/^l^ There are departed out of Mexico and other townes hereabout by the commaundement of the Viceroy 500. souldiers Spaniards, under the conduct of Rodorigo del Rio the governour of Nueva Biscaia which are gone to [HI. 397.] win a great City called Cibola, which is 400. leagues 5°°- s^am" beyond Mexico to the Northwest, and standeth up in *o'£**fo It is by report a very great citie, as great citie of the maine land. bigge as Mexico, and a very rich countrey both of golde Cibola which Mines and silver Mines : and the King of the countrey u 4°°is a mighty King, and he will not become subject to Mexico North his Majestie. There were certaine Spaniards sent to westward. that king from the Viceroy in an ambassage: It is thought they are slaine, for we can here no newes of them. that The other newes that I can certifie you of at this instant is, that there is a Judge of the city of Guadalajara called don Nunno de villa Inscensia lately maried. Also the kings Atturney of Guadalajara maried his daughter of 8. yeres old with a boy of 12. yeres old. But the Viceroy saith that he hath a warrant from his Majestie, that if any Judge whatsoever dwelling in that kingdome of Guadalajara should mary any sonne in that jurisdiction, that then the said Viceroy is to deprive him of his office. And therfore he went about to deprive the Judge & the kings Attourney of their offices. Whereupon the people of that province would a province of Nova Hispania. A.D. 1590. THE ENGLISH VOYAGES not thereunto consent, nor suffer them to be dismissed of their offices, nor to be arrested, nor caried prisoners to Mexico. When the viceroy had intelligence thereof, & that the Countrey did resist his commandement, and would not suffer them to be apprehended, he sent certaine Captaines with souldiers to goe and apprehend the Judge, the kings Attourney, and as many as did take their parts. So the citizens of Guadalajara withstood the viceroies forces, & put themselves in defence; and are up in armes against the viceroy : yet they do not rebel against the king, but say: God save king Philip, and wil submit themselves to his Majestie, but not to the viceroy. So that all the kingdome of Guadalajara is up in armes, and are all in a mutinie against us of Mexico. I beseech Almighty God to remedy it, and that it may be qualified in time: or else all Nova Spania wil be utterly spoiled. I write this thing, because it is publiquely knowen in all places. And thus I rest, from Mexico the 30. of May 1590. Bartholomew Cano. The first and second discovery of the gulfe of California, and of the Sea-coast on the Northwest or back side of America, lying to the West of New Mexico, Cibola and Quivira, together with Sir Francis Drakes landing and taking possession upon Nova Albion in the behalfe of the Crowne of England, and the notable voyage of Francis Gaule; Wherein amongst many other memorable matters is set downe the huge bredth of the Ocean sea from China and Japan to the Northwest parts of America, in the 38. and 40. degrees. A relation of the discovery, which in the Name of God the Fleete of the right noble Fernando Cortez Marques of the Vally, made with three