A voyage made by M. Roger Bodenham to S. [111.455.] John de Ullua in the bay of Mexico, in the yeere 1564. Roger Bodenham having a long time lived in the city of Sivil in Spaine, being there married, and by occasion thereof using trade and traffique to the parts of Barbary, grew at length to great losse and hinderance by that new trade begun by d new trade ^^^ me in the city of Fez: whereupon being c^ofFex returned into Spaine, I began to call my wits about mee, ty Roger and to consider with my selfe by what meanes I might Bodenham. recover and renew my state; and in conclusion, by the ayde of my friends, I procured a ship called The Barke Fox, perteining to London, of the burden of eight or nine score tunnes; and with the same I made a voyage to the West India, having obteined good favour with the Spanish merchants, by reason of my long abode, and marriage in the countrey. My voyage was in the company of the Generall Don Pedro Melendes for Nova Hispania: who being himselfe appointed Generall for Terra Firma and Peru, made his sonne Generall for New Spaine, although Pedro Melendes himselfe was the principal! man and directer in both fleets. We all departed from Cadiz together the last day of May in the yere 1564: and I with my ship being under the conduct of the sonne of Don Pedro aforesayd, arrived with him in Nova Hispania, where immediatly I tooke order for the discharge of my merchandise at the port of Vera Cruz, otherwise called Villa Rica, to be transported thence to the city of Mexico, which is sixty and odde leagues distant from the sayd port of Villa Rica. In the way are many good townes, as namely, Pueblo de los Angeles, and another called Tlaxcalan. The city of Mexico hath three great causeyes to bring men to it, compassed with a lake, so that it needeth no walles, It is a city plentifull being so defended by the water. things, having many faire houses, of all necessary churches, and monasteries. I having continued in the countrey the space of nine moneths, returned againe for Spaine with the Spanish fleet, and delivered the merchandise and silver which I had in the ship into the Contractation house, and there received my fraight, which amounted outwards and homewards to the value of 13000 ducats and more. I observed many things in the time of my abode in Nova Hispania, aswell touching the the commodities of the countrey as the maners of people both Spanyards and Indians : but because the Spanish histories are full of those observations, I omit them, and referre the readers to the same : onely this \ say, that the commodity of Cochinilla groweth in The place lillk^owfth & r e a t e st abundance about the towne of Pueblo de los and the trice Angeles, and is not there woorth above forty pence the thereof. pound. A notable discourse of M. John Chilton, touching the people, maners, mines, cities, riches, forces, and other memorable things of N ew Spaine, and other provinces in the West Indies, seene and noted by himselfe in the time of his travels, continued in those parts, the space of seventeene or eighteene yeeres. N the yeere of our Lord 1561, in the moneth of July, I John Chilton went out of this city of London into Spaine, where I remained for the space of seven thence I sailed into yeres, & Nova Hispania, and so travelled there, and by the South Sea, unto Peru, the space of seventeene or eighteene yeeres : and after that time expired, I returned into Spaine, and so in the yere 1586 in the moneth of July, I arrived at the foresayd city of London : where perusing the notes which I had 360