A relation of the commodities of Nova Hispania, and the maners of the inhabitants, written by Henry Hawks merchant, which lived five yeeres in the sayd countrey, and drew the same at the request of M. Richard Hakluyt Esquire of Eiton in the county of Hereford, 1572, S. John de Ullua. Aint John de Ullua is an Island not high above the water, where as now the Spanyards upon M. John Hawkins being there, are in making a strong fort. In this place all the ships that come out of Spaine with goods for these parts, do unlade: for they have none other port so good as this is. The comming into this place hath three chanels, and the best of all is the Northermost, which goeth by the maine land: and on every side of the chanels there are many small rocks as big as a small barrell: they wil make men stand in doubt of them, but there is no feare of them. There is another Island there by, called The Island of sacrifices, whereas the Spanyards did in times past unlade their Spirits. goods: and for that, they say, there are upon it spirits or devils, it is not frequented as it hath bene. In these places the North wind hath so great dominion, that oftentimes it destroyeth many ships and barks. This place is given to great sicknesse. These Islands stand in 18 degrees and a halfe, and about the same is great plenty of fish. Five leagues from S. John de Ullua is a faire river; it lieth Northwest from the port, and goeth to a little Vera Cruz, towne of the Spanyards called Vera Cruz, and with small vessels or barks, which they call frigats, they cary all their merchandize which commeth out of Spaine, to the said towne: and in like maner bring all the gold, silver, cochinilla, hides, and all other things that the shippes cary into Spaine unto them. And the goods being in Vera Cruz, they cary them to Mexico, and to Pueblo de los Angeles, Sacatecas, and Saint Martin, and divers other places so farre within the countrey, that some of them are 700 miles off, and some more, and some lesse, all upon horses, mules, and in waines drawen with oxen, and in carres drawen with mules. In this towne of Vera Cruz within these twenty yeres, when women were brought to bed, the children new borne incontinently died; which is not so now in these dayes, God be thanked. This towne is inclined to many kinde of diseases, by reason of the great heat, and a certeine gnat or flie which they call a musquito, which biteth both men and women Musquito. in their sleepe; and assoone as they are bitten, incontinently the flesh swelleth as though they had bene bitten with some venimous worme. And this musquito or gnat doth most follow such as are newly come into the countrey. Many there are that die of this annoyance. This towne is situated upon the river aforesayd, and compassed with woods of divers maners and sorts, and many fruits, as orenges and limons, guiaves, and divers others, and birds in them, popinjayes both small Popinjays. and great, and some of them as big as a raven, and their tailes as long as the taile of a fezant. There are also many other kinde of birds of purple colour, and small munkeys, marvellous proper. Monkeys. This hote or sicke countrey continueth five and forty miles towards the city of Mexico; and the five and forty miles being passed, then there is a temperate countrey, and full of tillage: but they water all their corne with rivers which they turne in upon it. And they gather their Wheat twise a yere. And water the ground where as their corne is sowen, the m a yeere* country is so hote it would burne all. if they should not Wheat twise Before you come to Mexico, there is a great towne called Tlaxcalla, which hath in it above 16000 house- Tlaxcallaa holds. All the inhabitants thereof are free by the kings free dt3of Spaine: for these were the occasion that Mexico was woonne in so short time, and with so little losse of [III. 463.] men. Wherefore they are all gentlemen, and pay no In this towne is all the cochinilla tribute to the king. growing. Mexico. Mexico then fifty is a great city; it hath more thousand households, whereof there are not past five or sixe thousand houses of Spanyards: all the other are the people of the countrey, which live under the Spanyards lawes. There are in this city stately buildings, and many monasteries of friers and nunnes, which the Spanyards have made. And the building of the Indians is somewhat beautifull outwardly, and within full of small chambers, with very small windowes, which is not so the Spanyards. This city comly as the building of standeth in the midst of a great lake, and the water goeth thorow all or the most part of the streets, and there come small boats, which they call canoas, and in them they bring all things necessary, as wood, and coales, and grasse for their horses, stones and lime to build, and corne. This city is subject to many earthquakes, which oftentimes cast downe houses, and kil people. This city is very well provided of water to drinke, and with all maner of victuals, as fruits, flesh and fish, bread, hennes and capons, Guiny cocks and hennes, and all other fowle* There are in this city every weeke three Faires or Markets, which are frequented with many people, aswell Spanyards as the people of the countrey. There are in these Faires or Markets all maner of things that may the be invented, to sell, and in especiall, things of countrey. The one of these Faires is upon the Munday, which is called S. Hypolitos faire, and S. James his faire is upon the Thursday, and upon Saturday is S. Johns faire. In this city is alwayes the kings governour or viceroy, and there are kept the Termes and Parliaments. And although there be other places of justice, yet this is above all: so that all men may appeale unto this place, and may not appeale from this city, but onely into Spaine before the king: and it must be for a certeine summe: and if it be under that summe, then there is no appellation from them. Many rivers fall into this lake which the city standeth in: but there was never any place found whither it goeth out. The Indians know a way to drowne the city, and -A wayt0 within these three yeeres they would have practised the d^wnfc same: but they which should have bene the doers of it were hanged: and ever since the city hath bene well watched both day and night, for feare least at some time they might be deceived: for the Indians love not the Spanyards. Round about the towne there are very many gardens and orchards of the fruits of the countrey, marvellous faire, where the people have great recreation. The men of this city are marvellous vicious; and in like maner the women are dishonest of their bodies, more then they are in other cities or townes in this countrey. There are neere about this city of Mexico many rivers Crocodiles. and standing waters which have in them a monstrous kinde of fish, which is marvellous ravening, and a great devourer of men and cattell. He is woont to sleepe upon the drie land many times, and if there come in the meane time any man or beast and wake or disquiet him, he speedeth well if he get from him. He is like unto a serpent, saving that he doth not flie, neither hath he wings. There is West out of Mexico a port towne which Navigation is on the South sea, called Puerto de Acapulco, where as there are shippes which they have ordinarily for the navigation of China, which they have newly found. This port is threescore leagues from Mexico. to p^a{r There is another port towne which is called Culiacan, on the South sea, which lieth West and by North out of Mexico, and is 200 leagues from the same: and there the Spanyards made two ships to goe seeke the streight The Northox gulfe, which, as they say, is betweene the Newfound- west-streight- land and Groenland; and they call it the Englishmens The more Northward, the richer silver mines. Painting earth. Golde mines. [in. 464.] Mesquiquez, Seven cities by witchcraft not found of the seekers. streight: which as yet was never fully found. They say, that streight lieth not farre from the maine land of China, which the Spanyards account to be marvellous rich. Toward the North from Mexico there are great store of silver mines. There is greater quantitie of silver found in these mines toward the North, then there is any other parts: and as the most men of experience sayde alwayes, they finde the richer mines the more Northerly. These mines are commonly upon great hilles and stony ground, marvellous hard to be laboured and wrought. Out of some of the mines the Indians finde a certeine kinde of earth of divers colours, wherewith they paint themselves in times of their dances, and other pastimes which they use. In this countrey of Nova Hispania there are also mines of golde, although the golde be commonly found in rivers, or very neere unto rivers. And nowe in these dayes there is not so much golde found as there hath bene heretofore. There are many great rivers, and great store of fish in them, not like unto our kindes of fish. And there are marvellous great woods, and as faire trees as may be seene, of divers sorts, and especially firre trees, that may mast any shippe that goeth upon the sea, okes and pineapples, and another tree which they call Mesquiquez: it beareth a fruit like unto a peascod, marvellous sweet, which the wilde people gather, and keepe it all the yere, and eat it in stead of bread. The Spanyards have notice of seven cities which old men of the Indians shew them should lie towards the Northwest from Mexico. They have used and use dayly much diligence in seeking of them, but they cannot find any one of them. They say that the witchcraft of the Indians is such, that when they come by these townes they cast a mist upon them, so that they cannot see them. They have understanding of another city which they PedroMorales call Copalla: and in like maner, at my beeing in the ^ Nt.€olas countrey, they have used much labour and diligence in wr^etke like the seeking of it: they have found the lake on which of Copalla, it should stand, and a canoa, the head whereof was wrought with copper curiously, and could not finde nor see any man nor the towne which to their understanding should stand on the same water, or very neere the same. There is a great number of beasts or kine in the The strange countrey of Cibola, which were never brought thither °^f by the Spanyards, but breed naturally in the countrey. A oa' They are like unto our oxen, saving that they have long haire they have upon their shoulders a bunch like a camell, which is higher then the rest of their body. They are marvellous wild and swift in running. They call them the beasts or kine of Cibola. like a lion, and short homes, and now of late, without any people in the same, goodly doned% bnildings, faire chimneys, windowes made of stone & timber excellently wrought, faire welles with wheeles to draw their water, and a place where they had buried their dead people, with many faire stones upon the graves. And the captaine would not suffer his souldiers to breake up any part of these graves, saying, he would come another time to do it. This Cibola is a city which the Spanyards found Cibola abanThey asked certeine people which they met, whither they made the people of this city were gone: and answere, they were gone downe a river, which was A g™at river there by, very great, and which was more for their commodity. there had builded a city nere CibokThis captaine lacking things necessary for himselfe and his men, was faine to returne backe againe, without finding any treasure according to his expectation: neither found they but fewe people, although they found beaten wayes, which had beene much haunted and frequented. The captaine at his comming backe againe, had a great gealed to salt. Dogs of India described. Cacao a fruit currant as money. Fruits. Hot springs. THE ENGLISH VOYAGES checke of the governour, because he had not gone forwards, and seene the end of that river. They have in the countrey, farre from the sea side, standing waters, which are salt: and in the moneths of April and May the water of them congealeth into salt, which salt is all taken for the kings use and profit. Their dogs are all crooked backt, as many as are of the countrey breed, and cannot run fast: their faces are like the face of a pig or an hog, with sharpe noses. In certeine provinces which are called Guatimala, & Soconusco, there is growing great store of cacao, which is a berry like unto an almond: it is the best merchandize that is in all the Indies. The Indians make drinke of it, and in like maner meat to eat. It goeth currantly for money in any market or faire, and may buy any flesh, fish, bread or cheese, or other things. There are many kinde of fruits of the countrey, which are very good, as plantans, sapotes, guiaves, pinas, aluacatas, tunas, mamios, limons, orenges, walnuts very small and hard, with little meat in them, grapes which the Spanyards brought into the countrey, and also wilde grapes, which are of the countrey, and are very small, quinses, peaches, figs, and but few apples, and very small, and no peares : but there are melons and calaba£as or gourds. There is much hony, both of bees and also of a kind of tree which they call magueiz. This hony of magueiz is not so sweet as the other hony is, but it is better to be eaten only with bread, then the other is ; and the tree serveth for many things, as the leaves make threed to sowe any kinde of bags, and are good to cover and thatch houses, and for divers other things. They have in divers places of the countrey many hote springs of water : as above all other, I have seene one in the province of Mechuacan. In a plaine field without any mountaine, there is a spring which hath much water, & it is so hot, that if a whole quarter of beefe be cast into it, within on halfe houre it will be as well sodden as it will I have seene halfe a sheepe be over a fire in halfe a day. cast in, and immediatly it hath bene sodden, and I have eaten part of it. There are many hares, and some conies. There are Ham and no partridges, but abundance of quailes. conies' They have great store of fish in the South sea, and Seajish, many oisters, and very great. The people do open the oisters, and take out the meat of them, and dry it as they do any other kinde of fish, and keepe them all the yeere : and when the times serve, they send them abroad into the countrey to sell, as all other fish. They have no salmon, nor trowt, nor pele, nor carpe, tench, nor pike in all the countrey. There are in the countrey mighty high mountaines, and [HI- 4^5-] . hilles, and snow upon them : they commonly burne ; and BurmnS , twise every day they cast out much smoke and ashes at certeine open places, which are in the tops of them. 1 1 1 1 J j mountaines, There is among the wilde people much manna. I have Manna. gathered of the same, and have eaten it, and it is good : for the Apothecaries send their servants at certeine times, to gather of the same for purgations, and other uses. There are in the mountaines many wilde hogs, which Wilde hogs, all men may kill, and lions and tygres ; which tygres do °nSy and much harme to men that travell in the wildernesse. %&res* In this countrey, not long since, there were two poore men that found a marvellous rich mine ; and when these men went to make a register of the same (according to the law and custome) before the kings officers, they thought this mine not meet for such men as they were : and violently tooke the sayd mine for the king; Mines disand gave no part thereof unto the two poore men. S^J^' ^ And within certaine dayes the kings officers resorted thither to labor in the mine, & they found two great mighty hilles were come together; so they found no place to worke in. And in the time while I was among them, which was five yerees, there was a poore shep- Theauthmr heard, who keeping his sheepe, happened to finde a well of quicke-silver ; and he went in like maner to manifest panfMm the same, as the custome and maner i s; the kings 385 ^"J^™ 2 B officers dealt in like order as they did with the two poore men that found the rich mine, taking it quite from the shepheard : but when they went to fetch home the quicke-silver, or part thereof, they could never finde it againe. So these things have bene declared unto the king, who hath given commandement, that nothing being found in the fields, as mines, and such like, shall be taken away from any man. And many other things have bene done in this countrey, which men might count for great marvels. There is great abundance of sugar here, & they make divers conserves, & very good, and send them into Peru, where as they sell them marvellous well, because they make none in those parts. The people of the countrey are of a good stature, tawny coloured, broad faced, flat nosed, and given much to drinke both wine of Spaine and also a certeine kind of wine which they make with hony of Magueiz, and roots, and other things which they use to put into the same. They call the same wine Pulco. They are soone drunke, and given to much beastlinesse, and In their drunkennesse they use void of all goodnesse. their mothers and and commit Sodomy; and with daughters they have their pleasures and pastimes. Whereupon they are defended from the drinking of wines, upon paines of money, aswell he that selleth the wines as the Indian that drinketh the same. And if this commandement were not, all the wine in Spaine and in France were not sufficient for the West Indies onely. They are of much simplicity, and great cowards, voide of all valour, and are great witches. They use divers times to talke with the divell, to whom they do certeine sacrifices and oblations: many times they have bene taken with the same, and I have seene them most cruelly punished for that offence. The people are given to learne all maner of occupations and sciences, which for the most part they learned since the comming of the Spanyards: I say all maner of 386 Sugar serves. conDescription of the Indians person and maners. The people of Nueva Espanna great arts. They are very artificiall in making of images with feathers, or the proportion or figure of any man, in all kind of maner as he is. The finenesse and excellency of this is woonderfull, that a barbarous people as they are, should give themselves to so fine an arte as this is. They are goldsmiths, blackesmiths, and coppersmiths, carpenters, masons, shoomakers, tailors, sadlers, imbroderers, and of all other kind of sciences: and they will do worke so good cheape, that poore yoong men that goe out of Spaine to get their living, are not set on worke: which is the occasion there are many idle people in the countrey. For the Indian will live all the weeke with lesse then one groat; which the Spanyard cannot do, nor any man els. They say, that they came of the linage of an olde man The Indians which came thither in a boat of wood, which they call a Woranc^ canoa. But they cannot tell whether it were before the flood or after, neither can they give any reason of the flood, nor from whence they came. And when the Spanyards came first among them, they did certeine sacrifice to an image made in stone, of their owne invention. The stone was set upon a great hill, which they made of bricks of earth: they call it their Cowa. And certeine dayes in the yere they did sacrifice, certeine olde men, and yoong children; and onely beleeved in the Sunne and the Moone, saying, that from them they The Sun and had all things that were needful for them. They have in M these parts great store of cotton wooll, with which they make a maner of linnen cloth, which the Indians weare, both men and women, and it serveth for shirts & smocks, and all other kind of garments, which they weare upon their bodies : and the Spanyards use it to all such purposes, especially such as cannot buy other. And if it were not for this kind of cloth, all maner of cloth that [in. 466.] goeth out of Spaine, I say linnen cloth, would be solde out of all measure. The wilde people go naked, without any thing upon Thewildelnthem. The women weare the skinne of a deere before dums- Friers in reve- The Indians have the friers in great reverence: the rence. their privities, and nothing els upon all their bodies. They have no care for any thing, but onely from day to day for that which they have need to eat. They are big men, and likewise the women. They shoot in bowes which they make of a cherry tree, and their arrowes are of cane, with a sharpe flint stone in the end of the same ; they will pierce any coat of maile: and they kill deere, and cranes, and wilde geese, ducks and other fowle, and wormes, and snakes, and divers other vermin, which they eat. They live very long : for I have seene men that have beene an hundred yeres of age. They have but very litle haire in their face, nor on their bodies. occasion is, that by them and by their meanes they are free and out of bondage; which was so ordeined by Charles the emperor: which is the occasion that now there is not so much gold and silver comming into Europe as there was while the Indians were slaves. For when they were in bondage they could not chuse but doe their taske every day, and bring their masters so much metall out of their mines: but now they must be well payed, and much intreated to have them worke. So it hath bene, and is a great hinderance to the owners of the mines, and to the kings quinto or custome. whereof they spend in the countrey as much as serveth their turnes. There is some golde in it, but not so much as will pay the costs of the fining. The quantity of it is such, and the mines are so farre from the sea, that it will not be worth the fraight to cary it into Spaine. On the other side, the kings officers will give no licence to make ordinance thereof; whereupon the mines lie unlaboured, and of no valuation. There is much lead in the countrey; so that with it they cover churches, and other religious houses: whereCopper mines. There are many mines of copper in great quantity, Thepompeof fore t h e ^ s h a 11 n o . t n ^ ed a n 7 of o ur had n e e d thereof in times past. owners of The pompe and liberalise of the owners of the mines mines. lead > as they have is marvellous to beholde: the apparell both of them and of their wives is more to be compared to the apparell of noble persons then otherwise. If their wives goe out of their houses, as unto the church, or any other place, they goe out with great majesty, and with as many men and I maids as though she were the wife of some noble man. will assure you, I have seene a miners wife goe to the church with an hundred men, and twenty gentlewomen and maids. They keepe open house: who will, may come to eat their meat. They call men with a bell to come to dinner and supper. They are princes in keeping of their houses, and bountifull in all maner of things. A good owner of mines must have at the least an Things neceshundred slaves to cary and to stampe his metals; he sary.t0 mines must have many mules, and men to keepe the mines; he ^ e w> and must have milles to stampe his metals; he must have many waines and oxen to bring home wood to fine the oare; he must have much quicke-silver, and a marvellous quantity of salt-brine for the metals; and he must be at many other charges. And as for this charge of quickesilver, it is a new invention, which they finde more profit- able then to fine their oare with lead. Howbeit the same is very costly: for there is never a hundred of quicksilver but costeth at the least threescore pounds sterling. And the mines fall dayly in decay, and of lesse value: and the occasion is, the few Indians that men have to labour their mines. There is in New Spaine a marvellous increase of cattel, The plenty of which dayly do increase, and they are of a greater growth cattell> then ours are. You may have a great steere that hath an hundred weight of tallow in his belly for sixteene shillings ; and some one man hath 20000 head of cattel of his owne. They sell the hides unto the merchants, who lade into Spaine as many as may be well spared. They spend many in the countrey in shooes and boots, and in the mines: and as the countrey is great, so is the increase of the cattell woonderfull. In the Island of Santo Domingo they commonly kill the beasts for their hides WoolL Cloth. Woad. Alum. Brasill [III. 467J Hogs grease in stead of oile. Silks of sundry sorts. Horses. Mules. THE ENGLISH VOYAGES and tallow; and the fowles eat the carkeises: and so they do in Cuba and Porto Rico, whereas there is much sugar, and cana fistula, which dayly they send into Spaine. They have great increase of sheepe in like maner, and dayly do intend to increase them. They have much wooll, and as good as the wooll of Spaine. They make cloth as much as serveth the countrey, for the common people, and send much cloth into Peru. I have seene cloth made in the city of Mexico, which hath beene solde for tenne pezos a vare, which is almost foure pounds English, and the vare is lesse then our yard. They have woad growing in the countrey, and alum, and brasill, and divers other things to die withall, so that they make all colours. In Peru they make no cloth: but heereafter our cloth will be little set by in these parts, unlesse it be some fine cloth. The wools are commonly foure shillings every roue, which is five & twenty pounds: and in some places of the countrey that are farre from the places where as they make cloth, it is woorth nothing, and doth serve but onely to make beds for men to lie on. They make hats, as many as doe serve the Countrey, very fine and good, and sell them better cheape, then they can be brought out of Spaine, and in like maner send them into Peru. Many people are set on worke both in the one and in the other: they spin their wooll as we doe, and in steed of oyle, they have hogs grease: they twist not their threed so much as wee doe, neither worke so fine a threed. They make no kersies, but they make much cloth, which is course, and sell it for lesse then 12. pence the vare. It is called Sayall. They have much silke, and make all maner of sorts thereof, as Taffataes, Sattins, Velvets of all colours, and they are as good as the silkes of Spaine, saving that the colours are not so perfect: but the blackes are better then the blackes that come out of Spaine. They have many horses, and mares, and mules, which thither. They have as good the Spaniards brought Jennets, as any are in Spaine, and better cheape then Jennets. they bee in Spaine. And with their mules they cary all their goods from place to place. There is raine usually in this Countrey, from the moneth of May, to the midst of October, every day, which time they call their winter, by reason of the said waters. And if it were not for the waters which fall in these hot seasons, their Maiz, which is the greatest part of their sustenance, would be destroyed. This Maiz is the greatest maintenance which the Indian Maize graine hath, and also all the common people of the Spaniards. >"man and. A Ana their horses ana mules which labour, cannot be ca^es without the same. This graine is substantiall, and inshould bee creaseth much blood. without it, they coulde not labour their Mines : for all their servants eate none other bread, but onely of this Maize, and it is made in cakes, as they make oaten cakes, in some places of England. If the Miners beast, eaten in 1 - 1 11 . 1 • ^1 •• 1 y j The Indians pay tribute, being of the age of 20. yeeres, 4. shillings of money, and an hanege of Maiz, AnHanegah which is worth 4. shillings more unto the King every & bushel and yeere. This is payd in all Nova Hispania, of as many an a"' as be of the age of 20. yeeres, saving the Citie of Tlascalla, which was made free, because the citizens thereof were the occasion that Cortes tooke Mexico in so little a time. And although at the first they were freed from paiment of tribute, yet the Spaniards now begin to usurpe upon them, and make them to till a great field of Maiz, at their owne costes every yeere for the King, which is as beneficial unto him, and as great cost unto them, as though they paid their tribute, as the others doe. The ships which goe out of Spaine with goods for Peru, goe to Nombre de dios, and there discharge the said goods : and from thence they be caried over the necke of a land, unto a port towne in the South sea, called Panama, which is 17. leagues distant from Hands sought, and found in the South sea 1568. China found by the West. * This is to be understood of the time when this discourse was written. Anno 1572. China ships with one saile. THE ENGLISH VOYAGES thither againe, and so from thence goe to Peru. They are in three moneths, and they come backe going againe in 20. dayes. They have seldome foule weather, and fewe ships are lost in the South sea. Foure yeeres past, to wit 1568, there was a ship made out of Peru, to seeke Salomons Islands, and they came somewhat to the South of the Equinoctial, & found an Island with many blacke people, in such number that the Spaniards durst not go on land among them. And because they had bene long upon the voyage, their people were very weake, and so went not on land, to know what commoditie was upon it. And for want of victuals, they arrived in Nova Hispania, in a port called Puerto de Navidad, and thence returned backe againe unto Peru, whereas they were evil entreated, because they had not knowen more of the same Island. They have in this port of Navidad ordinarily their ships, which goe to the Islands of China, which are certaine Islands which they have found within these 7. yeres. They have brought from thence gold, and much Cinamom, and dishes of earth, and cups of the same, so fine, that every man that may have a piece of them, will give the weight of silver for it. There was a Mariner that brought a pearle as big as a doves egge from thence, & a stone, for which the Viceroy would have given 3000. duckets. Many things they bring from thence, most excellent. There are many of these ylands, and the Spaniards have not many of them as yet :* for the Portugals disturbe them much, and combate with them every day, saying, it is part of their conquest, and to the maine land they cannot come at any hand. There are goodly people in them, and they are great Mariners, richly apparelled in cloth of gold, and silver, and silke of all sorts, and goe apparelled after the maner of the Turkes. This report make such as come from thence. The men of the maine land have certaine traffique with some of these ylanders, and come thither in a kind of ships, which they have with one saile, and bring of such marchandize as they have need of. And of these things there have bene brought into New Spaine both cloth of gold arnd silver, and divers maners of silks, and works of gold and silver, marveilous to be seene. So by their saying, there is not such a countrey in the whole world. The maine land is from the ylands 190. leagues : and the ylands are not farre from the Malucos Northwards. And the people of those ylands, which the Spaniards have, say, that if they would bring their wives and children, that then they should have among them what they would have. So there goe women dayly, and the [III. 468.] king payeth all the charges of the maried men and their wives, that go to those ylands. And there is no doubt but the trade will be marveilous rich in time to It was my fortune to be in company with one come. Diego Gutieres, who was the first Pilot that ever went to that countrey of the Phillippinas. Hee maketh report of many strange things in that Countrey, aswell riches, as other, and saith, if there bee any Paradise upon earth, it is in that countrey : and addeth, that sitting under a tree, you shall have such sweet smels, with such great content and pleasure, that you shall remember nothing, neither wife, nor children, nor have any kinde of appetite to eate or drinke, the odoriferous smels wil be so sweete. This man hath good livings in Nova Hispania, notwithstanding hee will returne thither, with his wife and children, and as for treasure there is abundance, as he maketh mention. In this countrey of Nova Hispania there are many buckes and does, but they have not so long homes as they have here in England. The Spaniards kill them with hand-guns and with grayhounds, and the Indians kill them with their bowes and arrowes, and with the skins they make chamoyce, such as we in Eng- Chamoke. land make doublets and hose of, as good as the skins that Spanish are dressed in Flanders, & likewise they make marveilous leather. good Spanish leather of them. There is a bird which is *******"" W« like unto a Raven, but he hath some of his feathers white: devmre car_ there is such abundance of them, that they eate all the rim. Killed* to r 1 • T-» 1 • K0t 11 1 r r 1 1 Wrongs done to the Indians punished* Justice ye cause of civilitie. corrupt and dead flesh which is in the countrey. Otherwise the abundance of carren is so much, that it would make a marveilous corrupt aire in all the Countrey, and be so noisome, that no man could abide it. Therefore it is commanded there shall none of them be killed. These birds are alwayes about Cities, and townes, where there is much flesh killed. The Indians are much favoured by the Justices of the Countrey, and they call them their orphanes. And if any Spaniard should happen to doe any of them harme, or to wrong him in taking any thing from him, as many times they doe, or to strike any of them, being in any towne, whereas justice is, they are aswell punished for the same, as if they had done it one Spaniard to another. When a Spaniard is farre from Mexico, or any place of justice, thinking to doe with the poore Indian what he list, considering he is so farre from any place of remedy, he maketh the Indian do what he commaundeth him, and if he will not doe it, hee beateth and misuseth him, according to his owne appetite. The Indian holdeth his peace, untill hee finde an opportunitie, and then taketh a neighbour with him, and goeth to Mexico, although it be 20. leagues off", and maketh his complaint. This his complaint is immediatly heard, & although it be a knight, or a right good gentleman, he is forthwith sent for, and punished both by his goods, and also his person is imprisoned, at the pleasure of the Justice. This is the occasion that the Indians are so tame and civill, as they are : and if they should not have this favour, the Spaniards would soone dispatch all the Indians, or the Indians would kill them. But they may cal them dogs, and use other evill words, as much as they will, and the Indian must needes put it up, and goe his way. The poore Indians wil go every day two or three leagues to a Faire or market with a childe upon their necks, with as much fruit or rootes, or some kinde of ware, as cotton wooll, or cadis of all colours, as shall be not past worth a pennie : and they wil mainteine themThe garments of the women, are in this maner. The The apparel ^thelndlansselves upon the same. For they live with a marvellous small matter. They are in such povertie, that if you neede to ride into the Countrey, you shall have an Indian to goe with you all the day with your bed upon his backe, for one royall of plate : and this you shall have from one towne to another. Here you are to understand, that all men that traveile by the way, are alwayes wont to carry their beds with them. They are great theeves, and wil steale all that they may, and you shall have no recom pence at their hands. uppermost part is made almost like to a womans smocke, saving that it is as broad above as beneath, and hath no sleeves, but holes on eche side one to put out their armes. It is made of linnen cloth made of cotton wooll, and filled full of flowers, of red cadis and blew, and other colours. This garment commeth downe to the knees, and then they have another cloth made after the same maner, and that goeth rounde about their waste, and reacheth to their shooes, and over this a white fine sheet upon their heads, which goeth downe halfe the legge. Their haire is made up round with an haire lace about their head. And the men have a small paire of breeches of the same cotton wool, and their shirts which hang over their breeches, and a broad girdle about their middles, and a sheete with flowers upon their backes, and with a knot upon one shoulder, & an hat upon their heads, and a paire of shooes. And this is all their apparell, although it be a Casique, which they use in all the Countrey. The wals of the houses of the Indians, are but plaine, The homes of but the stones are layd so close, that you shall not well the In^n^perceive the joynts betweene one stone and another, they are so finely cut: and by the meanes that the stones are so workmanly done, and finely joyned together, there is some beautie in their wals. They are marveilous small [ill. 469.] and light, as Pumie stones. They make their doores Divers speeches. Mutezuma, and his riches. A.D. 1572. THE ENGLISH VOYAGES very little, so that there can go in but one man at a time. Their windowes, and roomes within their houses are small, and one roome they have reserved for their friends, when they come to talke one with another, and that is alwayes faire matted, and kept marveilous cleane, and hanged full of images, and their chaires standing there to sit in. They eate their meate upon the ground, and sleepe on the ground upon a mat, without any bed, both the gentlemen, and other. The Indians strike their fire with one sticke in another, aswell the tame people, as the wilde. For they know not how to doe it with an yron, and a stone. In Nova Hispania every 10. or 12. leagues they have a contrary speach, saving onely about Mexico : so there is a number of speeches in the Countrey. Mutezuma which was the last King of this Countrey, was one of the richest princes which have bene seene in our time, or long before. He had all kinde of beasts which were then in the countrey, and all maner of birds, and fishes, and all maner of wormes, which creepe upon the earth, and all trees, and flowers, and herbes, all fashioned in silver and gold, which was the greatest part of al his treasure, and in these things had he great joy, as the old Indians report. And unto this day, they say that the treasure of Mutezuma is hidden, and that the Spaniards have it not. This King would give none of his people freedome, nor forgive any of them that should pay him tribute, though he were never so poore. For if it had bene told him that one of his tributaries was poore, & that he was not able to pay his tribute according to the custome, then he would have him bound to bring at such times as tributes should be payd, a quill full of Lice, saying, hee would have none free, but himselfe. He had as many wives or concubines, as hee would have, and such as liked him. Alwayes whensoever he went out of his Court to passe the time, he was borne upon 4. of his noble mens shoulders set upon a table, some say, of golde, and very richly dressed with feathers of divers and many colours and flowers. He washed all his body every The Indians day, were it never so cold. And unto this day so do all f | f / ^" Sj™s ever^ the Indians, and especially the women. The Spaniards keepe the Indians in great subjection. They may have in their houses no sword nor dagger, nor knife with any point, nor may weare upon them any maner of armes, neither may they ride upon any horse nor mules, in any sadle nor bridle, neither may they drinke wine, which they take for the greatest paine of all. They have attempted divers times to make insurrections, but they have bene overthrowen immediatly by their owne great and beastly cowardlinesse. this day eate one another. I have seene the bones of a Spaniard that have bene as cleane burnished, as though it had bene done by men that had no other occupation. And many times people are caried away by them, but they never come againe, whether they be men or women. There remaine some among the wild people, that unto Cannibals. They have in the Sea ylands of red salt in great abun- Island of salt. dance, whereas they lade it from place to place about the Sea coast: and they spend very much salt with salting their hides, and fish : and in their Mines they occupie great quantitie. They have much Alume, and as good as Alume. any that is in all the Levant, so that they neede none of that commoditie. They have also of their owne growing, much Cana fistula, & much Salsa Perilla, which Cassia fistula. is marveilous good for many kind of diseases. Perilla< Salsa There are in Florida many Jarrefalcons, and many Florida. other kinde of hawkes, which the gentlemen of Nova Hispania send for every yere. The Spaniards have two forts there, chiefly to keepe out the Frenchmen from planting there. 397