a peice of sixe pence of current English money under the plate, where under was also written the name of our Generall. It seemeth that the Spaniards hitherto had never bene in this part of the countrey, neither did ever discover the land by many degrees to the Southwards of this place. The true and perfect description of a voyage performed and done by Francisco de Gualle a Spanish Captaine and Pilot, for the Vice-roy of New Spaine, from the Haven of Acapulco in New Spaine, to the Islands of the Lu9ones or Philippinas, unto the Haven of Manilla, & from thence to the Haven of Macao in China, and from Macao backe againe to Acapulco, accomplished in the yeere of our Lord, 1584. Chap. 1. He tenth of March in the yeere of our Lorde 1582 wee set sayle out of the Haven of Acapulco, lying in the countrey of New Spaine, directing our course towards the Islands of the Lu?ones, or Philippinas West Southwest, running in that maner for the space of twentie five leagues, till wee came under sixteene degrees, that so wee might shunne the calmes by sayling close by the shoare. From thence forward we held our course West for the space of 30 leagues, & being there, we ran West, and West & by South, for the space of 1800 [III. 443.] leagues, to the Hand called Isla del Enganno, which is the furthest Hand lying in the South parts of ye Hands called Des los Ladrones, that is, The Hands of rovers, or Islas de las Velas, under 13. degrees and \. in latitude Septentrionall, and 164. degrees in longitude Orientall, upon the fixed Meridionall line, which lyeth right with the Hand of Ter^era. From thence we helde our course Westward for the space of 280. leagues, till we came to the point called El capo de Espirito Santo, that is, The point of the holy Ghost, lying in the Hand Tandaya, the first Hand of those that are called Philippinas, Lu?ones, or Manillas, which is a countrey with fewe hilles, with some mines of brimstone in the middle thereof. From the point aforesayde, wee sailed West for the space of eighteene leagues to the point or entrie in betweene that Hand of the chanell, which runneth and the Hand of Lu§on. This point or entrie lieth scarce under 12. degrees. All the coast that stretcheth from the entrie of the chanel to the point of El capo del Spirito santo, is not very faire. Eight leagues from the sayde point lyeth a haven of indifferent greatnesse, called Baya de Lobos, that is, The Bay of woolves, having a small Hand in the mouth thereof: and within the chanell about halfe a league from the ende of the sayd Hand lyeth an Hand or cliffe, & when you passe by the point in the middle of the chanell, then you have five and twentie fathom deepe, with browne sand: there we found so great a streame running Westward, that it made the water to cast a skum as if it had beene a sande, whereby it put us in feare, but casting out our lead, wee found five and twentie fathom deepe. From the aforesayd entrie of the chanell North, and North and by East about tenne leagues, lyeth the Island of Catanduanes, about a league distant from the lande of Lugon, on the furthest point Eastward, and from the same entrie of the chanell towards the West and Southwest lyeth the Hand Capuli about sixe leagues from thence, stretching Westsouthwest, and Eastnortheast, being five leagues long, and foure leagues broad: and as wee past by it, it lay Northward from us under twelve degrees and |;. and somewhat high lande. Foure leagues from the aforesayd Hand of Capuli Northwestward lie the three Hands of the haven of Bollon in the this Hand and the middle betweene Hand of Lu?ones, stretching North and South about foure leagues, distant from the firme lande halfe a league, whereof the furthest Southward lieth under thirteene degrees : In this chanell it is twentie fathom deepe, with white sand, and a great streame, running Southeast: we passed through the middle of the chanelL From this chanell wee helde our course Southwest, and Southwest and by West, for the space of twentie leagues, untill wee came to the West ende of the Hand of Tycao, which reacheth East and West thirteene leagues. This point or hooke lyeth under 12, degrees and f. In the Hand Capuli there lie three Hands called the Faranias, and we ranne in the same course on the Northside of all the Hands, at the depth of 22. fathom with white sand. From the aforesayd West point of the Hand Tycao to the point of Buryas it is East and West to sayle about the length of a league or a league and an halfe: we put into that chanell, holding our course South, and South and by West about three leagues, untill we were out of the chanell at sixteene fathom deepe, with halfe white and reddish sande in the chanell, and at the mouth thereof, whereof the middle lyeth under 12. degrees and §. and there the streames runne Northward. The Hand of Buryas stretcheth Northwest and Southeast, and is lowe lande, whereof the Northwest point is about three leagues from the coast of Luijon, but you cannot passe betweene them with any shippe, but with small foists and barkes of the countrey. This shallowe channell lieth under twelve degrees: and running thorow the aforesaid chanell betweene the Hands Tycao and Buryas, as I sayd before, we sayled Southward about The Isle of two leagues from the Hand of Masbate, which stretcheth Masbate. East a nd W est 8. leagues long, being in bredth 4. leagues, and lyeth under 12. degrees and £. in the middle thereof, and is somewhat high land. From the sayd chanell betweene Tycao and Buryas, thirteene wee helde our course Westnorthwest for thirteene leagues, leaving the Hand Masbate on the Southside, and the Hand Buryas on the North side : at the ende of leagues wee came by an Hand called Banton, which is in forme like a hat, under twelve degrees and f. when we had sayled the aforesayd thirteene leagues and eight leagues more, on the South side wee left the Hand called Rebuiam, which stretcheth Northwest and Northwest and by North, and Southeast, and Southeast and by South, for the space of eight leagues, being high and crooked lande, whereof the North point lyeth under twelve degrees and §. and there you finde 25' fathom deepe, with white sand. From the aforesayd Hand of Banton Southward nine leagues, there beginne and followe three Ilandes, one of them being called Bantonsilla, which is a small Hand in forme of a sugar loafe: the second Crymara, being somewhat great in length, reaching East and West about two leagues: the third Itaa, or the lie of Goates, having certaine hovels. By all these Hands aforesayd you may passe [III. 444.] with all sortes of shippes, whereof the foremost lyeth Southward under twelve degrees and ^. From the Hand of Bantonsilla, or small Banton, wee helde our course Northwest for the space of foure leagues, to the chanell betweene the Hands called de Vereies, and the Hand Marinduque, the Vereies lying on the South side under twelve degrees and £. (which are two small Hands like two Frigats) and the Hand Marinduque on the North side under twelve degrees, and |. which is a great Hand, stretching Westnorthwest, and Eastsoutheast, having in length 12. & in bredth 7. leagues. On the North side with the Hand Lucjon it maketh a long and small chanell, running somewhat crooked, which is altogether full of shallowes and sandes, whereby no shippes can passe through it. The furthest point Westward of the same It is high Hand lyeth under thirteene degrees and \. lande, on the East side having the forme of a mine of brimstone or fierie hill, and on the West side the land runneth downeward at the point thereof being round like a loafe of bread : in the chanell betweene it and the Vereies, there are 18. fathom deepe with small blacke sand. From the aforesayd chanell of Vereies and Marinduque, wee helde our course Westnorthwest twelve leagues to the lande of Mindora, to the point or hooke called Dumaryn, lying full under thirteene degrees: Five leagues forward from the sayde chanell on the South side wee left an Hand called Isla del maestro del Campo, that is, The Hand of the Colonell, lying under twelve degrees and |. which is a small and flat Hand : In this course we had 45 fathom deep, with white sand. By this point or end of the Hand Marinduque beginneth the Hand of Myndoro, which hath in length East and West five and twentie leagues, and in bredth twelve leagues, whereof the furthest point Southward lyeth under thirteene degrees, and the furthest point Northward under thirteene degrees and f-. and the furthest point Westward under thirteene degrees. This Hand with the Hand of Lu?on maketh a chanell of five leagues broad, and ten or twelve fathom deepe with muddie ground of divers colours, with white sande. Five leagues forward from Marinduque lyeth the river of the towne of Anagacu, which is so shallowe, that no shippes may enter into it. From thence two leagues further lie the Hands called Bacco, which are three Hands lying in a triangle, two of them being distant from the land about three hundred cubits, and between them and the land you may passe with small shippes : And from the lande to the other Hand, are about two hundred cubites, where it is altogether shallowes and sandes, so that where the shippes may passe outward about 150. cubites from the lande, you leave both the Hands on the South side, running betweene the third Hand and the river called Rio del Bacco, somewhat more from the middle of the chanel towardes the Hand, which is about a league distant from the chanell is tenne fathom deepe, with mud and shelles upon the ground : the river of 330 this Hand with Bacco is so shallowe, that no ships may enter into it. the same course two leagues From forward, you passe by the point El Capo de Rescaseo, where wee cast out our lead, and found that a man may passe close by the lande, and there you shall finde great strong streames : and halfe a league forward with the same course, lyeth the towne of Mindoro, which hath a good haven for shippes of three hundred tunnes. Three leagues Northward from the same haven lyeth the Hand called Cafaa, stretching from East and West, being hilly ground. From the sayde towne of Myndoro, wee helde our course Westnorthwest eight leagues, till wee came to the poynt or hooke of the sandes called Tulen, lying the Hand of Lufon, which sande or banke upon reacheth into the Sea halfe a league from the coast: you must keepe about an hundred cubites from it, where you finde eight fathom water, muddie and shellie ground : you runne along by those sandes North, and North and by West for the space of two leagues, till you come to the river called Rio de Anasebo : all the rest of the coast called De los Limbones to the mouth or entrie of the Bay called Manilla, (which are foure leagues) is sayled with the same course. The Limbones (which are Hands so called) are high in forme like a paire of Organs, with good havens for small shippes, running along by the Limbones : and two leagues beyond them on the South side, wee leave the Hands of Fortan, and foure Hands more, but the three Hands of Lubao, which are very low, lie under 13. degrees and ^. and the Limbones lie in the mouth or entrie of the Bay of Manilla under 14. degrees and J. leagues to the haven of Cabite, keeping along by the land lying on the West side, where it is shallowe, and is called Los Baixos del Rio de Cannas, The shallowes of the river of Reedes : all along this Bay in the same course, there is from ten to foure fathom deepe. 33* From thence we ranne Northwest for the space of sixe Manilla in 14 The Bay of Being by the point or hooke of Cabite, then wee kept but an hundred paces from it, running Southwest, southsouthwest, and South, untill we discovered the whole [III. 445.] mouth or entrie of the Bay, where we might anker at foure fathom about two hundred cubites from the lande, and then the towne of Manilla was two leagues Northward from us. Chap. 2. The course and voyage of the aforesayd Francisco Gualle out of the haven or roade of Manilla, to the haven of Macao in China, with all the courses and situations of the places. SAyling out of the haven of Cabite, lying in the Bay of Manilla, wee helde our course Westwarde for the space of eighteene leagues, to the point called El Cabo de Samballes : and when wee were eight leagues in our way, wee left the two Hands Maribillas on the South side, and sailed about a league from them : the point of Samballes aforesayde lyeth under foureteene degrees, and f. being low land, at the end of the same coast of Lugon, on the West side. From the hooke or point aforesayde, wee ranne North, and North and by West, for the space of five and twentie leagues (about a league from the coast of Lu£on) to the point called Cabo de Bullinao : all this coast and Cape is high and hilly ground, which Cape lyeth under sixteene degrees and §. From this Cape de Bullinao we helde our course North, and North and by East, for 45. leagues to the point called El Cabo de Bojador, which is the furthest lande Northwarde from the Hand Lu?on lying under 19. degrees. The Cape de Bullinao being past the lande maketh a great creeke or bough, and from this creeke the coast runneth North to the point of Bojador, being a land full of cliffes and rockes that reach into the Sea, and the land of the hooke or point is high and hilly ground. From the point of Bojador, wee helde our course Westnorthwest an hundred and twentie leagues, untill we came to the Hand called A Ilha Branca, or the white Hand, lying in the beginning of the coast and Bay of the river Canton under two and twentie degrees, having Canm 22. foure and twentie fathom browne muddie ground. egrees. From the Hand Ilha Branca, wee helde the aforesayde the space of sixteene course of Westnorthwest, for leagues, to the Hand of Macao lying in the mouth of The Hand of the river of Canton, and it maketh the river to have two mouthes or entries, and it is a small Hand about three leagues great. acao% Chap. 3. The Navigation or course of the aforesayd Francisco Gualle out of the haven of Macao to Newe Spaine, with the situation and stretchings of the same, with other notable and memorable things concerning the same voyage. T l ^ H en we had prepared our selves, and had taken VV our leaves of our friends in Macao, we set saile upon the foure and twentieth of July, holding our course Southeast, & Southeast and by East, being in the wane of the Moone : for when the Moone increaseth, it is hard holding the course betweene the Hands, because as then the water and streames run very strong to the Northwest; wee travailed through many narrowe chanels fathom, by night, having the depth of eight or with soft muddie ground, untill wee were about the Hand Ilha Branca, yet we saw it not, but by the height we Ilha Branca. knew that we were past it. ten Being beyond it, we ranne Eastsoutheast an hundred and fiftie leagues, to get above the sands called Os Baixos dos Pescadores, and the beginning of the Hands Lequeos on the East side, which Hands are called As A* IlkasferIlhas fermosas, that is to say, The faire Hands. This mosas' I understoode by a Chinar called Santy of Chinchon, and hee sayde that they lie under one and twentie degrees and f. there it is thirtie fathom deepe : and although wee sawe them not, notwithstanding by the height and depth of the water we knew we were past them. Being past As Ilhas fermosas, or the faire Hands, wee helde our course East, and East and by North, for two hundred and sixtie leagues, untill we were past the length Lequeos. of the Hands Lequeos, sayling about fiftie leagues from those Hands them: called Lequeos are very many, and that they have many and very good havens, and that the people and inhabitants thereof have their faces and bodies painted like the Bysayas of the Hands of Lu?on or Philippinas and are the said Chinar tolde me, that Mines of gold, apparelled like the Bysayas, and that there also are mines [III. 446.] Firando. of gold : Hee sayd likewise that they did often come with small shippes and barkes laden with Bucks and Harts-hides, and with golde in graines or very small pieces, to traffique with them of the coast of China, which hee assured mee to bee most true, saying that hee had bene nine times in the small Hands, bringing of the same wares with him to China : which I beleeved to bee true, for that afterwarde I enquired thereof in Macao, and upon the coast of China, and found that hee sayde true. The furthest or uttermost of these Hands stretching Northwarde and Eastwarde, lie under nine and twentie degrees. Being past these Hands, then you come to the Hands of Japon, whereof the first lying West and South, is to the Iland of Firando, where the Portugals use traffique : they are in length altogether an hundred and thirtie leagues, and the furthest Eastward lieth under two and thirtie degrees : we ranne still East, and East and by North, untill we were past the sayd hundred and thirtie leagues. All this information I had of the aforesayd Chinar, as also that there I should see some mines of brimstone or fierie hilles, being seventie leagues beyond them, and thirtie leagues further I should finde foure Hands lying together, which I likewise found, as hee had tolde mee : And that being in Japon, he sayd hee had there seene certaine men of a very small stature, with great rolles of linnen cloth about their heads, that brought golde in small pieces, and some white Cangas of cotton, (which are pieces of cotton-linnen so called by the Chinars) as also salte-fish like the Spanish Atun, or Tunney, which hee sayde came out of other Ilandes East- Other ^ands ward from Japon : and by the tokens and markes which Ejf™n ardof hee shewed mee, I gessed whereabout those Hands should bee, and found them not farre from whence he sayd they lay. Hee sayd likewise that all the Hands of Japon have good havens and chanels, being a Countrey full of Rice, Corne, Fish, and flesh, and that they are an indifferent and reasonable people to traffique with, and that there they have much silver. Running thus East, and East and by North about three hundred leagues from Japon, wee found a very hollowe water, with the streame running out of the North and Northwest, with a full and very broad Sea, without any hinderance or trouble in the way that wee past: and what winde soever blewe, the Sea continued all in one sort, with the same hollow water and streame, untill wee had passed seven hundred leagues. About JaPon 9°°two hundred leagues from the coast and land of newe i ^ ^ / ^7 Spaine wee beganne to lose the sayd hollow Sea and of America in streame : whereby I most assuredly thinke and beleeve, 37 degrees that there you shall finde a channell or straight passage, *** &n ha¥** the firme lande of newe Spaine, and the betweene Countreys of Asia and Tartaria. Likewise all this way from the aforesayde seven hundred leagues, we found a great number of Whale-fishes and other fishes called by the Spaniards Atuns or Tunnies, whereof many are found on the coast of Gibraltar in Spaine, as also Albacoras and Bonitos, which are all fishes, which commonly keepe in chanels, straights, and running waters, there to disperse their seede when they breeder which maketh mee more assuredly beleeve, that thereabouts is a chanell or straight to passe through. Being by the same course upon the coast of newe 1584. Seven and thirtie degrees and J. wee thirty deg. and p a s s e c i by a v e ry high a n c[ f ai re i a n c j e with many trees, an halfe. Read Francis wholly without snowe, and foure leagues from the lande, Ulloachap.16. you finde thereabouts many drifts of rootes, leaves of ^ T _ IJ 1 n • 1 ir & /• 1 J trees, reeds, and other leaves like figge leaves, the like whereof wee found in great abundance in the countrey of Japon, which they eate : and some of those that wee found, I caused to bee sodden with flesh, and being sodden, they eate like Coleworts : there likewise wee found great store of Seales : whereby it is to bee presumed and certainely to bee beleeved, that there are many rivers, bayes, and havens along by those coastes to the haven of Acapulco. From thence wee ranne Southeast, Southeast and by the South, and Southeast and by East, as wee found Cabo de San winde, to the point called El Cabo de Sant Lucas, which Lucas tn 22. j s tk e beginning of the lande of California, on the Northe^' west side, lying under two and twentie degrees, being five hundred leagues distant from Cape Mendo§ino. In this way of the aforesayde five hundred leagues along by the coast, are many Hands: and although they bee but small, yet without doubt there are in them some Havens lately good havens, as also in the firme land, where you have found out. these havens following, now lately found out, as that of the He of Sant Augustine, lying under thirtie degrees and f. and the Hand called Isla de Cedros, scarce under eight & twentie deg. and ^. and the Hand lying beneath Saint Martyn, under three and twentie degrees and \. All this coast and countrey, as I thinke, is inhabited, and sheweth to be a very good countrey: for there by night wee sawe fire, and by day smoke, which is a most sure token that they are inhabited. From the poynt or hooke of Saint Lucas, to the Southeast side of California, wee helde our course Eastsoutheast, for the space of 80. leagues, to the point called El cabo de las corrientes, that is, the Cape of the streames lying under 19. degrees and •§. And running this course, Northward about a league from us wee sawe • . -: - *- ' * -- * .*,imiH.ife7 1 . • • - . .. • rt 1 llfej a The material originally positioned here is too large for reproduction in this reissue. A PDF can be downloaded from the web address given on page iv three Hands called Las tres Marias, (that is to say, The three Maries) running the same course. About foure leagues from the other Hands, there are other Hands, reaching about two or three leagues: All this way from [III. 447-] the mouth or gulfe of California aforesayd, for the space of the sayd fourescore leagues, there are great streames that run Westward. From the point or Cape de las Corrientes, wee ranne Southeast, and sometimes Southeast and by East, for the space of an hundred and thirtie leagues to the haven of Acapulco. In this way of an hundred and thirtie leagues, being twentie leagues on the way, we had the haven of Natividad, that is, of the birth of the Virgin Mary: and other eight leagues further, the haven of Saint Iago, or Saint James: and sixe leagues further, the sea Strand called La Playa de Colima, that is, the Strand of Colima. All this coast from California to the haven of Acapulco is Acapulco, inhabited by people that have peace and traffique with the Spaniards, and are of condition and qualities like the people of the other places of new Spaine. The conclusion of the Author of this last voyage. ALI this description and navigation have I my selfe seene, prooved, and well noted in my voyage made & ended in the yeere of our Lord 1584. from great China out of the haven and river of Canton, as I will more at large set it downe unto your honour, with the longitudes and latitudes thereof, as God shall permit mee time and leysure, whom I beseech to send you long and happie dayes. And the same was truely translated out of Spanish into lowe Dutch verbatim out of the Originall copie, (which was sent unto the Viceroy of the Portugall Indies) by John Huyghen Van Linschoten. ix 337 [Divers voyages