The Principal Voyages of the English Nation [Hi. 498.] to the Isles of Trinidad, Margarita, Dominica, Deseada, Monserrate, Guadalupe, Martinino, and all the rest of the Antilles; As likewise to S. Juan de Puerto Rico, to Hispaniola, Jamaica and Cuba: and also to Tierra Firma, and all along the coast and Islands therof, even from Cumana and the Caracos to the neckland of Dariene, and over it to the Gulfe of S, Michael and the Isle of Perles in the South sea: and further to Cabe9a Cativa, Nombre de dios, and Venta de cruzes, to Puerto Belo, Rio de Chagre, and the Isle of Escudo, along the maine of Beragua, to the Cape and Gulfe of the Honduras, to Truxillo, Puerto de Cavallos, and all other the principall Townes, Islands and harbours of accompt within the said Gulfe, and up Rio dolce falling into this Gulfe, above 30. leagues: As also to the Isle of Co^umel, and to Cape Cotoche, the towne of Campeche, and other places upon the land of Iucatan; and lower downe to S. Juan de Ullua, Vera Cruz, Rio de Panuco, Rio de Palmas, &c. within the Bay of Mexico: and from thence to the Isles of the Tortugas, the port of Havana, the Cape of Florida, and the Gulfe of Bahama homewards. of most of the principall Cities and townes upon the coasts of Tierra firma, Nueva Espanna, and all the foresaid Islands; since the most traiterous burning of her Majesties ship the Jesus of Lubec and murthering of her Subjects in the port of S. Juan de Ullua, and the last generall arrest of her their ships and goods Highnesse people, with throughout all the dominions of the King of Spaine in the moneth of June 1585. Besides the manifold and tyrannicall oppressions of the Inquisition inflicted on our nation upon most light and frivolous occasions. The voyage of Sir Thomas Pert, and Sebastian Cabot, about the eight yeere of King Henry the eight, which was the yere 1516. to Brasil, Santo Domingo, and S. Juan de Puerto rico. Hat learned and painefull writer Richard Eden in a certaine Epistle of his to the duke of Northumberland, before a worke which he of translated out Munster in the yeere 1553, called A treatise of new India, maketh mention of a voyage of discoverie undertaken out of England by sir Thomas Pert and Sebastian Cabota, about the 8. yere of King Henry the eight of famous memorie, imputing the overthrow thereof unto the cowardise and want of stomack of the said Sir Thomas Pert, in maner following. If manly courage, that which hath bene seene & saith he, (like unto proved in your Grace, as well in forreine realmes, as also in this our countrey) had not bene wanting in time as our other these our dayes, at such that rich treasurie Poplar at soveraigne lord of famous memorie king Henry the 8. about the same yeere of his raigne, furnished and sent out certaine shippes under the governance of Sebastian Cabot yet living and one Sir Thomas Pert, whose This sir T^°faint heart was the cause that the voyage tooke none ^Jlh-alfoT' effect; if, I say, such manly courage, whereof wee have England,0and spoken, had not at that time beene wanting, it might dwelt in happily have come to passe, that called Perularia, (which is nowe in Spaine in the citie BlackwalL the of Sivill, and so named, for that in it is kept infinite riches brought thither from the newfoundland of Peru) might long since have beene in the tower of London, to the kings great honour and wealth of this realme. Hereunto that also is to bee referred which the worshipfull M. Robert Thorne wrote to the sayde king Henry the 8. in the yeere 1527. by doctor Leigh his ambassadour sent into Spaine to the Emperour Charles the fift, whose wordes bee these. Now rest to be discovered the North parts, the which it seemeth unto me, is onely your highnes charge and dutie, because the situation of this your realme is thereunto neerest and aptest of all other: and also, for that already you have taken it in hand. And in mine opinion it will not seeme well to leave so great and [I11- 499-] profitable an enterprise, seeing it may so easily and labour and danger be followed with so and obteined. Though hitherto your grace have made Note. thereof a proofe, & found not the commoditie thereby as you trusted, at this time it shalbe none impediment : for there may be now provided remedies for things then lacked, and the inconveniences and lets remooved, that then were cause your graces desire tooke no full effect: which is, the courses to be changed, and to follow the aforesayd new courses. And concerning the mariners, ships, and provision, an order may be devised and taken meete and convenient, much better then hitherto : by reason whereof, & by Gods grace, no doubt your purpose shall take effect. And whereas 3 the South parts. Moreover in the aforesayd wordes M. Robert Thorne sayth, that he would have the old courses to bee changed, and the newe courses (to the North) to be followed : It may plainely be gathered, that the former voyage, whereof twise or thrise he maketh mention, wherein it is like that sir Thomas Pert and Sebastian Cabot were set foorth by the king, was made towarde Brasill and that Gonsalvo de Oviedo, a famous Spanish writer, alludeth unto the sayde voyage in the beginning of the 13. chapter of the 19. booke of his general! and natural historie of the West Indies, agreeing very well with the time about which Richard Eden writeth that the foresaid voyage was begun. The authors wordes are these, as I finde them translated into Italian by that excellent and famous man Baptista Ramusius. Nel Un Corsaro Inglese, sotto colore di venire a 1517. An English discoprire se ne venne con una gran nave alia volta ^rLluTf del Erasil nella costiera di Terra ferma> & it seemeth indi 5 7. a^ t r a v e r so £ questa isola Spagnuola, & giunse presso la bocca del porto di questa citta di S. Domenico, & mando in terra il suo battello pieno di gente, & chiese licentia di potere qui entrare, dicendo che venia con mercantie a negotiare. Ma il castellano Francesco di Tapia fece tirare alia nave un tiro d'artiglieria da questo castello, perche ella se ne veniva diritta al porto. Quando gli Inglesi viddero questo si ritirarono fuori, & quelli del battello tosto si raccolsero fece errore: perche se ben fosse nave entrata nel porto, non sarebbono le genti potuto smontare a terra senza Et nel vero il Castellan in quello in nave. instante San Juan de volonta & della citta & del castello. La nave adunque puerto Rtco. Veggendo come vi era ricevuta, tiro la volta dell' isola di San Giovanni, & entrata nel porto di San Germano parlarono gli Inglesi con quelli della terra, & dimandarono vettouaglie & fornimenti per la nave, & si lamentarono di quelli di questa citta, dicendo che essi non venivano per fare dispiacere, ma per contrattare, to instant that very the governour of & negotiare con suoi danari & mercantie. Hora quivi hebbero alcune vettovaglie, & in compensa essi diedero & pagarono in certi stagni lavorati & altre cose. Et poi si partirono alia volta d'Europa, dove si crede, che non gungessero, perche non se ne seppe piu nuova This extract importeth thus much in English, mai. to wit: That in the yeere 1517. an English Rover under the colour of travelling to discover, came with a great shippe unto the parts of Brasill on the coast thence he crossed over of the firme land, and from this Hand of Hispaniola, and arrived neere unto unto the mouth of the haven of this citie of S. Domingo, and sent his shipboate full of men on shoare, and demaunded leave to enter into this haven, traffique. saying that hee came with marchandise But at the castle Francis de Tapia caused a tire of ordinance to be shot from the castle at the ship, for she bare in directly with the haven. When the Englishmen sawe this, they withdrew themselves out, and those that were in the shipboate, got themselves with all speede on shipboord. And in trueth the warden of the castle committed the shippe had entred into the an oversight: for if haven the men thereof could not have come on lande without leave both of the citie and of the castle. Therefore the people of the ship seeing how they were received, sayled toward the Hand of S. John, and entring into the port of S. Germaine, the English men parled with those of the towne, requiring victuals and things needefull to furnish their ship, and complained of the inhabitants of the city of S. Domingo, saying that they came not to doe any harme, but to trade and traffique for their money and merchandise. In this place they had certaine victuals, and for recompence they gave and paid them with certain vessell of wrought tinne and other things. And afterward they departed toward Europe, where it is thought they arrived not: for wee never heard any more newes of them. Thus farre proceedeth Gonsalvo de Oviedo, who though it please him to call the captain of this great English ship a rover, yet it appeareth by the Englishmens owne words, that they came to discover, and by their traffique for pewter vessell and other wares at the towne of S. Germaine in the Hand of S. John de puerto rico, it cannot bee denied but that they were furnished with wares for honest traffique and exchange. But whosoever is conversant in reading the Portugall and Spanish writers of the East and West Indies, shall commonly finde that they account all other nations for pirats, rovers and theeves, which visite any heathen coast that they have once sayled by or looked on. Howbeit their passionate and ambitious reckoning ought not to bee prejudiciall to other mens chargeable and painefull enterprises and honourable travels in discoverie. to [III. 500.] A briefe note concerning a voyage of one Thomas Tison an English man, made before the yeere Indies, & of his abode 1526. there in maner of a secret factor for some English marchants, which under hand had trade thither in those dayes: taken out of an olde ligier-booke of M. Nicolas Thorne the elder, a worshipfull marchant of Bristol. the West IT appeareth out of a certaine note or letter of remembrance, in the custodie of mee Richard Hakluyt, written 1526. by master Nicolas Thorne the elder, a principall marchant of Bristol, unto his friend and factour Thomas Midnall, and his servant William Ballard at that time remaining at S. Lucar in Andaluzia: that before the sayd yeere one Thomas Tison an Englishman had found the way to the West Indies, and was there resident: unto whom the aforesayd M. Nicolas Thorne sent armour and other commodities specified in the letter aforesayd.