And after straight examination of many of us, by letters of direction from her Majesties privie Counsell, the chiefe malefactors were onely chastised with long indeede before God they had imprisonment, where deserved to die : whereof some, although they escaped the rigor of mans law, yet could they not avoide the heavy judgement of God, but shortly after came to miserable ends. Which may be example to others to shew themselves faithfull and obedient in all honest causes to their captaines and governours. Parescer de Don Alvaro Bagan, marques de Santa Cruz, tocante la Armada de Francisco Draque, estando en las yslas de Vayona: Hecha en Lisboa a 26 de Otubre, estilo de Espanna de 1585. O que paresce, que podra hazer el Armada Inglese, en caso que quiere passar a las Indias, y entrar en el mar del Sur, (como lo ha hecho otra vez Francisco Draque) con las treynta y dos naves y galeones, y muchas lanchas y vergantines deremo que trae, y cinco mil hombres de guerra, que es el numero que a los de Vayona parescio que venian en el armada, es lo siguiente. Levera su derotta al Rio de Jenero, que es en la costa del Brasil en 23 grados de la parte del Sur de la Linea. Es puerto capaz de muchos navios y muy seguro, adonde se tiene agua, lenna, y carne : y tarn bien podra tomar harina de Maiz en un lugar dos o San Vincente. tres leguas del dicho puerto, que se dize San Vincents {siaSjde Madera, Canaria, y Cabo Verde* tiempo lugar a ello. £« 1 \ Ym ^ a bo V e r d e> podra saquear estas Y por ser camino per las islas de la Madera, Canaria, 1 islas, dandole el . , Tr 1? 1 1 Desde Vaiona a la isla de Madera con los vientos Nortes, que aora correran (passados los vientos de Vallee, que aora reynan, por estar la costa de Espanna Uovida) yra la Armada en seis dias ; de alii a las Canarias en quatro, y de las Canarias a Cabo verde en ocho, que son per todos diez y ocho dias: y tardera mas lo que se tuviere en saquear las islas. De Cabo Verde al rio de Jenero dias, que vernan a ser todos dos meses : por manera, que estando el Armada todo este mes en Galicia, podra ser en el rio de Jenero en fin de Deziembre. tardera quarenta RiodeJenero. m f^te A la entrada de la baia del Rio de Jenero ay una baxa, [HI. 531.] adonde con facilidad se hara un fuerte, en que pueden Lugar por estar mas que quinientos hombres: y ponendole su artilleria, guardera el puerto, y el fuerte quedara assalado, que por la una parte del sudueste y nordeste tiene los dos canales, por donde entran los navios en el puerto: En el qual podra Francisco Draque concertar su Armada, y dexar alii alguna gente, y partir con la que le paresciere, para entrar en el Mar del Sur, y yr en seguimiento de su viaje al Estrecho de Magallanes (que es quinientas Estrecho de y cinquenta leguas de a quel puerto, y esta en cinquenta y MaSa^anesdos grados y medio de parte del Sur) y entrar por el Estrecho a la Mar del Sur por todo el mes de Febrero ; Mar del sur, y yr a la ciudad de los Reys o Lima, que esta en la Llmaescludad costa, y es de dos mil vezinos : y por no ser gente de dVmil , . . de guerra, ni puesta en milicia, y lugar abierto sin ^ ^^ fortaleza, ni artilleria, le podra tomar y saquear, y yr se apoderando de la tierra; pues tomando los navios, que ay en aquella mar, no les podra entrar socorro de Espanna. vezinos. pero i _ ' / 4i J .. . 1 Y es de creer que se preverra a tomar a Panama. No queriendo hazer este viaje, repartira su armada La segunda Panama. en dos vandas, y saqueare la isla de San Domingo, Puerto ^ Rico, y la costa de Tierra firma, hasta Cartagena y Nombre de Dios. Y desde el rio de Chagre, que es xv. leguas de Nombre de Dios, podra meter la Infanteria en lanchas de remo, y en las varcas de carga y descarga en a quel rio, que son mas de cinquenta, y Uegar hasta la Venta de Cruzes, que es cinco leguas de Panama, que, aUeno y a saquear. por ser lugar abierto, sera facil a saquear. flotas. T HE E N G L I SH V O Y A G ES Y tambien corre peligro la Havana ; que aunque tiene fortaleza, es chica y flaca, y sacando artilleria en tierra, la tomaran con facilidad. Y de mas de los dannos que podran hazer, conforme a este discorso, no sera el menor, cortar el hilo a la las flotas, si alii navigacion de fueren. las Indias, a tomar Lo que Convernia hazer para reparar estos dannos. D1kEspachar caravelas con grandissima diligencia a los virreys y governadores de las Indias, avertiendo les de la Nueva de la Armada Inglese, para que esten prevenidos, y se ponganen orden. Aunque, segun el numero de las Naves que han salido de Inglatierra, tengo por sin duda, havran passado de aquellas partes alguna banda dellas, hasta Tierra nueva. Porque la Reyna a tenido cuidado de embiar y tomar las naos de la Pesqueria del Baccalao : Y assi es de creer sin duda lo de las Indias. Y teniendo se consideracion a que, por lo que se intiende de Inglatierra, han solido mas de ochenta navios los de Armada: Convernia que su Magestad con mandasse juntar otra para buscar la Inglese, y combatir con ella, ordinando que los galeones que tiene la corona deste Reino, y los que tiene su Magestad en el Rio de Sevilla se aderescan de yr opposito, dandoles carena, para che estubiessen a punto a qualquier viaje, por largo que fuesse : y que assi mismo se embara9e un galeon del Duque de Florencia, que esta muy bien armado y artillado, y a partido de Alicante ara Cadiz, y Quarenta naos complimiento hasta quarenta naos gruesas, que se hallaran g-uesas. en Viscaia y Guiposcoa : y que adere?adas, artilladas, y puestas en orden, como conviene, se avituallen por ocho meses, y que desde luego se levanten hasta mil marineros de Catalunna y Genoa para departir en las naves, y se trayen, como se hizo para la armada de la Tenjera: y que assi mismo se levanten seys mil soldados, dando condutas para mas gente, que esta, para que aya este numero de servicio. Tambien convernia, que de Viscaia venga para esta Armada 20 patazes, y veynte Azabras de Castro. Que las patazes sean de 50 hasta 60 toneladas : y las Azabras, como las que vinieran a la Jornada de la Ter9era. Que se porvea el artilleria, polvera, y cuerda, y plomo necessario, arcabuzes, mosquetas, y picas de respito para la guardia de la costa. Converne hazer otra armada de dos naos cada 400 toneladas, y otras quatro de a dozientas, y quatro patazes, y mil soldados, de mas de la gente de mar. Aviendo visto y considerado, que en dos meses han hecho tantos dannos los Ingleses con los navios de mercantes que navegan por estos mares, y que es de creer que haran lo mismo en las flotas que fueren y vinieren de las Indias, convernia, que, como para la ordenan$a en tiempo de paz, lleva la armada las naos Capitana y Almirante, que llevassen aora otras dos mas por lo menos en cada flota : y no por esto se ha de dexar de asegurar las con Armada. Todas estas prevenciones, me paresce, se deuen hazer, para solo lo que toca la Armada Inglese, y otros navios que han salido de aquel Reyno. Armada, y quisiese intentar lo d'este Reyno, seran menester las prevenciones siguientes. QUe se apercibiesen el conde de Benavente, Marques de Soria, conde de Altamira, conde de Monte Rey, Marques de Cerraluo, y los de mas Sennores y Cavalleros, a quien se dio orden que estubiesen a punto, quando se vino a este Reyno. Que se exercibiese tarn bien la gente de las Ciudades de Toro, Zamora, Salamanca, cuidar para socorrer a la parte dentro Doro y Minno. Y las de Estremadura y Sevilla para socorrer esta Ciudad de Lisbona, y su Comarca, 91 Pero en caso que Don Antonio Veniese con Que se avituallen los castillos desta ciudad, ribera, y comarca, y provean de polvere, cuerda, y plomo, y lo demas tocante el artilleria, como lo he pedido en las relaciones, que he embiado a su Magestad en 7 de mar9o deste anno 1585. Que se provean las galeras por quatro meses : y vengan otras seys de Espanna a este Rio con 120 soldados por galera, para que los pueden repartir, en las ocho que estan aca. Y en caso que esto se ay, que le armada Inglesa no passe a las Indias, y se ocupen en lo deste Reyno, porque havre navios de Ingleses, que acuden a lo uno y a lo otro, sera for9oso hazer otra armada para lo de las Indias, de doze naos, quatro patajes, y mil y quinjentos soldados. Todo esto, me paresce, conviene al servicio de su Majestad, se prevega y apercibiese con mucha diligencia y cuidado, proveiendo del dinero necessario para ello, sin que se aguarde lo uno a lo otro, sino que todo se haga sin deserirlo: Remitiendo me en todo a mejor parescer. Hecha en Lisboa a 26 de Otubre de 1585. Annos. The opinion of Don Alvaro Bafan, Marques of Santa Cruz, and high Admirall of Spaine, touching the armie of sir Francis Drake lying at the Isles of Bayona in Galicia, written in Lisbon the 26 of October after the account of Spaine in the yere 1585. r I \Hat which it seemeth unto me, that the English A army may doe, if they seeke to passe unto the West Indies, and enter into the South sea (as Francis Drake hath done once before) with their thirty ships and galeons, and many pinnesses and shalops with oares, The damage which they have with them, and 5000 men of warre, which may be which they of Bayona thinke to be in the fleete, is as {one bypassing followethby the nvei' ofJenerointo the South sea. which is on the coast of Brasil in 23 degrees to the course to the river of Jenero, mi T X m*Y , 1 , * • , r T South of the Equinoctial line. It is an haven capable of many ships and very safe, where there is water, wood and flesh: and likewise Drake may have corne of Maiz in a towne two or three leagues from the sayd haven, which is called S. Vincente. And because the course is by the Isles of Madera, the Canaries, and Cape verde, he may sacke those Islands, the time serving him for that purpose. From Bayona to the Isle of Madera, with the Northerne Madera, winds which now wil begin to blow, when the Westerne winds be past, which presently doe blowe because that it beginneth to raine on the coast of Spaine, the fleete may run in 6 daies, and from thence to the Canaries Canaries. in foure, and from the Canaries to the Isles of Cape The Isles of Verde in eight, which all together make eighteene dayes: CaPe Verdeand he may stay as much time more as shall serve him to sacke the Islands in. He may saile from Cape Verde to the river of Jenero The river of in 40 dayes, which in the whole amount unto moneths. So that the fleete remaining all this moneth of October on the coast of Galicia, it may come to the river of Jenero in the end of December. two JeneroAt the entry of the bay of the river of Jenero there A fort may is a flat low Island where a fort may very easily be made, *"*<*&/** , . , J i • 1 r^ 1 • an Island *n t_ wherein above 500 men may be left: and placing his t^e moutjl oj artillery therein, he may keepe the haven, & the fort the river of wil be able to hold out all assault, because that on the Jenero. Southwest and Northeast sides are two chanels whereby the ships come into the haven: wherein Francis Drake may repaire his army, and leave there some people, and depart with so much of the rest as shal seeme good unto him to enter into the South sea, & go on upon his The streikt voyage to the streight of Magelan, which is 550 leagues O/Magelan. in 52 degrees The citie of from & a halfe streight into the South sea all the moneth of February, b^J^t have & so may to goe to the citie of Lima, otherwise called 2OOO inkabi_ the citie de los Reys, which standeth on the sea coast touts. toward the South, and may enter by the Lima easie to the foresaid haven, and standeth J the South sea may be burnt. Panama may be taken. The second course which indeede Drake tooke. [HI. 533-] Panama being an open place is easie to be taken, Havana easie to be taken. The Indian fleete may be taken. THE ENGLISH VOYAGES having two thousand inhabitants in it. But in respect that they be no warlike people nor exercised in armes, and because the place is open and without fortresse & artillery, he may take and sacke it, and make himself master on the land, & afterward taking those ships which are in that sea, our people can have no succour of ships out of Spaine, but by the streight of Magelan, which is a long way about. It is also very credible that he will be able to take Panama. If he seeke not to take this course he may divide his army into two parts, & sacke the Isle of S. Domingo, Puerto Rico, the coast of Tierra firma unto Cartagena and Nombre de Dios. And from the river of Chagre, which is fifteene leagues from Nombre de Dios, he may send his footemen in shalops with oares and in the vessels which carrie goods up and downe the river, whereof there are above fiftie there, and passe up to the lodging of the Crosses, called in Spanish Venta de Cruzes, which is five leagues from Panama, which because it is an unwalled towne may easily be taken. And Havana also will bee in great danger, which albeit it have a fortresse, yet it is but little and weake, and bringing his great ordinance on shore hee may take the same with great facilitie. And besides these domages which he may do, according to this discourse, it will not be the least to cut off the navigation of the Indies, to take the West Indian fleet, if they chance to be there. What course is to be taken to prevent these mischiefes. TD dispatch Caravels with all possible diligence to the viceroyes and governours of the Indias, advertising them of the newes of the English army, that they may be provided, and make themselves ready for them. Albeit, considering the number of ships which have bene set foorth out of England, I assure my selfe, that some part Sir Barnard of them are gone out of those parts unto Newfoundland. Drake fooke )l'efl^( For the Queene hath taken carefull order to send to intercept the ships of the fishermen that goe to Baccalaos. [ndpTrtugall And it is likewise to be thought that shee hath done fishers rethe like for the intercepting of the fleet of the Indies, turning from And considering that according to our intelligence out of ^ewfound1 • b 11 r J 1 1 -r- England, above fourescore shippes, and the army of Drake Hisintellihave bene set foorth from thence, it is meete that his gence was too majestie should prepare another army to seeke the English trm-> as since fleete, and to fight with it, commanding that the Galeons Ifoundinthe fond, K 8 C. / * T^ , & 1 - 1 11 1 r -r* 11 11 r 1 • office of the which belong to the crowne or Portugall, and those of his Admiralty. majestie which lye in the river of Sivill bee prepared to send against them, and to give them the Carena, that they may bee in a readinesse for any voyage howe long soever it bee: And likewise to arrest a Galeon of the Duke of Florence, which is very well armed and furnished with great ordinance, and passed lately from Alicante toward Cadiz, and to make up the number of fortie great shippes, Fortie great which are to be had in Biscay and Guipuscoa: and that shifs^\e beeing rigged, armed and set in good order, they bee victualled for eight moneths, and that foorthwith there bee levied a thousand mariners of Catalunna and Genoa to bee divided among the Fleete, and bee conducted, as they were for the Fleete of Ter§era: furthermore that sixe I583- Terthousande souldiers bee levied, giving commaundement ^ X M ^^ to presse a greater number, to the ende that these may of Santa Cruz. bee able men for service. Moreover it is needfull for this armie that 20. pataches be brought from Biscay, and 20. Azabras from Castro. That the pataches bee from 50. to 60. tunnes : and that the Azabras bee like those which were in the expedition to Tenjera. That sufficient provision be made of artillerie, powder, match, and lead, and harquebuzes, muskets, and chosen pikes for the keeping of the coast. It is also meete to provide another army of two ships Another army of 400. tunnes apiece, and other foure of 200. tunnes, °fUn m es' fleete to be strengthened with 4. ships ofwarre. THE ENGLISH VOYAGES and foure pataches and a thousand souldiers, besides mariners. Having seene and considered that the Englishmen with their marchants ships onely that traverse these seas have made such havocke in two moneths, and that it is to bee thought that they will doe the like against the fleetes which goe and come from the Indies: it is expedient, that as by order in time of peace the fleete hath an Admirall and Viceadmirall, that now it should have two more at the least in eche Fleete: and neverthelesse they are to bee wafted home with an armie. In mine opinion all these provisions ought to bee made onely in regard of the English army, and the rest of the ships which have bene set out of that kingdome. But in case that Don Antonio should come with an armie, and should seeke to invade this kingdome, these provisions following would be needefull. THat warning be given to the Conde de Beneventa, to the Marques de Soria, to the Conde of Altamira, to the Conde of Monterey, to the Marquesse of Zerraluo, and to the rest of the Lordes and Knights, which are to have order to bee in a readinesse, against hee come unto this kingdome. That the people also be trained of the cities of Toro, Zamora, and Salamanca, to bee ready to succour the countrey betweene the rivers of Doro and Minno: and the people of Estremadura and Sivilla are likewise to bee trained to be ready to succour the citie of Lisbon, and the countrey about the same. Also that the castles of this citie, river and territorie be victualled and provided of gunpowder, match and lead, and all things else belonging to the artillerie, as I have requested in the relations which I sent unto his majestie the 7. of March of this present yeere 1585. That the gallies be furnished for foure moneths: and 96 What provision is to be made if Don Antonio should come with an army. [HI. 534-] An armie of 14. gallies to that sixe more bee brought from Spaine to this river of Lisbon with an hundred and twentie souldiers for ech gallie, that they may be devided among the eight gallies which remaine here. And in case it fall out that the armie of the English goe not for the Indies, but occupie themselves upon this kingdome, (for there may be English ships, which may attend the one and the other) we shal be enforced to make another armie, besides that for the Indies, of twelve Another army ships, foure pataches, and a thousand five hundred °fl2-great In mine opinion all this is meet for his majesties souldiers. service to be foreseene to be made ready with great diligence and care, and to provide money needfull for the same, without neglecting the one or the other, but that all these things be done without delay : Referring my selfe in all things to those of wiser judgement. Written in Lisbon the 26 of October, 1585. Indian voyage, begun A summarie and true discourse of sir Francis the Drakes West yeere 1585. Wherein were taken the cities of Saint Iago, Santo Domingo, Cartagena, and the towne of Saint Augustine in Florida; Published by M. Thomas Gates. in H is worthy knight for the service of his Prince and countrey having prepared his whole fleete, and gotten them downe to Plimmouth in Devonshire, to the number of five and twenty saile of ships and pinnesses, and having assembled of souldiers and mariners, to the number of 2300. in the whole, embarked them and himselfe at Plimmouth aforesaid, the 12. day of September 1585. being accompanied with these men of name and charge, which hereafter follow: Master Christopher Carleil Lieutenant general, a man 97 x 