luzia by the Isles of the Canaries, the small Isles called Las Antillas, along the South parts of the Isles of S. Juan de Puerto rico, Hispaniola and Cuba: and from Cabo de Corrientes, or Cabo de S. Anton without and within the litle Isles called Los Alacranes, to the port of S. Juan de Ullua in Nueva Espanna: and the course from thence backe againe by Havana, and through the Chanell the of Bahama speciall markes of all the Capes, Islands, and other places by the way; and a briefe declaration of their latitudes and longitudes. to Spaine: together with F you depart from the barre of S. Lucar de Barameda toward the West Indias in the Summer time, you must stirre away Southwest untill you come to the head-land called Punta de Naga upon the Isle of Tenerif. But if your departhe sayd barre in the ture be from Winter, you must stirre away Southwest and by South, untill you come to the height of Cape Cantin on the coast of Barbarie: the markes and signes whereof be these following. Punta de Naga. [III. 614.] The markes to know Cape Cantin. ward, and maketh a snowt CApe Cantin is a lowe Cape and small to the sea like the nose of a galley, and hath upon the top of the poynt a Heath or shrubby place, and on the toppe thereof stand two homocks, that to the sea-ward being higher then the other; but that on the Souther side sheweth like a tower: and his Cape is in 32. degrees and ^. by West, untill hee bring himselfe Northeast and Southwest with the same point, and then he must stirre away South to fetch the said point. T he signes of Punta de Naga. THe said point or Head-land is an high point of Land, and plaine upon the toppe like a table, and without it there are two litle rockie Islands; and upon the North side of the said point is another point called Punta de hidalgo, and upon the top thereof are 2. picked f.^f in I \u c TLT rockes like unto the eares of a Hare. T he course from the Canaries to the West Indies. hidalgo, F you set saile from any of the Islands of the Canaries for the West Indias, you must stirre away 30. or 40 leagues due South, to the ende you may avoid the calmes of the Island of Fierro : Th and being so farre distant from the said Island, then must you stirre away West Southwest, untill you finde your selfe in 20. degrees, and then saile West and by South untill you come to 15. degrees and ^. And from thence stirre away West and by North ; and so shall you make a West way by reason of the Northwesting of the Compasse : which West The variation way will bring you to the Island of Deseada. e calmes °f m ierro' °f compasse. J ° J The markes of the Island of Deseada. THis Island Deseada lieth East Northeast, and West Southwest, having no trees upon it, and it is proportioned like a Galley, and the Northeast ende thereof maketh a lowe nose like the snowt of a galley ; and by comming neere it, and passing by the Norther ende thereof, you shall perceive white broken patches like heapes of sand with red strakes in them: & the Southwest end of this Island maketh like the tilt of a galley. And t h is I s l a nd standeth in 15. degrees and J. Markes of the Island of Monserate. MOnserate is an high Island, and round, full of M trees, and upon the East side thereof you shall perceive certain white spots like sheetes : and being upon the South side at the very point of the Island, somewhat off the land, it maketh like a litle Island, and putting your selfe either East or West from that point, in the midst thereof will appeare a great broken land. Markes of the Island of Marigalanta. MArigalanta is a smooth Island, and full of wood or trees, and as it were of the fashion of a galley upon her decke : and being on the Southeast side about half a league off you shall make certaine homocks of blacke stones, and certain white patches : but on the West side appeare faire white sandy shores or plaines. Markes of the Isle of Dominica. T He Island of Dominica lieth Northwest and Southeast, and upon the Northwest side it sheweth more high : and if you come neere it at full sea, it will shew like two Islands, but by comming neerer unto it, you shall perceive it to be but one : and upon the Southeast side you shall make or see a plaine and long point, and upon the same point appeareth a cliffe like to the cliffe of Cape Tiburon; and upon the North side a litle from the land it sheweth like a litle Island, and upon the top thereof is, as it were, an high steeple, and upon the Norther side you shall perceive it like many white sheetes. Markes of the Island of Guadalupe. THe Island of Guadalupe lieth on the West of Deseada, and upon the Southwest part thereof appeare many hie mountaines, but upon the East side it maketh certaine tables, which are called the high part of Guadaof it, as if it were two Islands. Markes of the Isle of Matalina, or Martinino. [in. 615.] having in the midst THE Isle of Matalina is high and full of mountaines, thereof 3. homocks : the middlemost homocke being highest sheweth like the great bowle of an hat. And upon the North side it appeareth like three little Islands. And in this Island there are warlike Indians like those of Dominica. Warlike and dangerous Markes of the three small Islands called Islas de Indians like Dominica. LOs Santos are 3. Islandes lying one close by another Los Santos, or the Islands of Saintes. upon the South side of Guadalupe. For to goe with S. Juan de Puerto rico you must stirre away Northwest, untill you fall with the Isle of Saba. These 2. the white and the pray Islands Markes to know the Isle of Saba. SAba is a litle Island, and round about it you shall see are rather the bottome ; but feare not, for there is no danger but bare rockes in that which you shall see ; and round about it, itmaketh as ^e sea, fir so it were certaine heapes of white sand ; and by the side °^lon ^~ thereof it sheweth like a Ship under saile : but follow Spanish word that direction that I have given, and you shall see La signifie. But virgin gorda. 1 inurprete it Island, because all the rocks separatedfrom the bigger T°J?e h*k Islands. J Markes to know the Isle called La virgin i g o r a a - LA virgin gorda is an high Island and round, and Islands are seeing it, you shall espie all the rest of the Virgines spft J Txr ,. r 1 • 1 1 T- J i_ ^ which lye Last and West one from another, and are bare This white y without any trees. You may goe about by them until bare Island is you see the litle gray Island, which you shal see by it selfe m^ white by by the Virgines ; and comming neere to the sayd Island, *}? iun& °f birdesandsea - ^J. £ AX. 1/11 L 1 ^ J u 1 -j. over that you shall by and by rayse sight of the white fouies litle Island, which seemeth like a ship under saile. And if resort unto it. that leave the white Island on the larbourd side of you, and come no neerer it then a Caliever-shot, and so shall you passe through 12. fadome-water: and then stirre away Northnorthwest, and so shall you enter into the Haven of Puerto rico : and if you chance to passe the sayd Island by night, goe by the foresaid direction, untill the first watch be out, and then take in your sayles, and so drive untill it bee neere day : and then hoise sayles, and stirre away-Southwest, seeking the sayde Port: and when you come to the entring within, you must stay till 10. of the clocke for the sea-turne. And know, that having the Loguilo at Southwest, then shall the Harbour be off you North and South. Directions from Monserate to Santa Cruz. HE that departeth from Monserate to Santa Cruz, must stirre away Westnorthwest: and by the same course you shall seaze upon S. Juan de Puerto rico. 'Markes to know the Isle of Santa Cruz. SAnta Cruz is an Island not very high, all full of homocks : and comming with it at full sea, it will shew like the Virgines : and upon the East side there are two homocks higher then all the rest. And by this course you may goe to the Isle of S. Juan de Puerto rico; and having found it, you may sayle along the South coast East and West, untill you come to Cabo Roxo. Markes to know Cape Roxo. CApe Roxo is a low Cape and trayling to the sea-ward, having certaine heapes of broken ground thereon, which are like a homocke, and at full sea the same sheweth like a litle Island from the land by it selfe, but comming neere unto it, it will make all a whole land. IF you will seeke Mona from Cape roxo, you must stirre away West and by North. Markes of the Isle of Mona. THe Isle of Mona is a low, round, and smooth Island, lying lowe by the sea, and full of trees: and to goe from thence to the Isle of Saona you must stirre away West; and if you fall with it in the night season, and come any thing neere the land, then stirre away West and by South, untill it be neere day, that you may keepe your selfe by the land ; and if so be that in the Morning you see it not, then stirre away Northwest, and so shall you finde it: and if it be faire weather, and you perceive that the current hath set you to the Southwest, then stirre away Northnorthwest, and so shall you goe cleare off the land. IF you chance to see the Isle of Saona, it is an Island smooth with the sea, and lyeth Northeast and Southwest, and you shall see the trees before you see the Island: and on this Island appeareth a great high banke of white sand which is called the head of Saona. And if you would come to an anchor, you may, for all is cleare ground. And to go from this Island to Santa Catelina, you must stirre away Northwest. the Southwest end of Markes of the Isle of Santa Catelina. SAnta Catelina is a litle lowe Island all full of low rockes even from the water, and hath not any trees, and it is close by the land ; and if you doe not run along the coast of Hispaniola, you shall not see it: and from that Island to goe to Saint Domingo, you shall sayle along as the land lyeth, West and by North: Markes of the Isle of Saona. the spoutes. The point of Causedo. San Domingo. Sierras de las minas viejas. The point of Nisao. The Isle of Beata. Ocoa. Puerto hermoso. The Isle of Alto Velo. THE ENGLISH VOYAGES and before you come to the point called Causedo, you shall see certaine holes in rockes, which lye alongst as the rocks doe that cast up the water, which will shew like to the spouting of Whales. And a litle ahead off that, you shall see the point of Andresa: and ahead thereof the poynt of Causedo. This poynt of Causedo lyeth lowe close by the water, and passing thereby, the coast will make to thee Northwest and Southeast; and from thence to S. Domingo are 5. leagues. And if the winde chop up at North upon you, by meanes whereof you should be cast off from the coast or Port, and that you happen to see the olde Mines (called Sierras de las minas viejas) beare Northwest off you, and The teates which are within the land be open of you, then shal you be North and South with the harbour; and if The old Mines beare North off you, then shall you be below the harbour. Directions from Saint Domingo to Nueva Espanna. IF you will sayle from Saint Domingo in Hispaniola to Nueva Espanna, stirre away Southsouthwest, until you come up as farre as the point of Nizao: and from thence stirre away Westsouthwest, and so you shall finde the Isle of Beata. And if you saile from this point of Nizao for Ocoa, you must passe along the coast West and by North, untill you come to Puerto Hermoso, or The beautifull haven, which is 18. leagues distant from Saint Domingo: and if you proceede from Puerto Hermoso for Nueva Espanna, you must stirre away Southsouthwest, untill you looke out for Beata and Alto velo. Markes of the Isle of Beata. BEata is a small Island and not very high : you may passe along the outside thereof, and there is no danger but that you may see; and by and by you shall raise Alto velo: and from thence you must stirre away are as farre ahead as the Frailes, then must you stirre away West and by North, and so shall you goe right with Bacoa, and before you come to it, you shall see Bacoa. high craggie cliffes, and at the descending of them white paths like great sheetes; these high craggie mountaines are called Las sierras de donna Maria. And before you Las ster™s^e come to the sayde point of Bacoa, you shall discover a little lowe Island even with the Sea and full of trees, which is called Isla Baque. lsla Baque. Directions from Isla Baque to Cape Tiburon. I F you will goe from the Island Baque, or from the C*Pe point of Bacoa for Cape Tiburon, or to the isle of * uf 7' r J-ne isle of T on i • TTT TWT Navaza, you must stirre away vv estnorthwest, and edge in somewhat to the Northwest, and you shall passe betweene Navaza and Cape Tiburon. Markes of Cape Tiburon, which is the Western cape of Hispaniola. i i and maketh a sharpe cliffe CApe Tiburon lyeth sliding downe to the Seaward, like the snout of a Tiburon or sharke-fish; and upon the top thereof it appeareth like white wayes with certaine gullets or draines upon it, which are caused by the passage of the water from the mountaine in the Winter time. Markes of the Isle of Navaza. NAvaza is a litle round Island full of low trees or shrubs, and it lyeth East and West from Cape Tiburon, and from this small Island to go for Sierras de Cobre, or The mountaines or mines of Copper upon the Southeast part of Cuba, you must stirre away Northnorthwest. [Directions from Cobre. Sierras de Tarquino. in Cuba. IF you will saile from Cape Tiburon to Cape de Cruz in Cuba, you must stirre away Northwest, and you shall see the Sierras or mountaines de Cobre; and from thence you may goe along the coast West towardes Cabo de Cruz; and before you come at it you shall see The great Tarquino, and from this Tarquino you shall have to Cape de Cruz 30. leagues, and this great Tarquino is the highest land upon all that coast; and then by and by you shall see the lesser Tarquino, from whence to the foresayd Cape you have 12. leagues, and so shall you goe discovering the coast, untill you come to Cabo de Cruz. Markes of Cabo de Cruz. CApe de Cruz is a low Cape full of shrubs; and from thence Westward you shall see no land; for the distance or bay is great between the sayd Cape and the Isles called Los Jardines. Directions from Cape de Cruz to Isla de Pinos. IF you sayle from Cape de Cruz to seeke the Island of Pinos, you must stir away Westnorthwest. And note, that if in this course you happen to sounde, doe not feare; for you have nine fathoms. If also going this course, you meete with certaine little Islands upon The crocodiles, having sight of them, stir away Northwest, and so shall you finde the Island of Pinos. And if by seeing the sayde Islands called Caimanes you are amazed, you shall knowe by the latitude, whither they bee the Jardines or no: for if you finde your selfe in one and twentie degrees, then bee you sure they are Los Caimanes. the larboord side, which are called The Caimanes, or North of you, then may you stirre away West, if it bee by day; if it bee * by night, West and by South, till you see the Island of Pinos. T he markes of Isla de Pinos. rTHHe Island of Pinos stretcheth it selfe East and West, JL and it is full of homocks, and if you chance to see it at full sea, it will shewe like 3. Islands, as though there were divers soundes betweene them, and that in the midst is the greatest; and in rowing with them, it will make all a firme lande: and upon the East side of these three homocks it will shewe all ragged; and on the West side of them will appeare unto you a lowe point even with the sea, and oftentimes you shall see the trees before you shall discerne the point. Directions from the Isle of Pinos to Cape de Corrientes. I F you saile from the foresayde Isle of Pinos to Cape de Corrientes, stir away West and by North; and before you come to the sayd Cape upon the Northside of you, you shall see certaine mountaines all full of homocks, which are called Las Sierras de Guanaguarico, Las sierras de and that upon the West part hath more homocks then Giwff"™* that on the other, Markes of Cape de Corrientes. CApe de Corrientes is a lowe Cape, though not so low as the other part of the land that lyeth along by it; for it is more lowe, and hath upon it 4. or 5. great splats like unto oxen, and the very point of the Cape is all white sand: and from thence Westward you shall discerne no lande, for it maketh a great bay: and from hence you must saile to Cape de Sant Anton. 31S is lowe by the sea, and all full of shrubs or trees; and you shall see A convenient within the land a lake of fresh water ; and if you want watering water, there you may water : and upon the North side Qf t he s a id C a pe yQU s ] i a ll discerne a palme tree higher place. then the rest of the trees, and it sheweth round like a bowle at the top, like to the top of a ship : and the Cape are certaine sholdes which are North from 2. or 3. leagues long. Directions from the Cape de S. Anton to Nueva Espanna on the outside of the small Islands called Los Alacranes or T he Scorpions. The Isle Vermeja. Espanna with a North winde, IF you will sayle from Cape Sant Anton to Nueva then stirre away Westnorthwest from 21. to 22. degrees, and then sound upon the pracel or flat; and if you see by this direction, that you holde water, then stir away Northwest, [III. 618.] untill you lose the ground; and then follow your course againe, untill you have brought your selfe into 24. degrees and \. and then saile West untill you bring your selfe North and South with the Isle of Vermeja, or The red Isle : then stir away Southwest, and by this way you shall finde Villa rica on the coast of Nueva Espanna. And if by going this course you be in 19. degrees and \. and chance not to see the lande, then stir away West untill you see Villa rica, and from thence saile you South for the harbour of S. Juan de Ullua : and if you should be neere the land you must stir South and by West towardes the same harbour. And if you chance to see the Volcan or burning hill to beare west & by South from you, then know, that the harbour of S. Juan de Ullua shalbe East and west off you. A volcan or burning hit. S. Juan de Ullua. Villa rica. \. and *\ 7111a rica standeth in 19. degres and the full of thereof are certaine high hilles V top of the homocks of many heads, which have on the maner of white them certain white patches after beaten wayes ; and these hils lie Northeast and Southwest. And if you doubt whether these be the Sierras Sierras de lead or sound, and if Sant Martlnor hils of S. Martin, wet your you finde bottome, they are the Sierras of Villa rica : Sierras de and saile you to the landward, and looke by how much Vtlla the land, so much will they seeme you come neerer lower unto y o u: but so doe not the hilles of S. Martin ; for the neerer you come to them, the higher will they appeare to you : and likewise if they be the hilles of S. Martin, you shall not finde bottome, but even at land it selfe. rua' M a r k es of R io de las palmas, and of t he river of mountaines called R io de las montannas. went by land F you should chance to fall with Rio de R*° de las las palmas, or The river of palmes, or P almasthe river of Mountaines, it is Ri° de las els with all a plaine lande, and full of trees and mntan™5certaine woodie homocks, and among them certaine heapes of sand, and all this along by the sea side : and if you RiodePanuco. to the river of Panuco, you shall have Ri°He™os°> or The beaumany mouthes or openings or plaias or strands, where tifall river. also are many lizas or oazy places, which stretch Rio Hermoso. to The current of the bay of You must beware what part soever you happen of Mfxjco ^he this coast to fall withall, to discover it, and although ^EJA^" you knowe it, you must sound the depth ; because if setteth to the the windes bee Easterly, the current setteth there much North, and to the North : but if you should be 40. leagues at sea, 4°- kagu* to7he Norththen this current setteth to the Northeast. 1 • 4.U *. 1. c J • 3T7 T HE ENGLISH VOYAGES looking well within IF you wil seeke Markes of Rio Hermoso or The beautifull river. the river called Rio Hermoso, the land, you shal see three homocks of an high hill, and those two which are to the landward within, are rounder then the other which is neerest the sea, for that it is longer and bigger, and lyeth North and South, and you shall be 4. leagues at sea when you shall see them : and they are called The sierras, or mountaines of Tamaclipa ; and from thence to the river of Panuco there e v en w j t j 1 nO a n (j fu\\ of trees a n ( j and other trees. Markes of the river of Panuco. fall with you which and the foresayde Villa rica standeth the river of Panuco (betweene the Island called Isla de Lobos or The Isle of seales) the markes bee these. From the mouth of the river it maketh a great bay without, and at the ende of this bay upon the Northside there is oazy, low, and bare ground altogether without trees, and at the out ende of the oazy lowe place upon the West side it maketh a low homock like to a Lizards head : and when you see the aforesayde cliffe, you shall bee in the opening of the mouth of the sayd river, and then shall you see a little low tower having on the top of it a crosse, which the fishermen call Marien : and this barre hath on it 2. fathom water, and 2. and ^. and you neede r No tide at the not to stay for the tyde, for that it floweth not there : f river of -m tfcs kay which I have mentioned, or not, you shall Panuco, an(J that you may the better knowe whether you bee see certaine hils at West Southwest, which are called t h e o a Zy p l a ce Las sierras de Las sierras de Tarquia ; and forthwith also you shall Tarquta Tarquta. S. Luis de Tampice. s ee mouth of the river where standeth a towne called S. LmS de Tampice, and from to Panuco you have 9. leagues by land. j Sp e ak e of^ which goeth to the thence tfat ISla de lobos is a small Island nothing so big as the carde doth shew it, and in it is a litle grove or wood of palme trees, and all the rest of the Island is without trees, and round about it are sundry playas or [in. 619.] strandes, and it is inclosed round about with arrazifes or shoalds, and chiefly toward the maine lande. And from thence to Cape Roxo or The red Cape are 3. Cabo Roxo. leagues. And if you will come to anker at this Island to A watering water, for that there is water in it, you may ride on all P^acethe South side close by the poynt that stretcheth to the Westward, and you may passe by the East side of it, and ride in 22. fathom, and untill you come to 15. fathoms, all is cleane ground. Markes of the river of Tuspa. IF you fall with the river of Tuspa, you must beware the sholdes which run 5. or 6. leagues into the sea: and upon this river of Tuspa within the lande there are high hilles which lie Northeast and Southwest, and have the bay of Cassones: and The bay of upon the river you shall perceive a white clifFe, which Cassones. will shew unto you like the castle of S. Juan de Ullua. their ending upon Markes of the river of S. Peter and S. Paul. IF you chance to fall with the bay of Cassones, and upon the river of S. Peter and S. Paul, take heede : the hilles of the sayd bay is a deepe bay, and for Tuspa have their ending upon this bay. And in the All these are mouth of this river of S. Peter and S. Paul are two upon the coast homockes of white sand, the Westermost being bigger of Tabasco. then that on the Northeast. And by and by you shall ^/j™ ** perceive the water to change white which commeth out of the river, and sounding you shall finde sande mixed with clay upon your lead ; and looke upon the West higher then the other. Markes of Almeria. IF you should chance to fall or come upon the plaines of Almeria, it is a lande full of many homocks, some with tuftes of trees on them, and some bare with white sand, and in 60. fathoms you shall have clay or oaze, and in 30. fathom to the landward sand. And from thence to Punta de hidalgo or Punta delgada the coast lyeth Northeast and Southwest. Soundings of Villa rica. IF you fall with Villa Rica in 30. fathoms, you shall finde clay or oaze, and in some places stones, and neere the lande you shall have sand: and upon the port of S. Juan de UUua you shall have in some places clay or oaze, and in some places herring bones, and in other places mase and , and upon the rocks called Cabezas anegadas you shall have small blacke sande at 17. fathom two leagues from land. And if you see a coast that lieth Northeast and Southwest, and another Northwest and Southeast, you shall be upon S. Paul: and if you should be upon Cabezas anegadas, you shall finde in 30. fathoms great sand & blacke, and in 28. fathoms you shall have the sand white like the shavings of free stone: and from S. Paul to the barre of Vera Cruz it is clay or oaze, and from thence to S. Juan de UUua you have many deeps, which at one sounding bring you clay, and at another sand, and at another clay and mase together, and herring bones: and in some 35. or 40. fathom you shal finde rockie ground, and in some places sand, and in some other places herring bones: and we call this Comedera de pescado, or The foode of fishes. 3 20 Punta delgada, or The slender point. Cabezas anegadas are sunken heads or rocks under water. Comedera de the West end of Cuba, towards Nueva Espanna, within the Isles called Los Alacranes, or The Scorpions. IF you saile from Cape de Corrientes Cabo de towarde Nueva Espanna on the inside Corr'tentesof The Alacranes, you must stir West: and when you thinke you have sailed 35. or 40. leag. you shall sound upon the pracel, and you shall come upon many bristlings of waters, which, if it were faire weather, would seeme a skull of fish. And before you come out of the bristlings, if you sound you shal have depth as I have sayd. If you goe from Cape de S. Anton by the inside of The Alacranes, you Cabo de S. must stir away West and by South, and you shall Antonfinde sounding in the same order as I have sayd: you shall have white sand, and neere the land you shall finde it like the shavings and peckings of free stone, and white sand like houre-glasse-sand, and sometimes periwinkles or small shelles. Also if you sound in deepe water, and on the sudden finde rockes, then knowe that you are upon The Alacranes, and then stir away Westsouthwest untill you finde cleane ground, and til you bring your selfe into 18. or 20. fathoms. And if you goe deeping your water, then stir away West, and by these depths you shall go sounding; and then taking your heigth by sunne or starre, you must beware that you passe not 21. degrees & \. or 21. degrees and \. at the most; and in this heigth, and [ill. 620.] at 18. or 20. fathoms you shall follow your way: and if you deepen water, edge to the Northwestward, and Cape Sisal if you alter more your depth, edge to the Southwestward, upon the coast untill you have gotten so farre ahead as Cape Sisal, and °fc^mPec^ discovered the coast of Campeche, which coast lyeth or/jiW* North and South, and you shall take up on your lead Arenas. x 321 increasing depth, until you lose it, and so shal you passe between the Triangle and the Sandy Hand. T he course betweene the Triangle and the Sandy Island to S. Juan de Ullua. WHen you have lost your depth, stirre away Southwest to fetch the Sierras or hils of S. Martin: and to knowe the hils of S. Martin, there are 2. hils stretching Northeast and Southwest, and the Southwest is greater then that on the Northeast, but the Northermost hill is higher, and maketh on the top a flat point and very high, and without it, it hath an Island which Martin. Rocopartida. is called Roca partida, or The cloven rock: and if it be cleare, on the Southwest side an high lande like a topsaile will appeare, and then shall you bee North and Or Minsapa. South with The Pan or Loafe of Nisapa. Note, that these Sierras or Hilles of Sant Martin are all blacke and full of trees, and make no shewe as Villa rica doth: And marke this, that by how much you come neerer them, so much the higher will they shewe unto you: neither shall you finde any bottome till you bee at the very shore. r The course from Roca partida or T he cloven rocke to S. Juan de Ullua. F you depart from Roca partida or The cloven rocke for Sant Juan de Ullua, you must stir away Westnorthwest, and so shall you fetch or fall with OrAntoni- the point of Anton Mislardo: and if you happen to sound upon The sunken rocks called Cabezas anegadas, serro. you shall have black sand and 17. fathom water, and you shall bee but a league from the land, and if you land, you shall have .34. bee 2. leagues from fathoms. the F you depart from S. Juan de Ullua to Havana, you must stir away Northeast until you bring your selfe in 25. degrees, and from thence you must stir away East from the little Islands called Las Tortugas, untill you have sounding of them; and if you finde white sande very small, you shall bee East and West with them, and if your sounding bee shellie ground and periwinkles, or small shelles or skales, then shall you be Northeast and Southwest, and the shelles or skales must bee red, and if at some time you take up blacke sande, then are you North and South with the sayd Tortugas. Markes of The Tortugas. I F you chance to fall with The Tortugas, they are 5. or 6. little Islands of white sand, lowe and close by the sea, saving one which hath on it some shrubs or bushes of trees: and they are in 25. degrees. the Las Tortugas, T he course from T he Tortugas toward Havana. IF you depart from The Tortugas towards Havana with a fresh winde, you must stir away Southwest: and if it be faire weather, and a small gale of winde, then stir South, that the current may not draw you in, nor set you too much to the Westward: and if you fall with Los Organos, they are a ranke of high and The hllles low hilles with many sharpe heads like unto Organ pipes and at the entring thereof on the South side is c XT Rio de puercos, or The river of hogs; and at the Havana, further ende is the deepe bay called Baya honda, and Rio de there is the round loafe or heape called El pan de PuerC05baya honda, that bay: and from is to say, The loafe of the deepe Baya honda' this place untill you come to Cape calledLos Cavannas. La mesa de Marten. [III. 621.] tower of The Havana. Note. THE ENGLISH VOYAGES de S. Anton all is sholdes and flats 4. or 5. leagues into the sea, even as farre as the sayde Cape: and from Baya honda or The deepe bay to Havana, all the coast is full of high and lowe hilles, which they call La Quadrilla de sierras, which is as much to say, as A companie of hilles together like souldiers on a heape; and more to the Eastward you shall descry an high hill which is called El pan de Cabannas. And if you fall with Havana, you shall see on the Southwest side an hill called La meza de Marien, or the Table of Marien; and if it be cleare, you shall see lower to the Westwarde the heape or loafe that is called El pan de Cabannas. You must note, that about Havana it is all lowe land even with the sea, till you come to Mesa de Marien, and then looke well within the lande, and you shall see 2. little round trees like to the teates of womens breasts; and bringing your selfe North and South, you shall be with the harborough of Havana, and then shall you soone perceive the tower that is upon the cliflfes of Havana. Markes of the haven or port called Puerto de Marien. PUerto de Marien is a harbour that you may enter the into without any danger or feare, but at entrance thereof you must borrow on the West side, by reason of the rockes and shelves, and when you are within, then borrow on the East shoare, and leave the other side, and so shall you enter safe : and from this place to Havana is all lowe lande. Note, that if you overpasse the harborough of Havana to the Eastward, or if the current hath set you past it by meanes of calmes, then shall you perceive at full sea upon the coast certaine broken places like the enterances of harChipiona a towne standing hours, because the lande is lowe ; and comming neere %°nAndahSa s o me P l a c es of the coast next unto S. Pkyas or strandes of sande which shewe like unto Lucar. Chipiona : and looking Eastward along the sea coast, 324 s h o a re You s h aU t he s ee in certaine Matanzas. Matanzas: and also you places round white heapes of sande called Barrancas. ain^ifie If you will recover Havana, go along the coast close creeks or by the lande, for the current runneth very swift in the broken chanell, and there is no feare but of that which you e^tr^n may see ; for all the coast is cleane ground. T he course from H a v a na to Spaine. IF you will saile from Havana to Spaine, you must stirre away Northeast, till you come to the head of If it Cabeza de los j^[^es' The Martires called La Cabeza de los Martires. chance before you come to the said head, that the winde should chop up at North on you, then stand to the East- Martires are ward, untill you bring your selfe as farre ahead as a number of llands Matanzas ; then cast about to the West, to discover the smal1 lande of The Martires, or of Florida, that the current lPnSahead may not set you on 1 he Mimbres: and it by chance Florida. you see The Pan de Matanzas at ful sea, it hath these Los Mimbres. It is a round heape or loafe, and high The markes of markes following. withall, and on the Westerne side thereof, appeareth a rocke ^fn de like to the head of a Tortoise: and betweene this Pan and the hilles of Seluco, there will appeare unto you a great broken lande, like as it were sunken places, and upon the East side of this Pan toward Punta de los Puercos it Punta de los is all lowe lande, and you shall see no high lande at all: Puercosthis Pan de Matanzas and being so farre shot, that shall beare Westnorthwest and Southsoutheast off you, and being desirous also to avoyde the furie of the current The furious of the chanell of Bahama, stir away Northnortheast, and cT€n n !? the i i- by this course you shall passe the chanell, and win the Bahama. coast of Florida. c h a n e ll i n ii «i i of i Markes of the head of The Martires called Cabeza de los Martires. THe head of The Martires are three heapes of white sande full of trees, and that in the midst hath on the top a crowne, as it were of white sande, and is higher chanell of Bahama or no. Cabo de Cannaveralin 28. deg. and a halfe. The course in Winter. The Isle of Bermuda. The course in the Summer more Northerly. THE ENGLISH VOYAGES and bigger then the other two : and to know whether you be entred into the chanell, marke well how the coast lyeth off you; and if you perceive that the coast beareth off you East and West, you are not in the chanell; but if the coast should beare off you Northeast and Southwest, then are you in the chanell; and taking your heigth you shall know: for if you finde your selfe in 24. degrees and ^, then are you East and West with the head of The Martires : and if you see the coast beare off you Northeast and Southwest, (as I have sayde) stir away 4. or 5. leagues from the landward right off; and then stir away Northeast: and being in 28. degrees and a halfe, you shall be shot out of the chanell, and then shall you be East and West with Cape de Cannaveral, or The Cape of Reedes. The course to come through the chanell of Bahama homeward for Spaine. IF in Winter you should passe through the chanell of Bahama for Spaine, stirre away the first Sangradura or course Eastnortheast, and afterward East and by North, and so shall you passe by the South side of Bermuda: and you must take heede that you goe these foure hundred or five hundred leagues, because you shall not come neere the said Isle of Bermuda; & when you are gone this course, then put your selfe in what heigth you will, and make your way as you will your selfe. But if you passe the chanell in the Summer time towards Spaine, stir away Eastnortheast, and you shall passe by the North side of Bermuda; and when you have brought your selfe in 35. degrees, stirre East and by North until! you bring your selfe to 25. degrees and ^, and from thence stir away East for the Isle of Fayal or of Flores. [III. 622.] Markes to know the Isle of Fayal. THe Island called Fayal upon the Southwest side, maketh an high hill or loafe like to the top of Brasilia in the Island of Terzera; and behinde that and upon the North side there standeth a rocke or Island by it selfe. And from this Island being one of the Azores, you may shape your course to which of the Islands you please, or to any other place which you know. Markes to know the Isle of Flores. I F you happen to fall with Flores first, by this you shall know it: the Island lyeth Northeast and Southsouthwest, and the West ende thereof maketh a rocke or cliffe like the cliffe of Tiburon; and comming neere the lande, you shall see two little Islands neere the point of the lande ; and to the Northward of this cliffe or rocke a little from the land you may ride and water ; and betweene that and the village, in every bay you may likewise ride and water: and you shall see the water run into the sea in every part that you looke on. Now followeth the course and direction to saile from Passage on the Northeast part of S. Juan ElPassajea de Puerto rico, unto Havana, by the North side p^e of the Isle of Hispaniola, and by T he old of the isle of chanell. nJ^e part s- Jmn de Puerto rico. IF you depart from S. Juan de Puerto rico to seeke Cabo del Enganno, you must CabodelEnstirre away Westnorthwest, and so shall ganno the you see a round heape or loafe in the ^stEasterb sea, which lieth on the Southwest side of # f l * J^ the gulfe of Semana; and from thence Or Samana. it beginneth about the hill of the Cape del Enganno, & this is the mouth of the gulfe. And if it should be neere night when you see this lande, stir away Northwest with a small sayle, because of certaine rockes called Las Ovejas, or The Sheepe: and in the morning cast Las Ovejas. about to see the land to the Southwestward; and if when del Enganno: and from thence stir away West and by North toward Cabo Franco. Markes of Cabo Franco. CAbo Franco is a low Cape even with the sea, and hath these markes * And from thence stir away West, and you shall see an high mountaine, and on the top thereof a cloudie homock like the top of a hat: and at the foote of this hill is the haven or harbour called El puerto de plata. And if you will goe into this port, you must leave the Island on the West side, and then take heede of that which you see, and borrow on the castles side. And from thence to goe with the olde chanell, you must stirre away Northwest, untill you come out of sight of lande, and then stir away West and by North, and so shall you goe with the lande of Baracoa, and here are hilles very high, which make the teats which looke like 3. crownes. And you shall passe betweene the Isle of Tortugas, or Hinagua, and the Island of Jaico: and from thence run alongst the coast Northeast and Southwest; and having doubled the outmost high hill or mountaine, you shall see in the midst thereof a round hill, and upon the Southwest side by the sea you shall see a lowe even lande foure or five leagues long, and a lowe point, and this point of the hill is called La sierras de Cabanca; and then beginneth the bay of Cayo Romano: and ahead the sierras you shall see a rounde loafe which is in the midst of the same bay, and ahead of that you shall see a hill flat on the top like a table sixe or seven leagues, which hill is not very high, and from these hilles to Cayo Romano you have five and thirtie leagues, and you must stirre the one halfe of the course Northwest, and the other halfe Northwest and by West, and so shall you make or see the sayd Cayo Romano upon the larboord side of you. Note, that from Cayo Romano to Cabo de Cruz you have three leagues, and they lie North and South one from another. 328 Cabo Franco. El Puerto de Plata. Baracoa. Is la de Tortugas otherwise called Hinagua. The Isle of Jaico. Las sierras de Cabanca. Cayo Romano. This word Cayo in the Biscaian tongue signifieth aflat or a shold. Cabo de CAyo Romano is an high Island, and lyeth Northeast This Island and Southwest, and stretcheth it selfe as it were 4. lJeth I°/>" leagues: and comming on it Northeast & Southwest, it Havana™ maketh a loafe or round heape or homock ; in the midst there are two saddles, as wee terme them, or lowe partitions, the one on the one side, and the other on the other side ; and comming with it North and South, it maketh all one lowe send or saddle in the midst. And if night should come on you at chanell, because in the mid way is an Isle, flat, or Cayo, which lyeth North and South with Cayo Romana, and it is called Cayo de la Cruz : and at full sea you shall discerne a heath, which this Cayo hath in the midst of it, which is like to a saile; but al night beare but your foresaile a glasse one way and another glasse the other way untill it be day, and then enter the chanell, and leave these Cayos, on the larbourd side of you. Note, that if you bee within sight of the Parcel, and The great see two litle Islands of white sand, that then you are Pane'on the cantell of the Parcel: and if you goe more a head coasting the Parcell, about fifteene leagues, you shall see three Islands full of trees, which are called Las Las Anguillas, Anguillas and all these three Islands beare North and South one from another. Item from Cayo de Cruz to Havana, if it be by day, stir away West Northwest; but if it be by night, then stir a point more to the Westward: and if in this course you chance to see the Parcell, feare not; for in the lowest water there are sixe fathomes ; then cast about to the Southwestward to get out about two glasses, and then stir away Westnorthwest untill it be day and so shall you goe by the Cayos: and in this course you must keepe twentie foure leagues or thereabout. And from this Cayo de Another Cayo Cruz sixe or seven leagues lyeth another Cayo upon 6°r 7 leagues the Northeast and by North, which is great and white, Q™U% and all even; But the point on the Southwest is ay° white sand along by the sea-side, which in the middest thereof maketh a cliff full of trees that seemeth like a sadle: and upon the Northeast side (for on this maner the coast lyeth along from the Cape) going by the chanell you shal see certaine hilles eighteene or twentie leagues long lying Northeast and Southwest being all saddle-like: and bringing the poynt Southwest off you, you shall be in the middest of the chanell: and from thence you have as farre to Matanzas as to Cayo Romano. Likewise from thence on the side of Havana you shall see certaine hilles which shewe to be three, and ly Northeast and Southwest, and that on the Southwest is highest: they are called Las Sierras de Guana: and North and South from them lyeth a flat, which is called Cayo de Nicola, which stretched out in the middle of the sayde flatte there is a little Island of white sand: and from thence you must sayle to Cruz del Padre. the Sea, and leagues into two Markes of Cruz del Padre. Elpuerto de Matanzas or The haven of slaughters. Las Sierras de Guana. Cruz del Padre. iRuz del Padre is a Cape all broken in pieces: thence you must stir away Northeast, I and from La Bala de because of the Bay that is there, called the Bay of I'ai'aiade Conell> a nd Caos, or Cayos. which is within 20 leagues of the sayd poynt: and t h is B a 7 stretcheth to the Bay of Caos, then stir away West Northwest to goe with the Port of Matanzas, and with the hilles of Camoniaca. Or Cameloquea. Markes of the hilles of Camoniaca. east, and the Southeast side THe hilles of Camoniaca ly Northwest and Southis lowe land and even: also upon the Northeast side it is even land, and runneth towards the Bay of Matanzas, and in the middle of these hilles there is one high hill, and upon the Northeast side there appeareth a round heape : and and by South. Markes of the round hill called El pan de Matanzas. land and THis Pan is a round heape standing on a lowe if you bring your selfe North and South with it, it will make you two saddles ; and on the West side it maketh a great parted lande as it were sinking with the sea. Note that wheresoever you shall goe to seeke the Tortugas, and shall come with the coast and finde it beare off you Northeast and Southwest, I advise you to goe along the coast to the Southwestward : you may not deepen more then fortie five fathomes, for if you doe, you shall cast your selfe without the Tortugas. Also you must note, that if by chance you finde Note. the Tortugas, and the your selfe shotte betweene Martyres, and that you cannot goe on the out-side of the sayde Tortugas, then cause one to goe to the top, to see if you can descry them ; and if you cannot see them, stir away Southwest untill you see them; and having gotten sight of them, sounde, and you shall finde eighteene or ninteene fathomes : and so sholding stir away South and by West, and goe by this course. And feare you not the sholding, for you shall meete with 12 fathoms, and shall have blacke sand in your sounding. And going neerer to the ende of the said Tortugas (for hee that is on the toppe shall see them all) as you passe by, you shall finde but eight fathomes, and stony ground, and that is the sholdest water you [in. 624.] shall have. And you shall passe by a bustling of a tyde, that shoules out of the chanel that way: but you neede not feare any thing for you shall have no lesse then eight fathome water: and being past the said bustling but a minion shot, you shal loose the sight of the Tortugas. And if you will goe from thence to Havana, having a faire winde, stir away Southwest because the current may not set you off: and if with a fresh winde and Northerly, then stir away Southerly. Here the follow the headlandes, latitudes of Capes, and Islands, as well of Madera, The Canaries, and the Azores and the Isles of Cabo Verde. Indies, as of the West THe island called Puerto santo standeth in The isle of Madera standeth in The isle Salvaja in The isle of Alagranza in The isle Fuerte ventura in The Grand Canaria in The isle of Palma, and the point called Punta Degrees of latitude. 33 32\ 30 29 J 28\ 28\ de Naga in Tenerif in 28^ The isle of Gomera in 27\ The latitudes of the Islands of the West Indies. Degrees of latitude. \\\ The island of Fonzeca standeth in The isle Tabago in The Barbudos in The isle of Trinidad upon the North side in The isle of Granata in The isle of Sant Vincent in The isle of santa Lucia in The isle of Dominica in The isle of Matalina or Martinino in skant n 13 10 11^ 12 I2f 14 14\