The river of Amana by which Sir Walter Raleghfirst entred, called by Diego de Ordas Via-, pari: and by Bartk de Casas IviaPari. THE ENGLISH VOYAGES Here follow the names of those worthie Spaniards that have sought to discover and conquer Guiana : Extracted out of the writings of Juan de Castellanos clerigo, who the booke intituled, Primera parte de las Elegias de varones illustres de Indias. compiled THe enterprise of Guiana was undertaken by Diego de Ordas of the kingdome of Leon, in the yeere 1531. Hee was one of the captaines of Cortes in the conquest of Mexico. This Ordas made his entrance by the river of Amana, by which wee entred, and spent fiftie dayes before hee came to the river of Orenoque, which we past in fifteene. Hee named the river by which hee entred, Viapari; which name it still retaineth in the Spanish descriptions. It lyeth South from Trinidad some five leagues. He transported out of Spaine a thousand souldiers. He dyed afterwards at sea in returning for Spaine. 2 Juan Corteso arrived at the river of Amazones or Orellana with three hundred men: Hee marched up into the countrey. But neither hee nor any of his companie did returne againe. 3 Gaspar de Sylva, with his two brothers, departed from Teneriff, accompanied with two hundred men to assist Diego de Ordas. They sought El Dorado by the river of Amazones: but staying there a short time, they fell downe to Trinidad, where they all three were buried. 4 Juan Gonsales set saile from Trinidad to discover Guiana. He reposed himselfe more on the faith of his guides, then on his small number of men. Hee by triall founde the confines of Guiana, so farre as hee entred, to bee populous, plentifull of victuall, and rich in golde. Upon such proofes as hee brought with him, to make good his report, many others adventured to follow his steps. 5. 6 Philip de Uren, & after him Pedro de Limpias, who both successively commanded the Almaines, were leaders in this action. Limpias was slaine by an Indian Casique named Porima. 7 Jeronimo de Ortal undertooke it by the way of Maracapana. After great travell and his substance all spent, he dyed on the sudden at S. Domingo. 8. 9 Ximenes, brother of Don Ximenes de Quesida the Adelantado, and Pedro de Orsua were both at sundry times in the same conquest. 10 Father Iala, a Frier, taking with him onely one companion, and some Indian guides passed into the provinces of Guiana. Hee returned with good intelligence, and brought with him Eagles, idols, and other jewels of golde, An. 1560. Hee assayed the second time to passe in like maner, but was slaine by the Indians. 11 Hernandez de Serpa also undertooke The Indians of Cumanawgoto killed him, and defeated his armie. it. 12 Afterwardes, Diego de Vargas, and his sonne Don Juan followed this enterprise, and at their first setting out, were slaine by the Indians. 13 Caceres undertooke this discovery from Nuevo Reyno de Granada. Hee came no neerer to it then Matachines, which borders upon the sayd kingdome of Granada. Hee rested there and peopled that place. 14 It was also attempted by Alonzo de Herera, at two severall times. Hee endured great miserie, but never entred one league into the countrey. Hee sought it by Viapari or Amana, and was at last slaine by a nation of Indians called Xaguas. 15 It was also undertaken by Antonio Sedenno, with whom Herrera and Augustine Delgado joyned the conquest of Trinidad, against Bawcunar a famous king of that place. He passed by Maracapana in the yeere 1536 to discover El Dorado with 500 chosen men. In this journey hee got much gold, and tooke many Indian prisoners, whom hee manacled in yrons; and many of 497 in x them dyed as they were led in the way. The Tigers the being fleshed on those dead carkeisses, assaulted Spaniards, who with much trouble hardly defended themselves from them. Sedenno was buried within the pre- cinct of the empire neere the head of the river Tinados. Most of his people perished likewise. 16 Augustine Delgado searched the countrey to the Southward of Cumanawgoto with 53. footemen, and three horsemen. The warres that were then betweene the Indians of the vale, and those of the mountaines, served well for his purpose. By which occasion he found meanes to passe so farre, untill he came to an Indian Casique, named Garamental, who entertained him with all kindnesse, and gave him for a present some rich jewels of golde, sixe seemely pages, tenne young slaves, and three nymphes very beautifull, which bare the names of three provinces from whence they were sent to Garamental chiefe commander of all that countrey. Their names [III. 691.] were Guanba, Gotoguane, and Maiarare. These provinces are of an excellent temperature, very healthfull, and have an admirable influence in producing faire women. The Spaniards afterwardes to requite the manifold curtesies that they received in that countrey, tooke and carried away, besides all the golde that they could get, all the Indians that they could lay holde on: they conveyed them in yrons to Cubagua, and sould them for slaves. Delgado afterwards was shot in the eye by an Indian: of which hurt he died. 17 Diego de Losada succeeded in his brothers place. Hee had many more men; who in the ende wasted themselves in mutinies: those that lived returned to Cubagua. 18 Reynoso undertooke this journey: but having endured exceeding troubles, in the discomfort of his minde, he gave it over, and was buried in Hispaniola. 19 Pedro de Orsua, in the yeere 1560. sought it with 400. Spaniards by the river of Orellana. Hee imbarqued his men in the countrey of the Motijones. As they passed downe the river, they found Synamom trees. His men murthered him, and afterward the sayde rebels beheaded lady Anes his wife, who forsooke not her lord in all his travels unto death. 20 Frier Francis Montesino was in the province of Maracapana with 100. souldiers bound for Guiana, when Lopez Aguirri the tyrant made insurrection in all those parts of this intended journey is not expressed. the Indies. What became of In this discoverie of Guiana you may reade both of Orellana, who discovered the river of Amazones An. 1542. and of Berreo, with others that have trode this maze, and lost themselves in seeking to finde this countrey. An advertisement to the Reader. IN this Breviarie, the names onely are comprised of such, as being led with the generall fame of Guiana, have indevoured to discover and possesse it. The whole histories are long and cannot suddenly be translated or englished at large, as we in these Elegies finde them. It may perhaps seeme strange and incredible, that so many cavalleros should all faile in this one attempt, since in many parts of the Indies, far smaller numbers in shorter time have performed as great matters, and subdued mighty kingdomes: I have therefore thought it good here to alleage those reasons, which by circumstance may bee gathered to have beene chiefe impediments to the Spaniard in this intended search and conquest. The first may bee the remotenesse or distance of their places of Rendevous, from El Dorado: which appeare to be foure, Nuevo reyno, the mouth of Amazones or Orellana, Cubagua or the coast of the Caracas, and Trinidad. 1 From Moiobamba, where Orellana hath his headspring, to his mouth, the Spaniards account it 2000. leagues. Raleana riseth neere the said mountaines in Moiobamba, & tributeth his waters to the sea, not farre from the other: Guiana is environed with these 2 fresh-