voyage ofM. William Haukins to Brasil. A king of Brasil brought into England. [III. 701.] T HE E N G L I SH V O Y A G ES that Insomuch with the Negros, and tooke of them Elephants teeth, and other commodities which that place yeeldeth: and so arriving on the coast of Brasil, he used there such discretion, and behaved himself so wisely with those savage people, that he grew into great familiarity and friendship with them. in his second voyage, one of the savage kings of the countrey of Brasil, was contented to take ship with him, and to be transported hither into England: whereunto M. Haukins agreed, leaving behinde in the Countery as a pledge for his safetie and returne againe, one Martin Cockeram of Plimmouth. This Brasilian king being arrived, was brought up to London and presented to K. Henry the 8, lying as then at White-hall: at the sight of whom the King and all the Nobilitie did not a litle marvaile, and not without cause: for in his cheekes were holes made according to their savage maner, and therein small bones were planted, standing an inch out from the said holes, which in his owne Countrey was reputed for a great braverie. He had also another hole lip, wherein was set a precious stone about the bignes of a pease : All his apparel, the behaviour, and gesture, were very beholders. in his nether strange to Having remained here the space almost of a whole yeere, and the king with his sight fully satisfied, M. Hawkins according to his promise and appointment, purposed to convey him againe into his countrey: but it fell out in the way, that by change of aire and alteration of diet, the said Savage king died at sea, the which was feared would life of Martin Cockeram his pledge. Neverthelesse, the Savages being fully perswaded of the honest dealing of our men with their prince, restored againe the said pledge, without any harme to him, or any man of the company: which pledge of theirs they brought home againe into England, with their ship fraighted, and furnished with the commodities of the countrey24 the losse of turn Which Martin Cockeram, by the witnesse of Sir John Hawkins, being an officer in the towne of Plimmouth, was living within these fewe yeeres. An ancient voyage of M. Robert Reniger and M. Thomas Borey to Brasil in the yeere of our Lord 1540. Have bene certainly informed by M. Anthony Garrard an ancient and worthe citie of shipfull marchant of this commodious and London, that gainefull voyage to Brasil was ordinarily and usually frequented by M. Robert Reniger, M. Thomas Borey, and divers other substantial and wealthie marchants of Southampton, about 60. yeeres past, that is to say in the yeere 1540. A voyage of one Pudsey to Baya in Brasil anno 1542. Lso the worshipfull M. Edward Cotton of Southampton Esquire gave mee more particularly to understand, how that one Pudsey of Southampton, a man of good skill and resolution in marine causes, made a voyage in like to Baya de maner 62. yeeres agoe todos los Santos the principall towne of all Brasil, and the seate of the Portugal vice-roy and of the bishop, and that he built a fort not farre distant from A fort built that place, in the foresaid yeere 1542. ^^ 25