where ships may ride well. And from the river of Martin de Sousa to Rio de San Pedro are 52 leagues, Rio de S. and the coast lieth Northeast and Southwest. Pedro. From this river of San Pedro there lieth a point of sand a good league off and more, and it lyeth on the Southwest side of the port. And from thence to Cabo Cabo de Santa de Santa Maria are 42 leagues: and the coast lieth ManaNortheast and Southwest, and all is lowe land. Also on the Southeast side of Cabo de Santa Maria there lyeth an Isle two leagues off into the sea, and it hath a good harborough betwixt it and the mayne. And note that the mayne is lowe land. The cape of Santa Maria standeth in 35 degrees, and at the point thereof it hath an Island a league into the sea. Hereafter followeth a Ruttier from the sayd river of Plate to the Streight of Magelane. thence to He cape of Santa Maria is in 35 degrees. From the Cape de Santo Antonio, which is on the other side of the river, are 30 leagues Northnortheast, & Southsouthwest. And this the broadest place of the river. And this cape is in 36 degrees and a halfe, and it is a blacke grosse land. And thou must marke that 25 leagues a seaboord the mouth of the river there lie certaine sands, which be called Baixos de los Castellanos. Baixos de ks is He that falleth with the Cape of Santa Maria must CU take good heede to go Southeast untill hee be in 36 degrees, and from thence Southsoutheast untill 36 degrees and a halfe, giving the sayd sholds de los Castellanos a breadth: and also taking Keede of the flats of the cape. And when hee findeth 40 or 45 fadomes, and russet sand, then he must goe Southwest and by South, untill he be in 40 degrees: where hee shall find great store From the Cape de Santo Antonio to the Cape de Arenas Gordas are eight & forty leagues, and the coast lieth Northeast and Southwest, and by East, and by West: and in the first eighteene leagues is the river called Rio de Santa Anna, which hath at the entrance certaine flats and sholds, give them a good breadth, and come not nigh them by much, but keepe thy selfe in forty fadomes to goe surely. From the cape de Arenas Gordas to the cape of Sant Andre are one and thirty leagues: it lieth Northeast and by East, and Southwest by West: I meane when thou art in the middest with an equall distance from them both. And betweene both the capes are many bayes and rivers, but all full of sandie sholdes. From the cape of Sant Andres to the bay called Anegada, that is, The sunken bay, are 30 leagues EastIt standeth in 40 degrees, northeast, and Westsouthwest. rather lesse then more. From the bay called Baia Anegada to The point of the plaine land are 25 leagues Northnortheast, and Southsouthwest. This point lyeth in 41 degrees and a halfe. And from this point to Baia sin fondo, that is to say The bottomlesse bay, are 35 leagues Eastnortheast, and Westsouthwest. This bay standeth in 42 degrees and a halfe, rather lesse then more. And from Baia sin fondo to Cabo Redondo, & Puerto de los leones, are 37 leagues Northnortheast and Southsouthwest, somewhat to the North and South. And if thou meane to go out from thence with a com passe about after the maner of a halfe circle or an arch, so thou mayest passe through the Baia sin fondo along the shore: for there is water enough. Note that from the river of Plate to this place is never a good harbour for great shipping. From this place to Puerto de los leones the coast is cleane, and a man may come nigh unto the land: 86 Cabo de Arenas Gordas, Rid de S. Anna, Cape de S, Andre, Baia Anegada. Punta de Tierra liana, Baia sin Cabo redondo. Puerto de los kenes. Puerto de los. leones in 44 degrees & hee bee in 43 degrees or more, hee must have a care heede of these to looke out for certaine small rockes which lie neere littie rocksthe land, and lie North of the harbour. From this harbour to Cabo de Matas, or The cape Cabo de of shrubs, are 30 leagues North & South, halfe a point Matasto the East and to the West: and betwixt them there is a great bay very long: And to the Northwest 18 leagues from Cabo redondo is a river lying East and West: and it is called Rio de Camarones, or, The river &* d* Camaof shrimps. You shall know when you fall with this rones' river, by seeing many white spots upon the water, and they are small shrimps. From this river to Cabo redondo the coast lieth Cabo redondo Northwest and by North, and Southeast and by South. ? * 5 / / T" 13 a halfe T L . iarge% This cape is in 45 degrees and a halfe large. u ir 1 • • J j From this sayd cape to Cabo Blanco and Barancas Cabo Blanco Blancas that is to say, to The white cape and white and Barancas clifFes are 32 leagues lying North and by East and South and by West: and they stand in 47 degrees. B£%"invi [111^725.] From this Cape the coast lyeth towards the North side Northwest about three leagues all full of white clifFes steepe up: and the last clifFe is the biggest both in length and height, and sheweth to be the saile of a ship when it is under saile. These white clifFes are 6 in number. And this Cape hath in the face thereof a certaine round land that sheweth to bee an Island afarre off: and it hath certaine poynts of rockes hard by it. And two Cables length from the land is 25 fathomes water. Above these white clifFes the land is plaine and even: and it hath certaine woods. There is much people in the countrey: PeoPle t0 he taken heed of of whom I wish thee to take good heed. From this Cape the land lyeth North and South; which is the first fall of the Cape: and in the face thereof it hath a poynt of rocks, which shewe themselves. And on the South side of this Cape is a good harbour and road, and ^ & there is a Bay in the middest. censaom. Morro de Santo Tves, in 50 degrees large. Rio de Cruz. Rio de Galegps and the marks thereof. THE ENGLISH VOYAGES From Cabo Blanco to Puerto de San Julian are 37 leagues, and the coast lyeth North and by East and South and by West. This harbour of S. Julian hath in the entrance certaine high hilles, which afarre off seeme to be towers. On the South part of the entrance the chanell is deepest in the middest: and thou must borrow neerer the North side then to the South. Within the harbour are two Islands: thou must come to an anker hard to them. This haven lyeth in 49 degrees. And betweene Cabo Blanco and this harbour are The Islands of Ascension, and they be eight. From this said harbour to the hill of S. Yves are 35 leagues; the coast lyeth Northeast & Southwest: it is a low land and even and hath onely one hill, and it is a plaine from one part to the other, and hath certaine cliffes to seaward, and to the Southward, and to the South side it hath certaine little copples: it standeth in 50 degrees large. From the hill of S. Yves to Rio de Cruz are 8 leagues, Northeast and Southwest: and on the Northside of the river it hath a very high land, and in the toppe it is plaine and lyeth two leagues broad, layd out along North and South, and the downefall on both sides hath as it were saddles. This Cape hath many poynts of rockes lying 4 leagues into the sea: and when thou hast sight of this land, it is good for thee to keepe from it a good bredth off. And going from thence thou mayest runne in sight of the land in 25 fathoms. From Rio de Cruz to Rio de Galegos are 25 leagues* Northeast and Southwest; and it standeth in 52 degrees and \ of a degree. It hath a certaine high land: and in the highest of the sayd land it is plaine, and to the Northeast it is a pike up, and hath certaine white cliffes: and on the toppe and something downewarde it is blacke: at the foote of this high land to the Eastward thereof it hath certaine steps like a lather: and to the sea it hath a sharpe poynt that lyeth into this Cape almost halfe a league. To the Southward of this Cape where the lather is, there is a little Bay, which is the entrance in here for the cause abovesaid: but he must keepe of Rio de ^ l ^ T 'S himselfe out and not anker in it. From Rio de Galegos to the Streits of Magelan the floweth 12 facoast lyeth Northnorthwest & Southsoutheast: 8 leagues thomes. unto Cabo de la virgin Maria, which is the entrance into Cabo de la the Streit: and 4 leagues before a man come to this virgin Maria. Cape there are white cliffes with certaine blacke spots in them; and they be caused with the falling downe of the water. Here is water inough, and thou mayest come to an anker hard aboord the shore, and hast a good defence for a Southwest wind. And the Cape it selfe is the highest land of all, and is like to Cape Saint Vincent in Spaine: and it hath on the East side a Ciudad de ledge of rockes, and a poynt of sand, with divers sands Nombre de which shewe themselves at a lowe water: thou must M^Q^&sh take great heede heere and give them a good bredth port Famine, halfe a league or a quarter of a league off, until thou because he bring the Cape Westnorthwest, and then thou mayest found.al the stirre away Southwest. And when thou commest to the PfntaJ sf*~ i l l- r 1 , 1 misned, and lower land and into tenne or twelve fathoms, then art t^e towne 'it thou over against la Purification. And halfe a league selfe utterly within the land the citie of Nombre de Jesus was builded, abandoned, East and West with the sayd cape right against a cliffe, ^ / ; ^ ^_ jesus which commeth from the sayd Cape, and goeth within }re je the Streits. This Cape standeth in 52 degrees just. stood. And this is to be taken for a warning, that he that commeth neere this Cape, and passeth by it as I have said with the wind at Northeast, or any other wind off the sea inclining to the Southeast, must not come to anker, but presently be sure to passe by; because in °?*jWest. • n -1 t • 1 • winds raigne Sommer this place is much subject to Southwest winds, much here -m which blow right in: and they put a man from his Sommer. tackle, & make him to loose his voyage. And from From March March forwards there blow favourable winds from the ^^dJ^e sea to goe from this Cape to enter into the Streits, from favoura^ie this said Cape the Streits go in to the Northwest 14 the? ' for *J 1 Westsouthwest. And comming out of the mouth thereof a man must keepe himselfe a poynt to the Northward, because there be rocks and shoalds. And if you see beds of weeds, take heed of them, and keepe off from them: and after you be past this Streight you must stirre Westsouthwest 8 leagues unto Cabo de San Gregorio, which is a high white clifFe, and is a good road for any wind from the Northwest to the Southwest. But men must beware and not trust the Indians of this Cape: for they be subtill and will betray a man. From this Cape beginneth the second Streit which is called Nuestra Sennora de Gracia, and lyeth Eastnortheast and Westsouthwest 3 leagues. And comming out of this Streit thou shalt see 3 little Islands, lying West off this Streit: thou mayest go betweene them, for there is no danger: provided alwayes that thou keepe well off from the bayes on both sides, lest thou bee imbayed. And from these Islands thou must keepe forwards in the chanell Westsouthwest two leagues: and then the coast lyeth North and South unto 53 degrees and a halfe, unto a place called Punta de Santa Anna: and to the Northwest thereof in a corner or nooke (which is one of the rincones or nookes) was the towne builded called La Ciudad del Don Philippe. Thou must come to an anker to the Northward thereof, after thou art past the castle and a great tree. [in. 726.] Cabo de San Gregorio a good roadstead for any winds from the Northwest to the Southwest, The Indians about Cape de San Gregorio in the Streits are very trecherous. The second Streit called Nuestra Sennora de Gracia. Puntade Santa Anna in 53 deg. and a halfe. Rincones. La Ciudad del don Philippe: which is now utterly ruined.