] )• no current. [Libra J The Sunne being in j Sagittarius 1 1 Capricorne J t i d e t he h a* h h is c C o u r se S o u t h e a s t { Aquarius 1 Pisces Aries I no current. J A ruttier or course to be kept for him that will sayle from Cabo Verde to the coast of Brasil, and all along the coast of Brasil unto the river of Plate : and namely first from Cabo Verde to Fernambuck. He ship that goeth from Cabo Verde to Brasil, must goe Southsoutheast: and when she is within 5 or 6 degrees of the Equinoctial she must go Southeast and by South. And if she have the ternados, that is thundrings and lightthou must go altogether nings, then South, or that way and by that boord that doth profit thee most. And take this for advise, that having the general winds, & if the wind be at South or Southeast, then go Southwest, or westsouthwest. And if the winde be South, then goe Southwest, and by this way but little, for it is not a way for thy profit, because the more thou goest this way, the more will be thy thou mayest not come neerer the trouble, because coaste of Guinea then 60 or 70 leagues unto the sholde called Os baixos de Santa Anna. And being this distance from the same, thou shalt cast about the other way towards Brasil, and the wind will be large. Thou shalt understand that the ship that keepeth this course to Fernambuck, and goeth in October or after, and chanceth to goe to windward of the Isle 73 Te that will sayle to Brasil, must not come within 60 or 70 leagies of the coast of ly latitude. beare with the land. Thou must take this for a warning, that if going West in 8 degrees thou see land, then looke to the Northward, and thou shalt see certaine white cliffes. Then I advise thee that thou goe well to the Southward. And this is to bee understoode from October forward, for then time is most subject to Northeast and Eastnortheast winds. And if thou find thy selfe in the sayd height above mentioned, and seest cliffes, and seest a Cape to the Southward, and seest no more land to the South, then make accompt that thou art at Capiguoari: and from thence to Fernambuck thou hast sixe leagues, and hast a good port. the Thou shalt take this for a warning, that if in 8 degrees and a halfe thou see land lying all flat, thou mayest goe neerer it, and be bold till thou come in tenne or twelve fadomes : And then thou shalt see a great grosse land along the sea-coast which is called Capitagua : And being East and West with this land, and, as I have sayd, in tenne or twelve fadomes water ; and the time being from October thou needest not to feare any thing : but looke to the South and thou shalt see the cape of S. Augustine: and looke to the North and thou shalt see a point, and to the Southeast a point called Punta de Olinda, where Aponiquay standeth. And the land from the cape to the poynt called Punta de Olinda lieth North and South. to Februarie, then I advise thee that if thou be East and West with the cape of Saint Augustine, thou shalt see within the land an high hill, having as it were a saddle upon it like to a camel: And thou shalt see to the Southwards three hilles along then presently thou the sea, and shalt see the coaste to lie Northeast and Southwest. [III. 720.] The height of Thou shalt understand that from this cape of Saint yjuafstifeS' A ug u s t I n e> ofOHndalS leagues to the North. And this cape standeth in eight Fernambuck. degrees and two third parts, and Olinda standeth in eight towne of Olinda, thou hast nine t he to be observed and kept, if thou depart from Lisbon in October or November. Take this advise, that if thou depart in February or the land thou shalt goe to beare In what height in nine degrees, because March from Lisbone, then ivith ^V^K March forwards raigne most commonly Southeast and X / ^ L r/ Southwest windes. And if by this height and course from Lisbon thou bring thyselfe nigh to the shore, feare not to in February bring thy ship coast is cleane: and there are no more dangers, but such as the sea doth breake upon. into 18 or 20 fadomes, for all the or March. that from to goe And if after thy fall with the land thou have occato the Northward, and so going seest sion certaine sholdes, doubt not to come for the North, and How t0 know thou shalt see the cape of Saint Augustine, which lyeth ^e cJ^e°^ as it were sloaping to the seaward, and hath as it were a Whales head, and hath upon it a round hill, with many hilles round about it. And if thou come along the sea coast much about the depth above mentioned, thou shalt see a little Island called Saint Alexio: And from this IsladfSant0 Island to the cape of Saint Augustine are foure leagues, and it standeth in eight degrees and three quarters. exw% T he course that a man must keepe to the bay called A Bahia de Todos os Santos, that is to say, The bay of all Saints, which lieth on the foresayd coast of Brasil. jjF thou goe for Bahia de Todos os Santos, thou must keepe the course which I have already set downe, and shalt observe the time from March %^^of forwards, as also from October forwards. Thou shalt understand that the Bahia de Todos os Santos standeth Todos 0$ in 13 degrees and J: and if thou goe in October or Santos in 13 after October, then goe to fall with the land in 12 degrees and degrees or 12 and a halfe. one third part. And take this for a warning, that when thou seest a it is in whiting, then thou must go along from the North to the South untill this white land doe end: and thou needest not to feare to goe along the coast, for there are no sholds. Before thou be cleane past the white land or white sands, thou shalt have sight of an Island that standeth along the bay, I say on the Northside of the bay, which is called Tapaon: and here the land lieth West and by South. When thou art so farre shot as Tapaon, thou shalt see a certaine great tree which is round, and standeth neere the sea upon the very point of the entrance into Bahia on the Northside. And marke well that if thou looke to the Southward, and seest no white grounds such as I wrote of before, but that they be all behind thee to the Northward: then when thou seest none to the Southward, thou mayest bee bold to beare in with Bahia. And if when thou goest into Bahia to the Northwest, and seest the sea to breake, feare nothing: for it is the breach of a certaine banke, whereon thou shalt have alwayes 5 or 6 fadomes water: and this be sure of. Thou shalt understand that if thou come for this place from March to the end of April, I would wish thee not to fall to the Southward of 13 degrees and a halfe. And falling with the land, and not seeing the white sands, thou shalt strive to goe to the Northward. And seeing the land in 13 degrees and a halfe, thou shalt have sight of an hill along the sea: And if thou be nigh the land, and cannot make it certaine what land it is: thou shalt marke if it bee a round high hill along the sea, that it is O morro de San Paulo, or, The hill of Saint Paul: and it lieth blacke and bare on the top. And from thence to Bahia is tenne leagues. And here along this hill on the Northwest side there is a great river called Tinsare: and it is a very good river. And in the entrance of Bahia there are sixe or seven fadomes water in the chanell. And I 76 The situation of the Isle of Tapaon. When a man may beare in with Bahia. The distance of O morro de San Paulo from Bahia. Rio de Tinsare a very bay very dangerous. S T ^* And if thou goe from Bahia to Fernambuck, then I advise thee that thou take good heede of the coast on the Northeast and Southwest, and thou shalt goe East, if the winde will suffer thee to goe East: and so goe thirtie or forty leagues off to the sea. I advise thee that thou beare not in with the land [III. 721.] of Fernambuck, but in the height of 9 or 10 degrees, Ththnghtof because that in 11 degrees thou shalt fall with the bay called A Enseada de Vazabaris. Also if thou come de Fazabaris. from Portugal and fallest with the land in eleven degrees, beare not in with it, neither come neere it, for thou mayest hurt thy selfe in so doing: but thou shalt shunne it, and goe to the Southward. For if thou lie to the North thou shalt bring thy selfe into some trouble. J^elda This Bay of All Saints standeth in thirteene degrees. Baia de todos And from thence to Fernambuck thou hast a hundreth Santos in 13 leagues: and the coast lyeth Northeast and Southwest. e%reesAnd from thence to Rio das Ilhas, that is, the river of the Islands the coast runneth Northeast and Southwest, I meane taking a quarter of the North and South. The course for Baia das Ilhas, that is, The bay of the Islands, which lie on the sayd coast of Brasil, & the marks for the finding of them, IF thou goe for Baia das Ilhas thou Baia das Ilhas looke for it in fifteene degrees must , , . lacking a quarter. ° liethinlS degrees lacking a quarter. If thou be minded as I sayd to goe for these Isles, if it bee from March forward, thou shalt fall with the land in 15 degrees and a halfe, and though it be in 15 degrees and f, it is all the better. And if thou have sight of certaine high hilles, that seeme to reach to the skie, these hilles are called As Serras Raiemores. Then having sight of these hilles, thou seest the Islands, thou mayest make accompt they be these which thou seekest, for there are no other on A round hill, al this coast, and thou shalt see a round hil along the sea. Thou shalt understand that on the North side of this hill is the going in of the river. But if it chance that thou finde thy selfe in a time that will not suffer thee to goe in, then goe along the Islands giving them a bredth off. And thou mayest well come to an ankor hard aboord them, for all is cleane ground. And thou shalt finde eight or nine fadomes, and from thence thou mayest goe into the river hard aboord the shore. And if it chance that thou goe from the North to the South all along the great Island, thou must keepe thy selfe from the land: and when thou hast brought it Eastnortheast, two cables length from the shore: for all is cleane ground. thou mayest ankor then t he N o r t h e a st windes, thou shalt seeke to fall with In what height If thou chance to arrive on this coast in the time "fdlZithMs of tlace\n time t^ie ^an<^ *n foureteene degrees. And if thou see a of the 'North- lowe land, thou mayest make accompt it is the land east winds. called Ciemana, and then thou shalt see Mangues: Ciemana. ^ n (j c o me along this coast to the angues. South: and when thou seest an ende of the low land, then thou shalt finde an high land along the sea like the other that I have made mention of before, that is, all sandie along the sea coast. t ] l ou s ^ t a i so And thou must understand, that where the high land beginneth, there is a little river called Rio das Contas, but enter not into it: it hath for a marke to be knowen by as it were a white mouth. And from thence to the Islands thou hast nine leagues. And at the ende of this high land to the Southward of it thou shalt thou find a great bay within shalt looke to the Westsouthwest, and shalt see another high land, which lieth as it were in the middest of the bay, and thou shalt there see certaine white houses 78 land, & then the Isles being so farre shotte as Rio de Contas. °^UC And thou shalt see within the land a round hill which is like Monte de laude, and it hath another copple on the South side. ;1S The course to sayle to Porto Seguro, that is to say, The safe haven, lying on the foresayd coast of Brasil, & the markes to know the same by. iF thou goe for Porto Seguro and goest in the time of the Southeast windes, which is from March forwards, I advise thee that thou fall not in more degrees then sixteen and a halfe, because of the sholdes called Os baixos dos Abrolhos, To avoide Os which are very dangerous, and stretch haixos dos ro 0St very farre into the sea. And also going West from them, that thou keepe thy lead going and be often sounding. And if thou chance to see the land, and an high hill and long withall, much like to The pike, it is the hill that is called Monte Pasqual. And from Monte thence thou must goe to the North, and when thou Pas4ualhast brought it Southwest of thee, then thou mayest beare with the land, but with great care to looke about thee. Marke when thou seest the land and commest to see a red cliffe, then looke to the Southward, and thou [III. 722.] shalt see a great smooth coast along the sea, and then on the North side thou shalt descrie Porto Seguro. And going along the coast thou shalt see the towne of Porto Seguro standing upon the toppe of an hill; which hill is a white rocke : and on the North side of the sayd rocke there is a very hie land. I advise thee that when thou art East and West with the sayd land, I meane with this rocke, that then thou looke to the Northward, and Porto Seguro, which standeth In 16 deg. & one third. 16 degrees, A dangerous river in 16 degrees. Baixos de Santo Antonio. THE ENGLISH VOYAGES thou shalt see certaine rocks lying two leagues off into the sea, whereon the sea doth breake, and to the Southward of them thou mayest come to an ankor against the towne, and hast a good place to ride in thirteen fadomes in sight of the towne. And if it be thy chance to arrive in the time of the Northeast winds, and commest in the height of fifteene degrees and two third parts, and seest not certaine hilles, then thou must goe along the coast being in 16 degrees, and under the first hie land that thou shalt descrie, thou shalt see certaine sandie bayes along the sea coast: And if thou have sight of a river in this height, put not thy selfe into it, neither beare with the land, for it hath many sholdes. And off them lie certaine sunken grounds, called Os Baixos de Santo Antonio. And from hence to the Southward lyeth Porto Seguro. I advise thee that going along the coast to the Southward, and seeing such sholdes, and the sea to breake thou upon them, as the other which I last spake of, shalt runne along them a sea boord of them: and when thou art at the end of them, then the towne will beare West of thee: and then thou mayest goe to thine ankoring place as is abovesayd, giving these sholds a good birth. The course to the haven named Baia do Spirito Santo, that is to say, The bay of the holy Ghost, lying on the sayd coast of Brasil, and the markes thereof. IHou shalt understand that the ship that goeth for Spirito Santo, when it hath the sholdes Os Baixos dos doubled Abrolhos, and hath brought it selfe in 20 or 19 degrees and a halfe, then it Monzoins are O ^ j L S j SO may hall with the land in 18 or 19 twentie. certaine set w * th i i which the tides And the sayd shippe must goe in this height, because set degrees and a halfe, and in 1 on this coast there are no Monzoins. \r~*a**m^ • 1 11 • it* 1 ds w n ii \ and seest lowe land to the Northwest off thee, then Nortk side °f thou art on the North side of Spirito Santo, and thou mayest make accompt that it is the land lying over Criquare, and over the river called Rio dolce, that is the river of sweete or fresh water. If thou come along the land thou shalt find certaine high hilles: but trust not the first that thou seest only. For besides the rest thou shalt see a round hie hill which is at the capes end, which is called la Sierra de mestre Alvaro. Take heede that ^he situation going for this land thou looke to the North and thou °{i shalt see a river called Rio dos Reyes Magos: that is, Alvaro. The river of the three kings. And comming to the Rio dos Reyes Southward thou shalt see presently the mouth of the bay mag°sto open. At the end of this hill on the South side, thou hast a point of a rocke, which is called A punta do Tubaron. And on the South side of the bay it hath two or three blacke hie hilles, and in the middest of the bay thou shalt goe in westward. errade l^e I advise thee that in going in thou take heede of a sholde which lieth in the mouth of the bay: thou must leave it to the Southward of thee, and then plie to double a certaine Island which lieth within, and thou must leave it to the Northward of thee: and when it beareth on the North or Northeast, thou mayest come to an ankor: for all is cleane ground. And if thou chance to come by this course, and fallest in 20 degrees, and seest many hilles, and one among the rest very high and craggie: it is called A Sierra de Guari- A Stefra^e parim, that is, the hill of Guaraparim, and seest another in^dlsrees hill on the North side, which is called A Sierra de Pero A Sierra de Cam: both these lie on the South side of Spirito Santo. Pero Cam. And from these hils thou shalt see a little hill named Guaipel. And when thou seest these hilles, thou shalt see three little Islands together, lying to the Southward: And then from these thou shalt see another rockie, bare, and round Island: and to the land off this Island thou shalt see a great bay. If thou wilt thou mayest ankor 81 xi here safely. And if thou wilt go in, thou shalt bring thy selfe East and West with the hill, and so thou mayest go in. And thou shalt leave a lowe land to the North of thee, which is called A Ilha de Repouso, that is, the j s j e Qf j $ | e j i e t }l a j o n g c o a s t . r e s t . t j 1 0u t h j s a n ( j a nd t he mayest be bold to ride betwixt it and the maine, giving it a breadth off. From these three Islands to Spirito Santo are 12 Spirito Santo leagues: and running Northwards to come to Spirito standeth in 20 Santo, thou shalt see another Island, and shalt go a seaegreeSm egreeS boord of it, and by & by the mouth of the bay will open toward thee. And this bay standeth in 20 degrees. [III. 723.] The course from the bay de Spirito Santo to the bay of S. Vincent, and the markes thereof. Also the course from Saint Vincent to the river of Plate. Ailing from Spirito Santo for Saint Vincent, thou mayest goe along the coast, keeping seven or eight leagues off, and must goe to seeke Cabo Frio, that is, The cold toward cape. And as Cabo Frio, thou hast a very great bay called Bahia de Salvador, that is, The bay of our Saviour. And from thence thou hast twelve leagues to Cabo Frio. thou commest And before thou commest to Cabo Frio, thou hast two small Islands. Thou mayest go safely either a sea boord of them, or else betweene them. Thou shalt understand that Cabo Frio hath as it were an Island in the midst of the face or shew thereof, that doth cut off the cape. Thou mayest ride safely on the West side thereof; for all is cleane ground. Understand that Cabo Frio standeth in 23 degrees: and from it to Rio de Jenero are twelve leagues. And this river of Jenero hath in the mouth thereof 3 or 4 Islands. And if thou wilt go into this river de Jenero, thou 82 Baia de Salvador 12 leagues North from Cabo frio. Two small Islands. The height of Cape Frio in 23 degrees. this river there is a great hill seeming to bee a man with a k^**\ long haire. lo™an 2rT And take this for advise, that if thou be in the height of this river, thou shalt see certaine high hilles within the land, which be like unto organs. And when thou seest The organs these organs, then make accompt thou art right against ^f?*** high the river: and comming neere the land thou shalt see a certaine Island very round, which lieth to the Southward, and is hie and bare in the top. Thou must know that the mouth of this river standeth in 23 degrees and one third part. And from this river to Angra, that is to say, Angra. The open haven, thou hast 15 leagues. Goe not neere the land there, except necessitie compell thee. I advise thee, that from this river that I spake of, I meane from the entrance thereof, thou must goe Westsouthwest, and Southwest, and West and by South. And thou shalt see a great Island called Isla de San Sebastiano, A llha de San and to the Southward thereof another small Island very Sebastianohigh, called the Island of Alcatrarzas, that is to say, The The Isle of Island of Pellicanes: but come not neere it, for it hath Jlcatrarzasdangerous shoalds. And from hence thou mayest go West, and so thou shalt fall right with the mouth of Saint Vincent, and if thou meane to goe into Saint Vincent thou must leave this Island to the Westward. And understand that Saint Saint Vincent lieth in foure and twentie degrees. And when * j j^ j^iands thou art in the mouth of this bay, or art neere the about ye mouth mouth of it, then thou shalt see many other Islands, ofS. Vincent, to the seaward. And having &one out t0 and one among the rest these sights, thou hast the best markes that bee for these the seawardIslands, that I have told thee of: and this Island lieth Northwest and Southeast with the mouth of S. Vincent. thou shalt see an Island. And rincen* 83 Francisco. Boca de Overniron. Ilka de Arvoredo, SantaCatalina a great Island. Porto de Patos. Porto de Don Roderigo. Laguna. Rio de Martin de Sousa. The course from Saint Vincent to the river of Plate. om S. Vincent to Cananea thou hast 40 leagues: and the coast lieth Northeast and by East, and Southwest and by West. From Cananea to the river of Saint Francisco are fifteene leagues, and the coast lieth Northeast and Southwest. There is a little Island, which hath as it were two bayes, and a good rode, and is in 26 degrees and a quarter, and towards the maine it is hie and craggie. From San Francisco to Boca de Overniron are 26 leagues, and the coast lieth North & South. Also thou must marke that the river of San Francisco hath a great entrance, and 3 small Islands, and to seaward it hath a good road; and the maine is high and craggie. From this Boca de Overniron to Ilha de Arvoredo thou hast no great markes be observed: but this Boca is a very great bay, and this bay is deepe within the Island, and is a good road, and hath many Islands, and standeth in 28 degrees. And to the North of this Island under the point there is a good road: and there is no other road hereabout but the Island. this, and it is under From hence thou shalt have sight of the Isle called Santa Catharina, which is a great Island about eight or nine leagues long, and lieth North and South. And hard by even with this Hand is Porto de Patos, which standeth in 29 degrees. And from Porto de Patos to Porto de Don Roderigo are ten or eleven leagues: and the coast lieth North and South. And from Porto de Don Roderigo to Laguna are 5 leagues. And this is a good harbour for all winds, except the Northeast wind. From the Laguna to the river called Rio de Martin de Sousa are 42 leagues. And the coast is somthing where ships may ride well. And from the river of Martin de Sousa to Rio de San Pedro are 52 leagues, Rio de S. and the coast lieth Northeast and Southwest. Pedro. From this river of San Pedro there lieth a point of sand a good league off and more, and it lyeth on the Southwest side of the port. And from thence to Cabo Cabo de Santa de Santa Maria are 42 leagues: and the coast lieth ManaNortheast and Southwest, and all is lowe land. Also on the Southeast side of Cabo de Santa Maria there lyeth an Isle two leagues off into the sea, and it hath a good harborough betwixt it and the mayne. And note that the mayne is lowe land. The cape of Santa Maria standeth in 35 degrees, and at the point thereof it hath an Island a league into the sea. Hereafter followeth a Ruttier from the sayd river of Plate to the Streight of Magelane. thence to He cape of Santa Maria is in 35 degrees. From the Cape de Santo Antonio, which is on the other side of the river, are 30 leagues Northnortheast, & Southsouthwest. And this the broadest place of the river. And this cape is in 36 degrees and a halfe, and it is a blacke grosse land. And thou must marke that 25 leagues a seaboord the mouth of the river there lie certaine sands, which be called Baixos de los Castellanos. Baixos de ks is He that falleth with the Cape of Santa Maria must CU take good heede to go Southeast untill hee be in 36 degrees, and from thence Southsoutheast untill 36 degrees and a halfe, giving the sayd sholds de los Castellanos a breadth: and also taking Keede of the flats of the cape. And when hee findeth 40 or 45 fadomes, and russet sand, then he must goe Southwest and by South, untill he be in 40 degrees: where hee shall find great store