they cannot be suffered to rule & governe. Also the Indians have complayned against me, because I have burned their villages in this last rebellion. Wherefore if your Majestie doe not send some order for this countrey and see into these cases, it will breed great dissention and rebellion among us, and we shall be readie to cut one anothers throat before it be long. Thus I thought good, according to my humble bounden dutie, and for the service of your Majestie and quietnesse of this realme, to certifie your Majestie the truth of the whole matter; hoping in short time that your Majestie will send some good order to qualifie these broyles: for there is great hatred and malice among us. Jesus Christ preserve and keepe the royall person of your Majestie with long health, as it pleaseth him. From the Captaineship of Parajua this present 20 of August. 1597. Feliciano Cieza de Carvalsho. special note concerning the currents of the sea betweene the Cape of Buena Esperanza and the coast of Brasilia, given by a French Pilot to Sir John Yorke knight, before Sebastian Cabote ; which pilot had the coasts of Brasilia eighteene voyages. frequented Emorandum, that from Cabo de buena Esperanza unto Brasilia the Sunne hath the like dominion over the tides there, as the Moone hath over our tides here. And that whensoever the Sunne is in any of these signes he governeth the tides as followeth. f Taurus The Sunne being in< Gemini I Cancer 72 the tide hath his course Northwest. ] )• no current. [Libra J The Sunne being in j Sagittarius 1 1 Capricorne J t i d e t he h a* h h is c C o u r se S o u t h e a s t { Aquarius 1 Pisces Aries I no current. J A ruttier or course to be kept for him that will sayle from Cabo Verde to the coast of Brasil, and all along the coast of Brasil unto the river of Plate : and namely first from Cabo Verde to Fernambuck. He ship that goeth from Cabo Verde to Brasil, must goe Southsoutheast: and when she is within 5 or 6 degrees of the Equinoctial she must go Southeast and by South. And if she have the ternados, that is thundrings and lightthou must go altogether nings, then South, or that way and by that boord that doth profit thee most. And take this for advise, that having the general winds, & if the wind be at South or Southeast, then go Southwest, or westsouthwest. And if the winde be South, then goe Southwest, and by this way but little, for it is not a way for thy profit, because the more thou goest this way, the more will be thy thou mayest not come neerer the trouble, because coaste of Guinea then 60 or 70 leagues unto the sholde called Os baixos de Santa Anna. And being this distance from the same, thou shalt cast about the other way towards Brasil, and the wind will be large. Thou shalt understand that the ship that keepeth this course to Fernambuck, and goeth in October or after, and chanceth to goe to windward of the Isle 73 Te that will sayle to Brasil, must not come within 60 or 70 leagies of the coast of