the mouth of the river of Plata, and all along up within the sayd river, and what armes and mouthes it hath to enter into it, as farre as it is navigable with small barks. Rom the Isle of Santa Catelina, (which is in 28 degrees of Southerly latitude) unto Rio Grande is fortie leagues. This river by another name is called Ygai. The Island of Santa Catelina is sixe leagues in length : It hath two small Hands on the North side betweene the maine land and it: and on the South side it hath a shoald of rockes, which lyeth hidden very neere unto the poynt of the Isle. You are to passe betweene the firme land and the poynt of the Isle. From Santa Catelina to the haven of Biaza, which by another name is called la Laguna, are twelve leagues: it is a good haven within: but you must stay the full sea to enter into it, because it hath shoaldes in the mouth, and it may be knowen by a small Island which lyeth a league into the sea which is called La Isla de Raparo, that is The Island of succour or defence, and you must ride there to search the chanell. From this harbour unto the river before named there is no haven for a ship to harbour it selfe. And Rio Grande hath many shoalds in the mouth thereof. It is a river that none but very small shippes can enter into. And this river divideth the countrey of the people called Carios from other nations which are called Guavaes. And from this river unto the entrance of the mouth of the river of Plate it is al a plaine land, and very low: you must saile all along two or three leagues into the sea from the shore, untill you come to certaine Islands which lye twelve leagues from the mouth of the river of Plate. 96 The hie of Santa Catelina. Rio Grande, Puerto de Biaza, or Laguna. Is/a de raparo. Rio Grande. Certaine Hands 12 leagues distant from the mouth of the river of Plate, which are 3 in coast runneth Northeast and Southwest, somewhat inclining a poynt to the South. The Islands are three, and may be knowen as you come from the sea by two poynts, which shew like the eares of a conie: you may ride betweene them and the maine. From Rio Grande to the Cape of Saint Marie are 80 The Cape of leagues : and the Cape may be knowne by one Island s- Mariewhich lyeth from it a league and an halfe into the sea. i^IueTffhalfe You may sayle betweene the maine and that Island, be- frOm Cape cause there is above 8 or 9 fathoms water. The Cape of Saint Marie. Saint Mary standeth in 35 degrees of Southerly latitude. The Cape of Santa Maria upon the poynt thereof hath a little hill which standeth over against the Isle of Seales. From this coast of Santa Maria you must coast along the The way to land alway on the North shore, and along the same are enter wtojte Isla de Lohou j_ - T> T» A.\ r+ *. L\ ' r o 1 • river of Plate. certaine myes. JHrom the Cape unto the river or bolis are ^0 /e^0n5 tenne leagues, the coast runneth East and West. There 10 leagues standeth an Island over against the mouth thereof. From within the this river of Solis unto Los tres Mogotes which are on ^ape. the maine land is three leagues. And from Los Mogotes unto the Isles of Saint Graviel are other 8 or 9 leagues Saint Graviel more: all this distance runneth East and West. These 8 leagues. are five small Islands: to ride here you must keepe somewhat neere the maine within an harquebuze shot halfe a league before you come at the Islands, and straightway you shall see a crosse ^ standing on the said land, and there is an harbour for some winds. ^^LaJm' From Saint Graviel unto the river of Sant Juan going Rio de S. Juan along the same coast, I say on the North shore, are three 3 leagues. leagues: it is very well knowen by the broken cliffe which it hath, which is a white hill. The entrance into this river is very dangerous: because it is shallow, and none but very small shippes can enter into the same: the entrance thereof is on the West side very neere the land, ^ ^ great Carackes may ride within the harbour. From this Martin Garriver unto the Isle of Martin Garzia are three leagues: it zia 3 leagues. ,, xi 97 Island, I say, over against the same, you shall have three fathoms water, and on the West side it hath a little creeke where you may ride. He that desireth to crosse over the river of Plate unto m u st Rio de Buenos the river de Buenos Aeres from the Isles of Saint Graviel, s^RpG his course Southwest: and the cut over is ^resmthe 'therfoerof sixeteene leagues and upon his arrivall on the South shore of the river, hee must seeke a chanell of three Plate. fathomes water, and straite he must goe along the coast [III. 729.] untill hee come to a broken cliffe and a poynt like unto the firme land, which is distant from this chanell three or foure leagues: and when thou seest this broken cliffe, first keepe thee a league from it. Here upon this river of The taffantfin Buenos A£res was t he first Colonie that D on Pedro de Ihel'wfrof" Mendoza planted. This river lieth very much hidden: Buenos Aeres. because it is not seene, it is very shallow at a low sea, wherefore you must come in with the first of the flood. From the Isle of Martin Garzia unto certaine small Islands which are called the Isles of Saint Lazarus is two The Isles of San Lazaro. l e ag U e Sj these are shoalds: and to goe thither you must goe hard aboord the maine, for there goeth the chanell: all this is to be passed on the North shore, and with small barkes, and with good heede. From the Isle of Martin Garzia to the mouthes of the river are eight leagues in passing along on this side to seeke one of the mouthes of the river Parana, as it is hereafter described. But you had need first to harbour in a bay, which is in the very cliffe or Barranca, and you must stay for the full sea. And if you fall into the Rio Uruay. mouth of the river which is called Uruay, you must leave it on the right hand, I say on the North side. And foorthwith leaving the said mouth forward toward the West, you may enter into the first mouth although it seeme narrow; or rather you may enter into any of Parana is the the mouthes: for all of them meete together in Parana, great river. which is the maine river. these armes, or mouthes to speake more properly, is to Palmasshape his course to the West, and comming over to the other shore, and sayling along the coast Northnorthwest hee shall discover the mouth of this river of Palmas: and hee must enter hard by Los Juncales, which lye on the South side: and afterward within is very deepe sounding. All these mouthes of this river which are 5, are full of sholds towards the East above the space of two leagues. And if the course of the water were not swift there, you could not enter into them, as I have already sayd, and you must passe all along with much heede and foresight. And if peradventure you have passed Cape Saint Marie . r 7 1 and are come over to Cape Blanco, consider it, that it is Cape Blanco so even and smooth a land, that you can scarcely dis- onthe^th • 1 • cerne it a league from the maine, unlesse it be a very mouthofthe cleare day: and after this sort the coast lieth low unto river of Plate the river de Buenos Aeres. And from thence the coast a v*w low lyeth somewhat high unto the entrance of the river de andevenland. Palmas: all the coast runneth as I sayd before. And all along this coast are naughty people, which eate those Man-eaters which they kill, and many Tygers. g £ *' ' S G U th side of the 1 J lea&ue\ °ffFrom the Isle of Martin Garzia unto Sant Salvador is Sant Salvador nine or tenne leagues. This is an Island which standeth ** Island ten two leagues within the first mouth : where Sebastian Cabota tooke possession. And this countrey is very well peopled QaClT by a people called Carios; and you must beware of all these people : for they are your deadly enemies. The most Southerly mouth of Parana called Rio de Palmas is sixteene leagues long, and it hath many turnings, and l6- Leagues. many palme or date-trees growing neere it, whereupon it is called The river of palme trees: and forthwith it entreth into the river Parana, as soone as these sixteene leagues are finished. All the other armes containe likewise sixteene leagues in length, saving one small or narrowe arme, which is called The river de los Beguaes; for this containeth fortie leagues in length. From this from Rio de Pa/mas. Los Tenbuis a people. 15. Leagues. The Quiloacas 20. leagues. This towne perhaps may be the towne qfSantaAnna, 15. leagues. The Mequaretas a people. 20 leagues. The Mepenes 30 leagues. 8. leagues. The river Paraguai. The 7. currents. [in. 730.] The towne of Piquiri or Picora 170 leagues up the river of Parana. you must enter by the mouth of the river of Palmas unto Santo Spirito, the way is fiftie leagues: you are to passe still along the cliffes. As you enter on the left hand which is on the West shore up this river there are many Isles, lakes and small rivers, and many Indians which are your enemies. From Santo Spirito unto a people which are called Los Tenbuis is fifteene leagues. This is by the narrow arme whereby they passe into the river Parana: it is the more because it is the longer way. From the Tenbuis by this narrow arme upward unto the Quiloacas, which is another nation, are twentie leagues; and all up this river is great store of people. From the Quiloacas, to a place where the Spaniards now have builded a towne, are fifteene leagues. From this towne unto the people called Los Mequaretas is twentie leagues. Here are many sholds which continue thirtie leagues. All these thirtie leagues are sunken landes: where are many Isles, flats, and nations, which are our enemies. From the Mequaretas unto the people called Mepenes are these thirtie leagues. And from hence begin the coasts of the firme land unto the mouth of the river Paraguai; saving that there are eight leagues more of sunken ground. From the Mepenes unto the mouth of the river of Paraguai are thirtie leagues: it is a river that cannot be mistaken although it hath many armes and Islands and dangers, it hath a marke two leagues beneath the mouth on the East side, to wit, an high land, where are 7 points, which we call the 7 currents: and immediatly above these currents there is an Island as you passe up the river over against the poynt aforesaid standeth the mouth of Paraguai. Thic mouth is very plaine to be found in seeking whereof a man cannot be deceived. From this mouth the river of Parana is divided, which is a very great river : and it goeth unto the towne of Piquiri, which is an hundred and seventie leagues: and it runneth all this space they bee divided. From the place The citie of North and South, and in the way are many flats and shoalds; and great store of people, which are a bad nation, although where these two rivers are divided, that is to say, from Assumptions the mouth of Paraguai are sixtie leagues unto the citie f^™™!^' of Assumption. This is a good river, and better to sayle ^ mouth of then all the rest of the rivers, which are in this countrey. Paraguai. And from this towne to Los Xaraes are 200. leagues, 200. leagues fiom Assumpvery well inhabited with people of divers nations, which ti°n subject to the SpLiard, x%*T?°f e serve the Spanyards. , i J J T HE TWO FAMOUS VOYAGES Happily perfourmed round about the world, by Sir Francis Drake, and M. Thomas Candish Esquire, together with the rest of our English voyages intended for the South Sea, the kingdomes of Chili, Peru, the backe side of Nueva Espanna, the Malucos, the Philippinas, the mightie empire of China, though not so happily perfourmed as the two former: whereunto are annexed certaine rare observations touching the present state of China, and the kingdome of Coray, lately invaded by Quabacondono the last monarch of the 66. princedomes of Japan. The famous voyage of Sir Francis Drake into the South sea, and therehence about the whole Globe of the earth, begun in the yeere of our Lord, 1577. le 15. day of November, in the yeere of our I Lord 1577. M. Francis Drake, with a fleete of "five sfyips and barkes, and to the number of 164. men, gentlemen and sailers, departed from Plimmouth, giving out his pretended voyage for Alexandria: but the wind falling contrary, hee was forced the