T WO VOYAGES Of certaine Englishmen to the river of Plate situate in 35 degrees of southerly latitude: toruttier and description gether with an exact thereof, and of all the maine branches, so farre as they are navigable with small barkes, by which river the Spaniards of late yeeres have frequented an exceeding rich trade to and from Peru, and the mines of Potossi, as also to Chili, and other places. A report of a voyage of two Englishmen in the for company of Sebastian Cabota, intended the Malucos by the Streights of Magellan, but perfourmed onely to the river of Plate in April 1527. Taken out of the information of M. Robert Thorne to Doctor Ley Ambassadour for King Henry the eight, to Charles the Emperour, touching the discovery of the Malucos by the North. N a flote of three ships and a caravell This was the that went from this citie of Sivil armed fi?etfwheretn by the merchants of it, which departed J* eJ$ in Aprill last past, I and my partner of Plate, have one thousand foure hundred duckets i5 2^- Two that wee employed principally the sayd fleete, in for that two Englishmen, ^LTin this friendes of mine, which are somewhat learned in Cos- discovery. mographie, should goe in the same ships, to bring me certaine relation of the countrey, and the situation of to be expert in the navigation of those seas, and there I desire to know especially. Seeing to have informations of many other things, and advise those that quarters are ships and mariners of that countrey, and cardes by which they saile, though much unlike ours: that to have the sayd cards, and learne how they understand them, and especially to know what navigation they have for those Islands Northwards and Northeastward. they should procure in The Islands of For if from tkeMalucos. w i t h o ut interposition of land to saile from the said Islands the sea doth extend the North the Northeast point one thousand seven point hundred or one thousand eight hundred leagues, they should come to The new found Islands that we disThe New f2lt\lr7ddb c o v e r e d> & the English'! by almost 200 leagues then the Emperour, or the king so we should be neerer to the said Spicerie to of Portugall are. An extract out of the discourse of one Lopez the fight of M. Vaz a Portugal, touching Fenton with the Spanish ships, with a report of the proceeding of M. John Drake after his departing from him to the river of Plate. the Pon relation of Pedro Sarmiento concerning the streits of Magellan, that they might be fortified, and for that the there were ships in king heard, that England preparing for the same streits, he commanded Diego Flores de Valdes a noble man of Spaine, to passe thither with 23 ships, and 3500 men to stoppe the passage of the Englishmen. There went in this fleete the governour of Chili, with 500 olde souldiers that came out of Flanders: Five ships of but this was the unhappiest fleet of ships that ever 'aw^lnthT w e nt o ut o f . S P a i n e: coast of Spaine. c o a st °f Spaine a storme tooke them, and cast away [III. 727.] five of the fleete and in them above 800 men, and the for before they came from the