I desire to know especially. Seeing to have informations of many other things, and advise those that quarters are ships and mariners of that countrey, and cardes by which they saile, though much unlike ours: that to have the sayd cards, and learne how they understand them, and especially to know what navigation they have for those Islands Northwards and Northeastward. they should procure in The Islands of For if from tkeMalucos. w i t h o ut interposition of land to saile from the said Islands the sea doth extend the North the Northeast point one thousand seven point hundred or one thousand eight hundred leagues, they should come to The new found Islands that we disThe New f2lt\lr7ddb c o v e r e d> & the English'! by almost 200 leagues then the Emperour, or the king so we should be neerer to the said Spicerie to of Portugall are. An extract out of the discourse of one Lopez the fight of M. Vaz a Portugal, touching Fenton with the Spanish ships, with a report of the proceeding of M. John Drake after his departing from him to the river of Plate. the Pon relation of Pedro Sarmiento concerning the streits of Magellan, that they might be fortified, and for that the there were ships in king heard, that England preparing for the same streits, he commanded Diego Flores de Valdes a noble man of Spaine, to passe thither with 23 ships, and 3500 men to stoppe the passage of the Englishmen. There went in this fleete the governour of Chili, with 500 olde souldiers that came out of Flanders: Five ships of but this was the unhappiest fleet of ships that ever 'aw^lnthT w e nt o ut o f . S P a i n e: coast of Spaine. c o a st °f Spaine a storme tooke them, and cast away [III. 727.] five of the fleete and in them above 800 men, and the for before they came from the that they should proceede: and so there went out on the voyage 16 of the shippes, for two more of their fleete were much spoyled by the storme which they had. in In these sixteene shippes Pedro Sarmiento was sent to bee governour the straites, and had assigned unto him 500 men to stay there with him, and hee carried with him all kinde of Artificers to make him forts, and other necessaries, with great store of ordinance and other munition. This fleete because it was late, did winter on the This fleete coast of Brasil, in the river of Jenero: and from thence w™tr?dtn they went when the winter was past, and about the jeJ^ height of 42 degrees they had a sudden storme, so that Diego Flores beat it up and downe 22 dayes, in which time hee lost one of the best ships he had, which had in her 300 men and 20 women, that went to inhabit the Streits : and in this ship also was most part of the munition which should have bene left in the Streits, so in the end the storme grew to bee so great, that the ships were not able to endure it any longer, but were put backe unto an Island called Santa Catelina : and there he found a barke wherein were some fryers going for the M. Fenton river of Plate: which friers ef$ English ships, and a pinnesse, which had taken them, Sryefs' them any but harme, but onely asked them for the king of Spaines ships. told him of two great t0Ik tooke nothing from them, nor did ese Hereupon Diego Flores knowing that these English ships would goe for the Streits, determined to goe thither, although it was in the moneth of Februarie, and choosing 10 ships of the 15 that were left, hee left two ships which were not in case to goe to sea at the Island, and into the other three ships which were old, and shaken with the storme hee put all the women and sicke men in all the fleete, and sent them to the river of Jenero, and he with the other 10 returned again for the Streits. twixt our 2 English ships Ef? three Spanish ships. They victual at Spirito Santo. John Drake proceedeth on to the river of Plate. RichardFaireweather re- mayneth in the river of Plate, THE ENGLISH VOYAGES The three ships in which the sicke men and women were, went to Brasil, and there they found within the port of S. Vincent the two ships before mentioned. They woulde have had the English men to have gone out of the harbour, and thereupon they fell to fight, and because that these three ships were weake with the storme, and the men that they had were the worst in all the fleete, the Englishmen easily put them to the worst, and sunke one of them, and might have sunke another, if the Englishmen would : but they minded not the destruction of any man : for that is the greatest vertue that can be in a man, that when hee may doe hurt, yet he will not doe it. So the Englishmen went from this port to Spirito Santo, where they had victuals for their merchandise, and so they went backe for England, without doing of any harme in the Countrey. The cause why these English shippes under the conduct of M. Fenton went not to the streits, I know not: but some say that they were put backe by foule weather: other some say that it was for feare of the kings ships. But the pinnesse of these two ships went from them, in which was Captaine John Drake: the cause why they parted I know not, but the pinnesse came into the river of Plate, and within five leagues of Seale Island, not farre from the place where the Earle of Cumberlands shippes did take in fresh water, shee was cast away upon a ledge of rockes : but the men were saved in their boat, which were in number 18, who went ashore on the Northside, and went a dayes journey into the land, and met with the Savages which are no men-eaters, but take all the Christians that they can, and make them slaves. But the Englishmen fought with them and the Savages slew five of them, and tooke 13 alive, which were with the Savages about 15 moneths. But the Master of the pinnesse, whose name was Richard Faireweather being not willing to indure the misery that hee was in, and having knowledge that there was a towne of Christians on the other side of the river, he in a night called John Drake, and another yong man which was with them, and tooke a very little Canoa, which had but two oares, & so passed to the other side of the river, which is about 19 leagues broade, and were three dayes before they could get over without meat: and comming to land, they hit upon an high way that went towardes the Christians: and seeing the footing of horses, they followed it, and at last came to an house where there was corne sowed, and there they met with Indians servants unto the Spaniards, which gave them meate, and clothes to cover them, for they were all naked, and one of the Indians went to the towne, and told them of the Englishmen; so the Captaine sent foure horsemen, who brought them to the towne behind them. This Captaine clothed them, and provided lodging for them, and John Drake dieted at the Captaines table, and they were all very well intreated, the Captaine purposing to send them for Spaine. But the Viceroy of Peru having John Drake newes hereof, sent for them, and so John Drake was sent s^t0 to him, but the other two were kept there, because they were married in the countrey, so that I know no more of [in. 728.] their affaires. p^^ f Upon this comming of the Englishmen, there were prepared 50 horsemen to goe over the river to seeke the rest of the Englishmen, and also certaine Spaniards that were among the savage people, but I am not certaine, whether they went forward or not. 95