The voyage of M. John Winter into the South sea by the Streight of Magellan, in consort with M. Francis Drake, begun in the yeere 1577. By which Streight also he returned safely into England the second of June 1579. contrary to the false reports of the Spaniards which gave out, that the said passage was not repasseable: Written by Edward ClifFe Mariner. JN the yeere of our Lord 1577. the 19. of September there went out of the river of Thamis over the lands ende one good and newe ship called the Elizabeth, of 80 tunnes in burthen: in company whereof went also a small pinnesse being 12 tunnes in burthen called the Benedict. The sayd ship with her pinnesse arrived at Plimmouth: in which haven were three ships more, one called the Pellican in burthen 120 tunnes, being Admirall of the fleete: a barke called the Marigold in burthen thirty tunnes, with a flieboat of 50 tunnes. These ships had in them 164 men, and were victualled and furnished with all kind of necessary provision to make a voyage into the South sea. Wee set sayle the 15 of November, but were put into Falmouth by contrary winds: and afterward were constrained to put backe againe to Plimmouth to repaire the great hurt which divers of our fleete had sustained in that tempest: and at length the V Oyage. They set for- 13 of December wee set forward from thence upon our wardfrom 1%. of Deem- T he five and twentie of December we had sight of her. this Cape lyeth in the latitude of 32. Cape Cantin. degrees and 30. minutes upon the coast of Barbarie, Asaphu Cape Cantin: neere to a towne called Asaphi. The land all along this coast is hie and great mountaines. Sayling from the sayd Cape Southsouthwest about 18 leagues, wee found a little Island called Mogador an English mile distant Mogador an from the maine, we sent our boat to sound the depth, Island°n th* and at the returne thereof we understood by our men Cfafi that the haven was without danger, having five fathomes of water fast by the rocks entring in upon the poynt of the Island: wherefore wee entred in with our whole fleete the 27 of December. The Moores that were on the maine seeing our ships ride there, came from the mountaines to beholde us: whom our Generall, M. Francis Drake espying, shewed to them a white flagge in token of friendship, and sent his boat to shore with one of our men, which not long before had bene captive in the countrey, and partly understoode their language, to talke with them. When the boate came to shore, the sayd man went on land to them: to whom they shewed many tokens of friendship, casting up their eyes to heaven, and after looking downe upon the ground, as though they had sworne by heaven and earth, promising peace. That done two of them came aboord to our Generall, and our man stayed on shore for a pledge. These two Moores, after they had made good cheere, to and received certaine gifts of our Generall went shore againe, and our man came aboord also. But the craftie slaves having devised to betray us, came the next day along the sea side with certain camels as though they had brought some merchandize to traffique with us: to whom our General sent certaine of our men in the boat to learne what they had brought, giving charge that none of them should goe on land. But the boate [III. 749.] being neere the shore one of our men more hastie then wise lept immediatly tooke by force, and setting him on horsebacke caried him away into the mountaines, so that we saw him no In the meane time wee set up a more after that time. Pinnesse in the island, whereof wee brought 4 loose out F™re.lme of England: which being finished, the last of December bought out of wee weighed, and came out of the North part of the England. to shore; whom the Moores island, the same way that wee came in: for the South chanel is dangerous, having but 8 foote at low water, and is full of rockes. This island standeth in 31 degrees 2 °f latitude, being one league in circuite, not inhabited; and hath infinite number of doves upon it. At Sea wee met with a contrary winde, so that wee beate off and on, till the 4 of Januarie 1578, at which time a more favourable winde began to blowe at Northeast, and then wee set our course Southsouthwest, till Cape de Guer On the 7 of Januarie wee came as high as Cape de Guer, m 30 degrees, ^ j^ standeth in 30 degrees of latitude. Here our new Pinnesse tooke 3 Spanish fisher-boates, called Cantars. From thence wee ran Southwest and Southsouth- west, carying the sayd Cantars along with us, till the 10 of the sayd moneth, at which time wee found our selves in 27 degrees 4 min. being 10 leagues WestCape Bojador southwest from Cape Bojador, which lieth on the maine h ZminegreeS' l a nd of A f r i c a- t h e n ce we ran South and by West, untill the 13 day at noone, at which time wee had sight of Rio del Oro, where our Pinnesse tooke a Portugall caravel. The 15, the Marigold took a caravel F r om Cape de las about Cape de las Barbas. And thence we ran along t ' ie c o a st being low sandie land, till wee arrived at Cape Cat>eB/anco in 20 degrees. Blanco. This Cape sheweth it selfe like the corner of a 30 mh. wall upright from the water, to them which come from the Northwardes: where the North pole is elevated 20 degrees 30 min. And the Crociers being the guards of the South pole, be raised 9 degrees 30 min. The said Crociers be 4 starres, representing the forme of a crosse, and be 30 degrees in latitude from the South pole: and the lowest starre of the sayd Crociers is to be taken, when it is directly under the uppermost; and being so taken as many degrees as it wanteth of 30, so many you are to the Northwards of the Equinoctial: and as many degrees as be more then 30, so many degrees you are to the Southwards of the Equinoctial. And if you finde it to be just 30 then you be it doeth blow for Within the sayd Cape Blanco wee tooke one ship more, all the men being fled away, save two. We brought this ship with all the rest which wee had taken before, into our harbour, 5 leagues within the Cape, where we washed and trimmed our ships, and went to sea againe the 22 of Januarie, leaving all the Spaniards there with their ships, saving one Cantar, for which our Generall gave them the Benedict. In which course wee ran continually to the Southwest, untill the 26 day, when wee found the North pole raysed 15 degrees 15 min. having the winde Northeast or Eastnortheast, which is common on that coast. For the most part continually from the shore: and we kept the sayd course, untill wee came neere the island Bonavista, within 2 leagues off the shore; so that wee haled off againe Northwest, the space of one houre, and then ran Southwest againe, till day light the 27 of Januarie: from which time wee ran Southsouthwest, untill 3 of the clocke in the afternoone, at which time we approched neere the island of Mayo, being high and hilly land, The hie of saving that the North part of the island stretcheth out Mmo' it selfe, a league into the sea very lowe. Wee came to anker under the West part of this island the 28 day of Januarie, and stayed there untill the 30 of the same. During which time, our General appointed M. John Winter and M. Thomas Doughtie, to goe over to the East part of the island with 70 men, to get some fresh victuals. And as wee marched through the island, about the middest thereof, we found one house having a garden belonging to it, in which wee found ripe grapes, also Ripe grapes in ripe gourds, and melons, in the most dead time of our JanuarieWinter. Wee found also a tree which beareth the fruite Cocos, which is bigger then a mans head, having within The Cocos the utter coate, which is about 3 inches thicke, a certaine treenut as bigge as two fists, and hath within a white sub- stance, cleaning fast to the shell, which is halfe an inche thick, very pleasant to taste, and within that a certaine and pleasant water in taste, and as some thinke, marveilous comfortable. As we passed through this island the inhabitants fledde into the mountaines, so that we could have no talke with them. But we understood by the Portugals which came with us, that they were but servants to those of S. Iago, to keepe their cattell and goates, which bee very plentiful! in this island: but we found them so wilde, that we could take none saving some yong kiddes: wherefore wee returned backe againe to our shippes. The Portugals had salted their Welles neere to the sea, so that we could.not water. Then our Generall commanded every man aboord: afterward we weighed, and ranne over to Sant Iago the same night, being 10 leagues distant from thence: which [III. 750.] seemed to bee a fruitefull island and well peopled. For wee sawe 3 townes on the shore: two of which shot at us, as we passed along. Our General made a shot at one of them againe. And sayling along the shore, at the South part of the island, wee tooke a Portugal shippe laden with wine and other commodities. This island hath 15 degrees in latitude. The isle of Fogo. Brava. Nonnez de Siha. From hence wee ran Southsouthwest to the isle of Fogo, so called, because it casteth continually flames of fire and smoake out of the top thereof, all the whole island being one high mountaine. Two leagues West from the isle of Fogo, is another island called Brava, where the sea is above 120 fathoms deepe neere to the shore, so that we could not anker for the depth of the sea, by reason whereof we were constrained to depart without water. Here the Generall discharged the Portugals, giving unto them our Pinnesse which we built at Mogador: with wine, breade, and fish, and so dismissed them the first of Februarie, taking one of their companie along with him, called Nonnez de Silva. The 2 of February wee set off from Brava, and directed our course Southsoutheast, running so untill the 9 of Febwhich time, wee had the ayre troubled with thunder lightning, notwithstanding calme with extreme and heate, and divers times great showers of raine. The 17 day wee were right under the line, which is the most fervent place of the burnt Zone: where in the middest of February we susteined such heat, with often thunder and lightnings, that wee did sweate for the most part continually, as though wee had bene in a stove, or hote-house. Here we saw flying fishes in Flyingjishes. great abundance, some a foote long, some lesse. Their fynnes wherewith they flye be as long as their bodies. They be greatly pursued by the Dolphine and Bonitoes, whom as soone as the flying fishes espie, immediatly they mount out of the sea in great numbers, and fly as long as their fynnes continue moyst: and when they bee dry, they fall downe into the sea againe. And here is to bee noted, that after we came within 4 degrees of the Equi- Continual! noctial, untill we were so much past it, no day did passe without great store or raine. iaine,at certame seasons neere t^e 5 r r r / . ' From hence wee directed our course towards the Equinoctial. Southsouthwest untill the 5 of Aprill; at which time, wee had a very sweet smell from the land. The same the sea to be day at noone wee sounded, and found 32 fathomes deepe, the ground being soft oaze: and shortly after we had but 28 fathomes, being 31 degrees Land in 31 and 30 min. beyond the Equinoctial, towarde the South de&ree5- 3° i 1 1 ri , ,° 1 pole: and wee had sight of the land about 3 of the Sout% ofthe clocke in the afternoone the same day. This land is Equinoctial. very lowe neere the sea; and hie mountaines up within the countrie. the to 11 ri mtn- From hence we ran towardes the Southsouthwest, untill the 14 of Aprill; when wee found a little island, lying neere the maine land of Cape Sant Marie, by Cape Sant which is the enterance into the river of Plate, being in ^^Lff 35 degrees of Southerly latitude. From this island wee jnver of ran 7 or 8 leagues along the maine, where we came to Plate. an anker under a Cape, which our General called Cape departed, and ran about 15 leagues towards the WestIn the bottome southwest, where we found a deepe bay. of this bay is a long rocke, not far from the maine: which rocke so breaketh the force of the sea, that shippes may ride commodiously under the same for Southerly windes. Hither came all our fleete to anker, the 19 of Aprill, and roade there untill the 20 day at night. Here wee killed some seales. And.from thence wee ran about 20 leagues, where we found the water very much troubled and fresh, and wee ran in so farre that?we had but 3 fathomes water. Here wee tooke in fresh water, and ranne over to the Southward, and fell with the land which lyeth on the South part of the river of Plate, the 27 day. This land lyeth Southsouthwest and Northnortheast, and is shold 3 or 4 leagues into the sea. Here our fly-boat lost our companie in the night. From hence we ran toward the Southwest, having much foule weather and contrary windes, untill the 12 of May: and then wee sounded and had 28 fathomes, with blacke sande and small stones, and had sight of the land the same morning about 10 of the clocke. This land is 47 degrees in latitude. Our Generall named morning our General, went to the maine in a boate: by meanes whereof hee had bene in great danger, if the Marigold had not weighed, and ran in with the shore, and so tooke up the boate and men: for there arose such foule weather, with a thicke myst and a Southeast winde, that they were not able to recover their shippes againe which rode without: which were forced to weigh and runne to sea. The Prize weighed the 13 at night, and ran to the Southwards: the other stayed untill the 14 in the morning and then ran to sea, not being able to ride. In the meane time while the Marigold rode under the shore, our Generall with certaine of his men went Cape of Hope this land, Cape Hope. We came to anker there, about on land, where they sawe two naked men, saving that they had a certaine skinne wrapt about their shoulders and rowles upon their heades. To whom our General shewed a white cloth, in signe of friendship, who with [III. 751.] certaine gestures of their bodies and handes, shewed the like to him againe, speaking likewise and making a noyse, which our men could not understand, but they would in no case come neere our men. Our Generall went the next day to the same place againe: but hee had no sight of the foresaid men or any other. Howbeit hee found certaine foules, as Ostriches, and other Ostriches and sea foules, which the sayd men had newly killed, and seafouleslaid them on an heape together, as though they had done that for our men of purpose. There was also a certaine bagge with litle stones of divers colours, which together with the victuals our General brought aboord, and then weighed, and came to sea the 15 of the sayd moneth: where all the rest of the fleet mette with him, save the Prize, and the fly-boat. The 16 day wee ran into a bay to the Southwardes of Cape Hope, where we roade al that night. The next morning our Generall weighed, & ran without the cape to the Northwardes, & sent the Elizabeth towards the South to looke for the Prize: leaving the Marigold and the Canter to search if in the bay they could finde any fit harbor for our ships. The same day being the 14 of May, our General met with the fly-boat (which lost us the 27 of April) and brought her into saide bay. The 18 in the morning we had word from the ships, that they had found a safe harbour and we weighed and ran in, the same day being Whitsunday. The Elizabeth weighed & put forth again to sea, the 20 day, to looke for the Prize, and not finding her came in the next day. In the meane time our General discharged the fly-boat, and ran her upon the maine, where we broke her up for fire-wood. In the meane while there came about The descrip30 of the countrey people downe to the sea side: and *** of certaine 0 , r when they were within 100 pases of our men, they set Savages. J. ,r. , , r themselves in array very orderly casting their companie into the forme of a ring, every man having his bow and arrowes: who (when they had pight a staffe on 'the ground, with certeine glasses, beads, and other trifles) returned backe. Then the countrey people came and tooke them and afterward approched neerer to our men, shewing themselves very pleasant, insomuch that M. Winter daunced with them. They were exceedingly delighted with the sound of the trumpet, and vialles. They be of a meane stature, wel limmed, and of a duskish, tawnie, or browne colour. Some of them having their faces spotted with divers colours, as red, white, and blacke. Their apparel is a certeine skinne (wherein they wrap themselves) not reaching so low as to cover their privy members, all the rest of their bodies be naked, saving that they weare certaine roules upon their heads, whose ends hang over their shoulders. Every one beareth his bow, being an ell in length, and arrowes made of reeds, having heads, framed very strangely & cunningly of a flint stone. They be much given to mirth and jollity, and are very sly, and ready to steale any thing that comes within their reach: for one of them snatched our Generals cap from his head (as he stouped) being of skarlet with a golden band: . yet he would suffer no man to hurt any of them. They eate rawe flesh, for we found seales bones, the raw flesh whereof they had gnawen with their teeth like dogs. In this bay we watered, and victualed with seales: for there is such plentie that we slew above 200 in the space of one houre upon a litle island. The 3 of June we departed from thence, and being at sea we were put backe againe to Cape Hope, where we discharged our Canter and let her float in the sea. Afterward wee ran to the 50 degree of the South pole, where wee met with the winde Southerly, and so turned backe againe to the Northward. And as we ran along the shore, we met with our Prize the 19 of June, which we lost the 13 of May. The day following we found a harbour, into the which we entred with all our fleet the same day. This port is 49 degrees and an halfe in latitude, and I suppose it to be the same which Magellan named Port S. Julian: for we found a gybbet on an The port of hil, whereupon they were executed that did conspire $antJulmn' against Magellan, and certaine bones also of their dead bodies. The 22 of this moneth our Generall going to shore upon the maine with 7 or 8 of his men, met with 3 of the Patagons, having bowes and arrowes, who came neere to our men making them signes to depart. Where- Tw0 of our upon a gentleman being there present, and having a bowe ™fop*™LJ and arrowes, made a shot to the end to shew them the force of our bowes, with the which shot his string broke: whereupon the Patagons presumed to encounter them, directing their arrowes first at our M. Gunner, who had a caliver ready bent to shot at them but it would not take fire: and as he levelled his peece one of them shot him through the brest, and out at the backe, wherewith he fell downe starke dead. Also the gentleman that shot the arrow was so wounded that hee dyed the 2 day after and with the other was buryed in a litle island lying in the said port. Our men left the slaine man on shore till night, and then fetched him in a boat. In the meane time the Patagons had stript him of all his clothes, and viewed his body laying his clothes under his head, and so left him untouched, saving that they had stucke the English arrow in his left eye. These men be of no such stature as the Spaniardes report, being but of the height of English men: for I have seene men in England taller then I could see any of them. But peradventure the Spaniard did not thinke that any English men would have come thither so soone to have disproved them in this & divers [III. 752.] others of their notorious lies: wherefore they presumed more boldly to abuse the world. The last of June M. The execution Thomas Doughty was brought accused, and convicted of certaine articles, and by M. Drake condemned. He was beheaded the 2 of July to his answere, was °fM-Thomas 1578, whose body was buried in the said island, neer to them which were slaine. We wintered in this port 2 moneths, during which time we had such weather as is commonly in England in the depth of winter, or rather colder. After we had trimmed up our ships, and made provision of fewell and fresh water, we departed thence with 3 ships the 17 of August about noone. And the 20 of the said moneth we seazed Cape Victorie, / & ,, The entrance by the which Cape is the way into the South sea, called °f/t 5trtight The streights of Magellan, the first discoverer thereof. 1 „, of M a g e l l a n. Wee found the mouth of the streights to be 52 degrees ^ Southward of Equinoctial. In this streight, we found the sea to have no such current as some do imagine, (following the course of the primum mobile from East Ordinarie to West) but to eb and flow as ordinarily as upon other flood and ebbe c o a s ts rising c fathoms upright. The flood riseth out , in the streight. /• 1 • 1 ,-, , r & 1 r 1 ' J t r • • •> r r or the JcLast ocean, and stretcneth it selre so far into the streights, that it meeteth the flood of the South sea neere about the midst of the streights, where it bendeth like an elbow, tending the West-north-west into the South Sea, whereas the East part from the mouth of the streights to this elbow lyeth South-west and by West, or South-west to 53 degrees and ^. 30 leagues within the streights there be 3 islands. To the greatest our general gave the name of Elizabeth: to the 2 Bartholomew, because we found it on S. Bartholomews to the 3 he named S. Georges island. Here we Abundance of day: SGeCges"hind s t a i ed o ne d a ? & v i c t u a l l. ed o ur sel ves with a kinde of in the streight foxxlz which is plentifull in that isle, and whose flesh is of Magellan, not farre unlike a fat goose here in England : they have no wings, but short pineons which serve their turne in swimming. Their colour is somewhat blacke mixt with white spots under their belly, and about their necke. They walke so upright, that a farre off a man would take them to be litle children. If a man aproch any thing neere them, they run into holes in the ground (which be not very deepe) whereof the island is full. So that to take them we had staves with hookes fast to 1 1 1 , * *"€ r. -1 *1 •fc-r t™" t n i0 f^ in siei^ the ends, wherewith some of our men pulled them out and others being ready with cudgels did knocke them on the head, for they bite so cruellie with their crooked bils, that none of us was able to handle them alive. The land on both parts is very high: but especially toward the South sea, monstrous high hills and craggy High hils on rocks do exalt themselves, whose tops be all hoary with ho*h sldesj>f the moneths of August, September, and snowe, October. Notwithstanding the lower partes of the hilles are replenished and beautified with impenetrable thicke woods of strange and unknown trees, flourishing all the yere long. Here we made provision of fewel and fresh water, and passed by Cape Deseado into the South sea C*Pe the 6 of September. And running along towards the JNorth-west about 70 leagues, the winde turned directly south sea. against us, with great extremitie of foule weather, as raine, haile, snow, and thicke fogs which continued so more then 3 weeks, that we could beare no saile, at which time we were driven 57 degr. to the south pole. They were The 15 of September the moone was there ecclipsed, -W«**57 ^1 Q & began to be darkened presently after the setting of w*r^ the sunne, about 6 of the clocke at night, being then Equinoctial vernal in that countrey. The said ecclipse happened the 16 day in the morning before one of the clocke in England, which is about sixe houres difference, agreeing to one quarter of the world, from the Meridian of England towards the West. The last of September being a very foule night, and the seas sore growne, we lost the Marigold, the Generals shippe and the Elizabeth running to the East-ward to get the shore, whereof we had sight, the 7 of October, falling into a very dangerous bay full of rocks: and there we lost company of M. They loose M. Drake escaping the danger of streights againe, where we ankered in an open bay for the space of 2 dayes, and made great fiers on the shore, to the end that if M. Drake should come into the streights, hee might finde us. After wee went into a the same night. The next day very hardly Drakes comthe rocks, we put into the ^any c degrees South^i_ i_ i_ *. n 1 ^ J sound, where we stayed for the space of 3 weekes and named it The port of Health, for the most part of our men being very sicke with long watching, wet, cold, and evill diet, did here (God be thanked) wonderfully recover their health in short space. Here we had very great muscles (some being 20 inches long) very pleasant meate, and many of them full of seed-pearles. The voyage We came out of this harbour the first of November, given over. giving over our voiage by M. Winters compulsion (full sore against the mariners minds) who alleged, he stood turne in dispaire, as well to have winds to serve his for Peru, as also of M. Drakes safetie. So we came backe againe through the streights to S. Georges Island, where we tooke of the foules before named, and after departed. They returned And thus wee passed by Cape Victorie out of s t r eights the 11 of November, directing our course °Ut ^IK ^November, t^ie North-east, till the last of having entred time wee arrived at an island which lyeth at the mouth into The south of the river of Plate. Upon this island there is such an infinite number of seales, as may seeme incredible to any sea the 6 of the to this moneth. What [III. 753.] ' man that hath not bene there, some of them being 16 the foote long, not fearing the presence of men : for most of our men were upon the island, for the space of 15 dayes to set up a Pinnesse, during which time the seales would come and slepe by them, and rather resist our men, then give place, unlesse mortall blowes forced them to yeelde. Sant Vincent ^? When our Pinnesse was built, we went to another island, where wee did water, and afterward departed the first of Januarie 1579, and ran towards the North till the 20 of the said moneth, and then we arrived at an island the coast of Brasil, neere to a towne which lieth on caUed sant Vincent inhabited by the Portugals. sa5r(^ t o w ne l y e th 2 4 degrees Southwarde, almost under the Tropicke of Capricorne. Here, by reason of fowle weather we lost our Pinnesse, and 8 men in her, and never saw them since. Here also our ship was in great 160 the shore before wee were aware, currenU danger, by the meanes of a strong current, which had ^ dangerous almost cast us upon insomuch that we were constrained to anker in the open sea, and brake our cable and lost an anker, and presently in weighing whereof our men let fal another anker; ranne about so were sore spoiled. For the capstan violently with the rising of the shippe in the sea, that it threwe the men from the barres, and brake out the braines of one man: one other had his legge broken, and divers others were sore hurt. At last wee gote up our anker and set sayle, and ran into a place called Tanay, where we roade under an island and tooke in Tanayapiace wood and water. BrmL ln And while we stayed here, there came 3 Portugals aboord us in, a canoa, to knowe what wee would have, or of what countrey we were. To whom our Captaine made answere: that we were Englishmen, and had brought commodities for their countrey, if they would trafficke with us: whereat they greatly marveiled. For they saide that they never heard of any English ship to have bene in that countrey before; and so they went to land againe, having one of our men with them to speake with the Governour of the towne, and we kept one of them for a pledge. Shortly after there came another canoa aboord us with one Portugal and al the rest naked men of the countrey: of whom wee had two small Oxen, one yong Hogge, with certaine hennes: also Pome-cytrons, limons, oranges, and other fruites of the countrey. For the which our Captaine gave to them, linnen cloth, combes, knives, and other trifles. In the meane time the Governour of the towne sent word that we should have nothing, unlesse we would bring our shippe into the haven. Whereunto our Captaine would in no case consent: for all their practise was to have their danger, nevertheles we came gotten us within somewhat neere the towne with our ship, as though wee would have gone in; but we never meant it. Here we tooke in our man; and set the Portugal 161 xi about the Tropuke of Capricome. Cape Sant Augustine. The isle of Fernando de Loronna. The sea of the Tropicke of Cancer. Their arrivall Devonshire. THE ENGLISH VOYAGES pledge on land. After that we went to an iland called the isle of Sant Sebastian; where wee tooke fish. Here the Portugals had betrayed us, if a Brasillian one of their slaves had not bene. For he stole from them, & shewed unto us by signes, that the Portugals were comming with their canoas to take us, as it fell out in deed : for the next morning they shewed themselves with 12 or 16 canoas, some of them having 40 men in them. The same night two of our men ran away with our boat to the Portugals. And toward our owne countrey the 17 of March: and had sight of the Cape of sant Augustine, lying in 8 degrees to the Southward of the line. After that we had sight of an island lying within 3 degrees of the Equinoctial, called the isle of Fernando de Loronha. We crossed the Equinoct}al t he I3 of A •] a nd h ad • ht of thfi N o r th s t a r re ^ 19 or the sayd moneth. thus wee came away from thence The 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 of May, wee sayled through the s ea o f Weedes, about the space of 100 leagues, being under the Tropicke of Cancer. From whence wee kept our course towards the North-east, untill wee had the pole raysed 47 degrees. The 22 of May we ranne Eastnortheast. ^ g fjie 29 we sounded and had 70 fathomes with white t ' ie North pole raysed 51 degrees. The 30 o a ze y f S I hd °f May wee had sight of S. Ives on the North side of Corne-wall, and the 2 of June 1579 we arrived at Ilfoord-combe in Devon-shire. h N 5g ih p 3 And thus after our manifold troubles and great dangers in having passed The streights of Magellan into the South Sea with our Generall M. Francis Drake, and having bene driven with him downe to the Southerly latitude of 57 degrees, and afterward passing backe by the same streights againe, it pleased God to bring us safe into our owne native countrey to enjoy the presence of our deare friendes and kinsefolkes, to whom bee prayse, honour, and glory, for ever and ever. Amen. EDWARD CLIFFE, Mariner.