the South sea taken. They arrive at Guatulco. Aprill 13. Stilo novo. Nuno da Silva set on land. [III. 748.3 the which were the letters of the king of Spaine, sent to the governour of the Philippinas, as also the sea-cards wherewith they should make their voyage, and direct themselves in their course. And so sailing untill the sixt of Aprill, about evening they discovered a shippe that held two leagues to seaward from the land: and before the next day in the morning they were hard by her, and suddenly fell upon her while her men slept, and presently made the men enter into their ship, among the which was one Don Francisco Xarate. Which done, they followed on their course with the sayd ship, out of the which they tooke certaine packes and other wares, but I know not what it was. They likewise tooke a Negro out of it, and three dayes after they both let the ship and men goe whether they woulde, setting therein the two saylers that should goe for China, which they had taken in the frigate, keeping onely one sailer to shewe them where they should find fresh water, to the which ende they tooke the emptie vessels with them to fill with water, and so kept on their course to the haven of Guatulco, where they put in, being upon Munday the thirteenth of Aprili, and having ankered, they stayed there till the sixe and twentie of Aprill: and about three or foure houres within the night, they set sayle^ holding their course Westward, and an houre or two before they let Nuno da Silva goe, putting him into another ship, that lay in the haven of Guatulco. From thence forward the Englishmen passed on their voyage, to the Islands of Malucos, and from thence they passed by the Cape de Buena Esperanza, and so to England, as it is well knowen, so that thjs is onely the descrip- tion of the voyage that they made, while the said pilote Nuno da Silva was with them. Hereafter followeth the copie of a letter written by sir Francis Drake (being in the South sea of New Spaine, in his ship called The Pellican or the Golden Hinde with the ship of Sant John de Anton, which hee had taken) to his companions in the other shippes that were of his company, and by foule weather separated from him, as I said before: The contents whereof were these: Master Winter, if it pleaseth God that you should chance to meete with this ship of Sant John de Anton, I pray you use him well, according to my word and promise given unto them, and if you want any thing that is in this ship of Sant John de Anton, I pray you pay them double the value for it, which I will satisfie againe, and command your men not to doe her any hurt: and what composition or agreement we have made, at my returne into England I will by Gods helpe perfourme, although I am in doubt that this letter will never come to your hands: notwithstanding I am the man I have promised to be: Beseeching God, the Saviour of all the world, to have us in his keeping, to whom onely I give all honour, praise and glory. What I have written, is not only to you M. Winter, but also to M. Thomas, M. Charles, M. Caube, and M. Anthonie, with all our other good friendes, whom I commit to the tuition of him that with his blood redeemed us, and am in good hope, that we shal be in no more trouble, but that he will helpe us in adversitie, desiring you for the Passion of Christ, if you fall into any danger, that you will not despaire of Gods mercy, for hee will defend you and preserve you from all danger, and bring us to our desired haven, to whom bee all honour, glory, and praise for ever and ever. Amen. Your sorowfull Captaine, whose heart is heavy for you: Francis Drake.