The voyage intended towards China, wherein M. Edward Fenton was appointed Generall: Written by M. Luke Ward his Viceadmiral, and Captaine of the Edward Bonaventure, begun Anno Dom. 1582. He second of April I departed with the Edward Bonaventure from Blackwall, and the 19 of the same arrived in Nettle roade at Hampton, where I found riding the Gallion Leicester: and $0 remaining there till the first of May, wee set saile thence in the forenoone, being of us in the whole fleete foure saile. 1 The Gallion Leicester of 400 tunnes Admirall, whereof was Generall Captaine Edward Fenton, and William Hawkins the yonger lieutenant Generall in her, and Christopher Hall, Master. 2 The Edward Bonaventure of 300 tunnes Viceadmirall, whereof was Captaine Luke Ward, and Thomas Perrie Master. 3 The Francis of fortie tunnes, whereof was Captaine John Drake, and William Markam Master. 4 The Elizabeth of fiftie tunnes, whereof was Captaine Thomas Skevington and Ralph Crane Master. We spent by meanes partly of businesse, and partly of contrary windes, the moneth of May upon the coast, and then leaving the land wee put off to sea, and proceeded on our voyage intended by the grace of God for China: untill the moneth of August following, nothing fell out much worthy the knowledge of the worlde, which is not common to all navigants, but about the beginning of August aforesayd, being somewhat neere the coast of Guinie, upon the shooting off a peece and the putting out of a flag in the Admiral, I went on boord, and M. Walker, M. Shaw, M. Geffreis, our Master & Pilot with me, where the generall counsel was assembled to consider of two points, viz. The first, whether it were necessarie to water presently or not, which was thought very needful of all men, and so concluded. The second, where the best and aptest place was to water in, which was thought of the greater number to be at Sierra leona on the coast of Guinie, which was also concluded, and by the Master and Pilots agreed to goe hence Southeast, which determined, wee returned aboord. The 3 day wee went Southeast and Eastsoutheast, till sixe a clocke at night that wee sawe the lande of Guinie, which bare Northeast of us about 12 leagues off, which seene, wee sounded, and had no ground: then went I and our Master and Pilot aboord the Admirall, and after many debatements concluded to run in Northeast by East, and at eleven at night wee came aboord againe, and went all night Northeast by East. The 4 at eight a clocke in the forenoone wee were within 2 leagues of the lande, which bare off us Northeast, which rose like a hill full of woods, and on each side low land: wee being perswaded by our pilots that it was the entrance into Sierra leona, went in Northeast untill we were within an halfe league of the shoar, and had brought the South point Southeast by east off us. At eleven a clocke finding it a bay and not Sierra leona, wee brought our tacks aboord, and stoode along West by North and West larboord tacked. In this time our Admirals pinnesse rowed in, and went on land upon the South side of the bay, and the Eliza- [III. 758.] beths boate with her. They found houses of boughes, and in one of the houses the tongue of a beast, and a bullocks tongue fresh killed; also a lake with plentie of fresh water, and fresh-water-fish in it had by the sea side: they found drie pomegranates, and pease like nuts, with other unknowen fruites under the trees. The Elizabeth ranne in, and brought the South point South by West of her, and ankered within Faulcon shot of the shore in seven fathom oaze, where they tooke fish with hookes, while hee stayed for the boates. The 4 all the afternoone wee ran along the coast (which lyeth Northwest and by North, and Southeast by South) West, and within a point one way or the other, seeing the lande under our lee three or foure leagues off, and all night likewise. The 9 at three a clock in the morning our Admiral shot off a peece, and at foure wee weyed and went hence They arrive Northeast. At five in the morning wee saw the land %etrJ7eona'f along> a nd b e f o r e> t he I s l a nd which w ee saw t he n i g ht and divers other Islands about it, & so ran in Northeast untill we had brought our selves thwart of the river, and then ran in East about sixe at night, being a league within the river. Our Admirall shot off a peece, and there wee ankered in eight fathom sand. Being at anker, I manned our boate and would have gone aboord the Admirall, but could not, the flood was bent so strong, and she rode halfe a mile beneath us in the tyde, but we had no tyde. The 10 in the morning at five a clocke I sent our skiffe with our pilot in her to find a roade, and a watring place: in the meane time at sixe a clocke we set saile with our ship, and being calme wee towed with our boat untill ten, and then ankered a mile short of the watering place. After dinner I went on land with my skiffe to finde timber to fish our maste, and searching along the shoare we found a good watring place: and further seeking in the wood, which all the countrey is full of, and of divers Trees hung sorts, wee found Limmon trees full of fruits: also trees with oysters. g r o wi ng by the water side with the stalkes hung full of oysters and great periwinkles, and crabs amongst them: wee found drie pomegranates with many other fruits unknowen to us. In the meane time our Admirall and the Edward with the barkes, having a gale at West, set saile, and ran up and ankered in the rode before the accustomed watering place. us before, came down and brought some other Portugals and Negros with them in a shippe-boate, wherein they brought us 80 mewes of rice, 500 and odde weight of Elephants teeth, and a Negro boy, which boy they gave the Generall, and the rice and teeth for the Elizabeth, Their trafique which wee solde them, with all her tackle and sailes, here wit* ihe having neede of the rice, because our meale which wee ortu£asbrought out of England was decayed and naught, whereof wee had into the Edward 30 bushels, which is a mewe and a halfe: the Francis had 5 bushels, and the Gallion had the rest. And wee had 200 weight of Elephants teeth, and the Gallion 300 and a halfe, and sixe pound. During this time we sent our skifFe with the Admiralls pinnesse up the river to meete with a Gundall, which the Portugals had sent for fresh victuals for us: who not finding her, returned at night: All this day I with M. Walker remained aboord with the Admirall, and after their dinner and supper wee ended our businesse, and returned aboord, having had many good speaches with the Portugals. The 26 day being Sunday, Captaine Hawkins, M. Maddox, M. Hall, M. Bannister, Captaine Drake, M. Evans, M. Hoode, and others came aboord and heard the Sermon, and dined with me: after dinner we went on shoare to the lower point where we followed the footing of an Elephant, but saw him not, and so spent the time to and fro till supper time, and then came aboord, and supped together, which done, each man departed to his abode. This night I was very sicke, (and so were all they Skknesse by that were on shoare with mee,) with eating of a fruite eating some in the countrey, which wee found on trees, like nuts: whereof some did eate foure, some five, some sixe, and more, but wee vomited and scoured upon it without reason. ^** The 27 day the olde Greeke the afternoone Francisco came aboord to me, with request that hee might have the Francis boate to goe up for his owne boate which was not come downe, with whom I talked of this Countrey and Countrey-people, untill five of the clocke at night that the flood was come, and then I went aboorde to the Admirall, and got his consent, and sent themselves in her: viz. Ferdinando the Portugall Master, and his Negro: In the meane time I sent foure of my men to watch in the Elizabeth all night. The 28 day in the morning at foure a clocke I sent my skiffe with the Admirals pinnesse down to the west point to fish, who came aboorde againe at one in the afternoone, and brought as much fish as all our companies could eate. During the time that our boates were a fishing, came downe the river a canoa and the Portugals former boate, with hennes, orenges, plantans, which they presented the Generall and mee with: and also the rest of the rice due to us for the payment of the Elizabeth. For the partitions whereof I went aboord the Admirall, where I dined. After dinner M. Evans began to barter away certaine of the ships commodities with the Negros, without acquainting the Generall or any other untill hee had done, where- of grewe more wordes then profite, as by the bookes of marchandise appeareth. Which done I came aboord, and had two of the Portugals to supper with mee. About two of the clocke in the morning we had a Ternado, and much raine. The 29 about 4 a clocke in the morning, I in my skiffe, and Captaine Parker in his pinnesse, went downe to the West point, and there wee landed with 11 men in all well furnished, and searched the woods, plaines and plashes, after an Elephant, finding the haunt, footing, and soyle of many newly done, yet wee saw none of them. Wee saw hogs, goates or fawnes, and divers sorts of fowles very wilde: and having travailed about 2 leagues, about noone wee returned to the point, where wee landed, and met our boates which had beene at sea, and taken plentie of good fish: there wee refreshed our selves with such victuals as wee had, and came 176 The Portugals presents. [III. 7S9-J M. Evans one of our marchants. They search aboord our severall ships, where I found the Portugals and Negros, who had dined, and after supped aboord with mee. The 2 of September we set saile at sixe of the clock in the morning, & went out West betweene 7 and 10 fathom, with a pretie gale at East til 8, then it waxed calme, wee being shot out of the harbour a league and a halfe. It continued calme this day till one in the afternoone, and then it blewe up at Westsouthwest a good gale, so wee stood off Northnorthwest, and Northwest till 5 in the afternoone, then wee ankered in 12 fathom, being 6 leagues off the point West by North. The 3 day about eight a clocke in the forenoone, the They retume Generall came aboord to mee, complaining that his maine t0 Stfrra leona crosse-trees were broken, and therefore determined to a&atne' goe into Sierra leona againe when the winde blewe: at 12 at noone wee set saile, and went in Eastsoutheast, and Southeast, and Southsoutheast, being carried to the Northward with the flood. And at 7 at night wee ankered in eight fathom three leagues off the entrance, Westnorthwest. The 12 day came downe the river a boate with three Trafique with other Portugals, with whom the General bargained, to let 3'^e^ortu' them have 3 barrels of salt for 5 barrels of rice, and after that rate to exchange for 40 barrels, which hee acquainted Henriques a mee with: afterwards I dined among the Portugals with dweller here him: after dinner I went on shoare to the oven, and ahove 2O to the carpenters. After I had bene on shoare and seene ^Matthew the worke there, I returned aboord, & there supped with Fernandos mee the Generall, M. Maddox, Captaine Hawkins, and Captaine. seven Portugals: after supper each man returned to his $Jedro Vaz place. gjie^' ** ° ' The 13 in the afternoone, the Portugals came againe aboord me, and brake their fast with me: after I sent by them up the river in my skiffe 12 barrels of salt, and gave them a bottell of wine for one of the savage Queenes. xi 177 a c c o m P a n i ed w i th They enter up The 15 after dinner, the Master, M. Walker, and I, I2 o t h er travelled over a great deale ^unTrt ^ countrey. ^ ground to finde some cattell, but found none: and comming home thorow the Oyster bay, I found of my company and of the Admirals together rosting of oysters: and going from them, Thomas Russell one of my cornpan ie sawe a strange fish named Utelif, which had fought with a crocodile, and being hurt came neere the shoare, where hee waded in, and by the taile drew him a lande, a n d there slewe him, and sent the Generall the hinder A sword-fish killed. kalfe of him: the head part I kept, in whose nose is a bone of two foot long like a sword with three and twentie pricks of a side, sharpe and strange: The bodie wee did eate, and it was like a Sharke. The 30 and last day of September the Francis cooke came aboord about seven a clocke in the forenoone from fishing with my net, and brought among other A strange fish fish5 a Sea-calfe (as wee called it) with haire and lympits, taken, a n (j b a r n a c i es U p on him, being seven foote long, foure foote nine inches about: which to see I sent for the Generall, and such as pleased to come see it out of the Admirall, who came and brought with him M. Maddox, Captaine Hawkins, Captaine Parker, and most part of his companie, who having viewed the beast, which was ougly being alive, it being flayed, opened, and dressed, prooved an excellent, faire, and good meate, broyled, rosted, sodde and baked, and sufficed all our companies for that day. The first day of October in the morning, wee tooke in to make up our full complement of rice twentie barrels for the twelve barrels of salt, delivered the Portugall Lewis Henriques before. little winde: The 2 day about sixe a clocke in the morning, wee set saile having the Captaine with the Master, and other of their companie of the Portugals came aboord me, complaining that the carsey by them received for the foure Negros of the Generall, was not sufficient for their payment, whereupon I gave them scarlet caps, and other things to their content, who finding themselves well pleased, departed away in the Gundall, and we having little winde, got downe thwart of the fishing bay, and there came to anker about nine a clocke the same forenoone. The third day about two a clocke in the morning wee set saile, and went hence Southwest by West till two in the afternoone then being little wind: at five wee ankered sixe leagues Eastsoutheast of the Southermost [III. 760.J part of the land in fifteene fathom, and there wee rode till eight a clocke at night, and set saile with a stiffe gale at Northeast, which sometime blewe, and sometime was little winde, and so continued all night. The first day of November in the forenoone, wee tooke in our maine saile to mend it: in the meane time, the Admirall came up by us, and desiring mee with my Master, and M. Blackcoller to come aboord to him about certaine conference, hee sent his boate for us, where by him was propounded, whether it were best for us to stand on with the coast of Brasil as wee did, or else to stand about starboord tacked to the Eastwards : whereupon divers of their charts and reckonings were shewed: by some it appeared, wee were a hundred and fifteene leagues, by some a hundred and fiftie leagues, by some a hundred and fortie leagues, and some a great deale further short of Brasil, next hand Northeast of us: but all agreed to bee within twentie minutes of the line, some to the North, some to the South of the line. After many debatements, it was agreed by most consent to stand on for the coast of Brasil, except the wind changed, and there to doe, as weather should compell us. In this consultation, wee had speaches of courses, and places of meeting, if by misfortune wee should bee separated, wherein was no full order concluded, but that we should speake every night with the Admirall, if wee conveniently might, and so to appoint our course from time to time, if wee lost companie, to stay fifteene dayes in the river of Plate, and from thence to go for the streights, and there to ride, and water, and trimme our ships. The 12 in the afternoone M. Maddox, M. Hall, to visite M. M. Bannister, and others came aboord Walker. After they returned to the gallion all againe, except M. Maddox who remained with M. Walker here aboord. time of abode with him, a This night M. Maddox and I, behelde many constellations in the firmament, and set downe certaine newe starres raised to the Southwards. All day and night wee went South, and South by East among. The seventeenth day in the afternoone wee shot off three peeces of ordinance in honour of our Queenes Majestic This day after dinner came master Maddox, and Captaine Drake with others to take their leave of Master Walker, as I with, all my company had done before, supposing him past hope of recoverie. At 19 degrees of foure of the clocke, finding our selves Southerly degrees to the Southwards of the line, and cleare of atitu e. t j ie shoai^s called by us Powles, wee went hence Southsouthwest all night following. in nineteene The 18 day being Sunday, after dinner the Generall, M. Maddox, Captaine Parker, and many other came aboord, and visited M. Walker : which done, they dranke, and departed aboord againe. All this day and night, we went our course Southwest by South, with a franke gale. The 19 day about noone, the Sun was in our Zenith, being declined to the Southwards 21 degrees, and 33 minutes, where wee found the aire fresh and temperate, as in England in June, when a fresh gale of winde the night, and the morning are more fresh and colder here, then it is in England either in June or Julie. The first of December, about sixe of the clocke in the morning, wee sawe lande on the coast of Brasil, in the height of 28 degrees or there abouts, which bare 180 Northwest, and was eight leagues from us very high land. Wee stood in with it, being much winde, and comming neere, found divers Islands : and seeing the Divers Hands. Francis would not come roome nor run ahead us, wee stood in with the shore, and sounded in 30 fathom oaze the Westthree leagues off the lande, bearing from northwest to the Northnorthwest of us, and so stoode still till it shoalded orderly into seven fathom, within a mile of a headland : then perceiving a breach over our bowe, and no hope of a good harbour, in that place, wee bare up roome, and our Admirall after us, whom wee haled : then hee tolde us hee would seeke harbour to leewards, requiring me to go ahead. Then seeing the barke was asterne I hoised out my skiffe, and set her maste and saile, taking her ging, and Tobias one of my Masters mates with mee, and ranne before the shippe, sounding in 15 fathom faire sand, leaving a ledge of rockes asea-boord of us : so the ships and the barke looffed up under a headland, and ankered in eight fathom, halfe a mile off the lande, having brought the headland which lyeth in 27 degrees 50 minutes The latitude Southsoutheast off them, and the North land Northeast of z-] degrees Off them. 5O mtnutes. I stoode on with the skiffe, hoping to finde a better harbour to leeward three leagues, but it prooved not so : wherefore I returned, and in my way aboord I met with a rocke in the sea, where we landed, and killed good store of fowle, and after I went aboord the Admirall, where I presented him with fowle, and returned aboord to supper. In this time our boates had beene aland, and found water, ballaste, and two decayed houses, as they told me, and our men aboord hooked fresh-fish. This night wee rode quietly. The second, being Sunday, our masters moared our [HI. 761.] ships further point Southeast off us, and the North land Northeast: and so rid. into the bay. We brought the South A bah company, went a Wels made by m a de three wels. our men. After dinner captaine Parker, with my boat, and there placed pipes, and land, and In the meane time, I accompanied w i th M# Hawkins, M. Maddox, M. Cotton, and divers of mine owne people, landed farther within the bay, and found two rivers of fresh water, and a good fishing place. Presently I sent aboord for my net, with which An exceeding at one draught we drew 600 great mullets, and 5 great \fet draught was never seene with so small great draught b a s s es . tfe ^s ' a net: with which we went aboord, giving the the rest our admirall 240, to company spent, and gave almighty God thanks for his great goodnesse. the Francis 80, and to The woods set AH this while was captaine Parker and others gone on fire by our -mto men. the woods; which burned j a n c j j t ^ 1 fire(j a n ( j extremely. The third day in the morning our carpenter calked without boord, and the master and others tooke up all the merchandize in the stearne sheets to the keele, and there put downe a boats loding of stone : and seeing the merchandize well conditioned, stowed same the meane time, my selfe, and others in againe. the our boats, scraped off rudder, and part of one side of our ship. the wormes, and washed the In After dinner, the master, pilot, and I, went ashore, and observed the Sunne at noone, which being past, with our net we drew plenty of divers sorts of fishes, and went from the watering place : from thence, aboord the generall, which had taken physicke, and gave them and the Francis fish for their companies, and so went aboord, where our company had romaged aforemast: so that this afternoone we tooke two boats more lading of stones afore mast. that bay to in A saile seene The sixt day in and taken. the morning, before sixe of the clocke, we saw a saile which went towards the Southwards, the admirall not having knowledge thereof. I went aboord, and certified h i m; who appointed me to goe and bring her in, and to take captaine Parker and some of the gallions men into the Francis, and the admirals skiffe with us : so we gave her chase, and tooke her sixe leagues to the leewards of the place we rode in. Then not being able to fetch the rode againe, we ankered in the sea. I intending to come away in the pinnesse, and leave the Francis, and the prize together, being ready to depart, the winde blew at South a stout gale, and raine ; so that about sixe of the clocke, we ankered in the rode, where our ships rid. they came After we had taken them, and that captaine Parker them and I were aboord, we had much talke with before the ships; and being ankered there, the chiefe men were caried abord the general, which was a gentleman, named Don Francisco de Torre Vedra, nephew to the governour of the river of Plate, named Don John de Torre Vedra. to We found an Englishman, named Richard Carter Richard borne in Limehouse, who had bene out of England S * ^ ** foure and twenty yeres, and hath bene nere twelve takenin X yeres dwelling in the river of Plate, at a towne named prize. Ascension, the river, whither they were now determined to go & inhabit, having two yong children, seven friers, the rest boyes, and sailers, to the number of one and twenty persons. The number The olde frier was had in great reverence among the ^.21 tn the two women, and three hundred leagues up in rest : insomuch that they called him the Holy father. He was abiding in no place ; but as visitour he went visiting from monastery to monastery. The substance of all the speeches was, that the Spanish fleet was before the streights of Magellan, as they thought; for they were departed sixe weeks past from the river of Jenero, where they had beene seven moneths to refresh and Winter, and that these were not of that company, but came out of Spaine the 26 of May 1582 tun, and fourescore persons, of purpose for the river of Plate. 183 The friers being eighteene in number, could not agree, and their barke was a ground at Spirito santo, like to be lost: therefore the old frier bought this small barke of 46 tun, at a port named Spirito santo, in Brasill; and so divided themselves: and comming from thence, lost company at sea : but they thought they were before at the river of Plate. After his speeches, I went and appointed (by the generals order) men to remaine aboord the prize with captaine Parker, and brought one of the Portugals sailes away with me, and came aboord, where I found that our men had filled water all day. The 7 day in the morning the generall sent for me ; where he shewed me and M. Maddox certeine articles which the friers and mariners Spaniards were examined of; which tended altogether to the knowledge of the Spanish fleets intent, and of the meanes whereby we might be discovered by the way of the river of Plate In this time came the rest: after by land to Peru. whose comming it was debated, whether it were best to take the boat & people with us or not. Which was not determined ; but referred till further examination. Then was it determined to passe by the streights, notwithstanding the Spaniards were there, but not to set up forge, nor to build pinnesse, but water, and so thorow. The eight day afore noone M. Walker and I went aboord the admirall to dinner, where was determined to discharge the Spanish barke, named Our lady of pity, and all the men, except Richard Carter the English man, and John Pinto a Portugall, which dwelled at the river of Plate. [III. 762.] The Spanish After dinner, the generall appointed mee and captaine barke dis~ Hawkins to see them all set aboord their ship, and to receive from them certeine necessaries, which willingly they imparted with us, and to leave them satisfied. Which done, I returned aboord. The 9. day, being Sunday, in the morning, I sent M. Shaw and M. Geflfries aboord the admirall, to peruse the Spaniards letters: wherein they found the estate of the fleet which was in the streights of Magellan, as by the note thereof appeareth. About ten of the clocke the generall, M. Maddox, captaine Hawkins, and captaine Parker, came aboord of me. The generall began to reproove my quarter master for grudging of victuall for the Francis. Which was answered: and he well satisfied. Then sent I for the olde frier and Don Francisco; who all dined with me: and after dinner, the Spaniards having received the canoa, which was suncke, aland, and stones to ballast them, which my boat caried them, and all other things to their liking and content, they departed from me. The generall also departed, and his company, who being gone, I divided the sugar and ginger among my people, which Spanish the Spaniards gave us: and after spent the day in presents. ordinary businesse. The 10 day in the morning, our skiffe went a fishing, whereof we eat as much to supper as served the company: the rest we salted for store, and to prove if they would take salt or not. The 11 day, betimes in the morning, our skiffe went againe to fish, and tooke great plentie. About seven of the clocke I went aland, taking with me the master, and others of our best men, to the number of 22 persons, & travelled to the place where our people before had Things found found many great jars of earth, and decayed habitations m th£ tslandof the Indians, and trees, being dead and withered, of sweet wood. From that place we saw over the tops of a narrow wood, a faire plaine, which at the request of the master and the rest, I went with them to see. We passed thorow a thicke and perillous wood, before we came to the supposed plaine: and when we came to it, we found the lowest part thereof higher then any of our heads, and so mossy under foot, that we slipped to the knees many steps, which so wearied us, that for my part, I was very sicke, and so hasted aboord, leaving the master with 15 men, which cut a tree of sweet wood, and brought many pieces thereof aboord. About 3 afternoone, M. Walker and many of our men being ashore, the winde came faire, and we layed out a warpe to the Northeast, and began to winde ahead. After we layed out another warpe with a bend, and wound to the plat, and so rid by it with one anker all night. They leave the The 12 day about five a clocke in the morning, we set deflTsand*1 sa^e> anc* as we r an o ut 50. min. betwixt the ledge of rocks and the maine, in eight fadom water, as we were catting our anker, the catt-rope, stopper, and all brake; so that we were glad to let slip all the cable, and cast off our boat and skiffe to wey the same. After we had stood out a good way, the admirall was under saile: then cast we about and went roorae with the admirall which weaved us, who sent in his pinnesse and the Francis to helpe out our boats; so by the helpe of the admirals pinnesse, with her saile, we had our boat the sooner, and about 12 a clocke at noone had taken in the anker, cable, our long boat, skiffe, & all, and put out all our sailes bearing after the admirall, which went hence South by east. About sixe a clocke at night, being thicke weather, we lost sight of the land, being foure leagues off or thereabout. All night it was but little winde: yet went we our course South by west. The 13 day about seven afore noon, the wind blew at Southsoutheast, & was very foggy; with which gale we stood in larboord tacked West, till ten a clocke the same forenoone. Then had we sight of the land ahead, all along (for it waxed cleere weather) it sheweth a farre off like white cliffes, but is all sandy hilles, and bayes along the sea side. At one a clocke after noone we were in 16 fadome water, and within halfe a league of the shore, where we saw severall fires made by the Indians to give warning to the other people within the land, as we supposed. Then we cast about, and stood off Southeast by east till midnight, that the winde came large : then went we our course South by west till next morning. The 14 day we went our course South by west, having sight of the land at sixe a clocke in the morning about seven leagues off: and so went till sixe at night, that wee saw land againe seven leagues off West, and the winde shifted to the South. Then we cast about, and stood off Eastsoutheast at seven at night for a while: then came up the winde at Northwest, and blew agood. The 15 day in the morning, the admirall was ahead, as farre as we could almost see her, by whose default I know not; and being little winde we could not get to her till foure of the clocke after noone: then we hayled [III. 763.] her, and stood in betweene the Southsouthwest and the Southwest till sixe at night, that the winde was variable, and foule weather. Then we cast about, and sounded in 23 fadome soft oaze, and stood off a while Northeast; and presently cast about againe, and went tacked, and Southsoutheast, South by East larboord among all night: finding at foure in the morning 15 fadome sand. The 20 day, about ten a clocke afore noone, we went aboord the admirall; viz. M. Walker, the master, the pilot, the two merchants, and my selfe, being directed so to doe by the Generall. Upon our comming the generall was going to dinner, where wee also dined with him. Having dined, the generall called us his assistants into his cabbin, and there delivered to us in writing two demands, to be by us considered upon, and he to have our opinions therein. The effects of the demands were these. 1 Whether it was best for us to adventure our selves to passe the streights of Magellan or not; considering the force of the enemy, which we knew to be there before us: and also that our determination was there to set up our pinnesse, make yron hoops, carene our ships, and do all our necessary businesses for the full acomplishment of our voyage. 2 If that course were not thought best, which way were meetest for us to take. To the first we were of opinion, that it were good to heare the opinions of captaine Hawkins, captaine Drake, and the two pilots, which had passed the streights and knew the harbours, and likest places to be fortified, and inhabited or not, who were called, & the three masters with them. Their opinions were as divers as their names; & as much differed, as before this time they were wont usually to doe: onely they all agreed in this one point, that it was impossible for us to passe the streights without seeing, and incountring with the ships, although the fortification of the land did not annoy us: which being long and thorowly debated, and their opinions with the three masters demanded, which accorded not scant any one with other, they were dismissed. Then the generall received the opinions of us his assistants, beginning with the yoongest in authority first: which when he had heard them all over, and being set downe in writing under our hands, he tooke deliberation till after supper to give his determination. When we had all supped, then he sent for us downe into his cabbin, and delivered in writing his determination, (which was) to victuall, and furnish our selves on this coast, before he proceeded any further; and named two places, The river of Plate, or S. Vincent, to be chosen. For the better deciphering of the river of Plate, & the commodities thereof, was called before us, Richard Carter, which doth dwell there; who could not assure us of any wine, except we could stay foure moneths for it: but other victuals plenty. The river is shoale and dangerous, the road seven leagues from any towne, or place of commodity: which considered with the trechery that might from thence be used, into the streights by sea, and into Peru by land, we all concluded to go to S. Vincent, which place is inhabited by Portugals, and where in honest sort we might conveniently have all our businesse done. With this resolution we tooke our leaves about eight a clocke at night, & being come aboord, presently bare up, and went roome, having all the day before beat up the 188 Richard Carter the English man taken in the prize, carted along with They returne in the latitude winde larboord-tacked Eastsoutheast till at night: after it was a little winde all night we went North next hand. The 21 day, after service, I declared unto my company the intent of our returne to the port of S. Vincent, wherewith they were well satisfied, being before doubtfull that we should not proceed, but returne without performance It continued calme all day till six at night, of our voyage. then we went Northwest by west till eight at night, and then we cast about, and stood off Eastsoutheast, and East by south all night with a good gale. The 22 day in the morning we missed the Francis, John Drake in which by all presumption went roome in the beginning of Je Francts the night. i river of Plate, 1 1 i XT The 25 day, being Chnstmasse day, it was little winde wherein his in the forenoon e till ten a clocke; then it blew a fresh ship was cast gale, with which wee went our course Northnortheast. awa9> &ut the In the afternoone it was lesse wind: yet went we our ^ w ^ l / L^ i land, and Lived r$ monetks course JNorth by east, and JNorthnortneast, and JNorth, and North by west, till midnight. Then being in shoaled among the water, wee cast about, and lay Southsoutheast, and South- Savages. east by south, an houre; and seeing our admirall came not after us, we cast about backe againe, and presently met him : so we went both together next hand Southsoutheast all the rest of the night. This afternoone we saw the Infinite num- skim of fishes so thicke in the sea, that it seemed a water ber 0ffi5htroubled with trampling of horses; which was thicke, and slimy: for we had taken up some of it. 1 XT 1 The 17 day of January, about seven a clocke, the master, M. Blaccoller, and I went in our skiffe, and rowed, and sounded round about an ile, and found 16 fadoms within a stones cast hard aboord the shore, and faire ground : after we landed, and found nothing but woods and bushes, and strange wormes: we saw a faulcon, and [III. 764.] one other small bird, and therefore named it Faulcon ile: A small Island it is a mile about, with a rocke on the East side, which lieth close to it, and it is in sight without danger. After we came aboord, and dined; at two a clocke we set saile, with winde Southeast, and ran in Northeast a while, till the 189 1583T HE E N G L I SH V O Y A G ES winde scanted: then we went in Northnortheast, till we were in seven fadome and a halfe of water, within a league of shore: then we cast about, and stood off Southsoutheast all night, till sixe a clocke the next morning. The 18 day about three a clocke, afore day, we saw our admirall againe, and kept her company till day. about eight a clocke afore noone, we went aboord the general, viz. M. Walker, the master, the pilot, and my selfe, rejoycing of our good meeting, who tolde me of their evill road, where they lost an anker, a cable, and a haulser, and how the day before, their pinnesse was ashore on the same iland, and found fowle, and water there, whither now they had sent their boat and pinnesse for more water, where I know they had small store. I also taking captaine Parker, the master, and M. Wilks with me, went ashore, and travelled to the top of the ile, which is wooded, and high grasse, but evill water, and little on it, but yoong fowle plenty, and dangerous comming to them. By this time (I having set the isles, and headlands about in sight with a compasse) came a small gale at Southsoutheast; then our admirall shot off a piece for the boats, and hence I went, and dined aboord with him, and came after aboord, and went in Northnortheast and Northeast till morning: at which time wee were within a league of the isle, entring before Theirarrivall s. Vincent, but knew not how much water was upon at S. Vincent t he b a r fe tQ gQ Q uL The 20 day in the morning, being calme, the generals pinnesse came in to the shore, with intent to sound Three canoas ^ entrance, but seeing three canoas, with ech at the least ^ t w e n t 7 men> w h e r e °f the greater part were naked Indians, which rowed, the rest Portugals, they returned aboord again. The canoas came with a flag of truce within, calling of our ship, and we shewed them the like, asking what we were, and of what nation : at length one Portugall went aboord the admirall, by whom the generall sent a letter to the governour, craving a pilot to bring in noone, having the winde at South, we bare in Northwest, and so to the Northeast, as the chanell trended : but comming into seven fadome water, we ankered, untill our boats had sounded the barre. During which time, I went aboord the admirall, to conferre with him about our proceedings. After I had stayed a while aboord the admirall, the generall came aboord with me, where we published unto all my company very good rules for their behaviour and profit, to their great satisfaction: after he went downe into my cabbin, where with all his assistants he conferred of divers particulars of our voyage: by which time the boat being returned from sounding, we departed, and set saile, following our skiffes and with our ships got within the barre into seven fadome : then being becalmed, we ankered againe before a sandy bay, wherein stands a castle A castle. and houses: we rid within musket shot of it: and ankered about foure a clocke afternoone. Then went I forwards with my skiffe unto a further point, sounding along. Before my returne, the generall had sent for me to supper; and thither I went: but being ready to sit downe, there came out to us a canoa, wherein A canoa with were ten Indians and two Christians; the one an ancient tenJn<ilans Genouois, the other a Portugall: who came aboord, and "chrhtians, there received a small banket, declaring their comming whereof one was to understand our intents, and what we sought: who was an old being satisfied, departed with a farewell of three great Genouotspieces from ech ship. The 21 day about three a clocke afternoone, came ' , i i i 1 it _, a canoa, with the old Genouois named Joseph Dory, a Jo^n WhithaU Fleming named Paul Badeves, and Steven Repose a an En&!h: r Portugall, and brought a letter from the governor, and dwelkth at withall, answere of feare and doubts of us, &c. After Santos, hath many speeches and requests, a banket was made them, and married this the generall in his pinnesse with his musicke, & trumpets; Jose^ Dmes and I in my skiffe with trumpets, drum and fife, and tabor and pipe, accompanied them a mile up the river: at going 191 i man which aug teu ^i off, we saluted them with a volley of three great pieces out of ech ship: and after us came captaine Parker with the admirals long boat, and certeine shot in the same, to attend on the generall. Santos. The 22 day betimes in the morning, I went aboord the admirall to conferre about the sending of some token and present to the governor, which was by all the assistants determined to send him three yards of fine skarlet, & three yards of fine murry-cloth; and to Joseph Dory the old Genouois, Steven Repose the Portugall, and to Paul Badeves the Fleming, ech of them three yards of fine blacke cloth, which our merchants went up to Santos withall in the admirals skiffe, about nine a clocke aforenoone. Also this forenoone, we being minded to goe up higher [III. 765.] with our ships into harbour, I advised them to goe view the place, and sound the road before we went u p; which we did: where were found the place both unconvenient, and the road woorse: and so we returned, and left the first determination. This day we tooke downe our maintops, and top-mast, and all the shrowds. About two a clocke after noone our merchants returned with their presents, not having beene at the towne, because Steven Repose by the way met them on the river, and advised them to stay untill there had beene word sent to the governour, who was unwilling to speake with them yet, but shortly would send their answere. The rest of this forenoone we spent in communication about the appointing of a purser for the Edward. Also we signed an assent for comming to this place: about which thing grew foule speeches betweene the generall and his lieutenant, after the olde custome. The Indians Then went wee to supper: and being at supper, certaine Indians came aboord, and brought the generall a strange presents. crow, and potatos, and sugar canes, to whom he gave ™ L n .looking glasses, great pinns, and biscuit: and so we Thechanellof S. Vincent departed, being late. Also this arternoone I ran over towards S. Vincent, and sounded the bay a league over, .sounded. 192 j &i • It • 1 t Ai r T and found the chanell and flats, and returned aboord againe within two houres, having a good gale of winde. The 23 day our skifFe went ashore to fish, and tooke prety store: we sent our main-top ashore to be mended, and many of our men to wash their cloaths; also I went my selfe with them aland, to take order that no man should any wayes offend the Indians. In the meane time the generall with all the rest of the chiefest gentlemen, came ashore, and viewed the place, and appointed out the fittest roome to set up our smithes forge, and ovens Portable ovens to bake our biscuit, and place for our coopers to trim t0 ^ake m; our water caske. The 24 day at foure of the clocke, before day, we heard one call for a boat on the North shore, to whom I sent my skifFe, who brought aboord one named John John Whithall, an English man, which is maried here in this Whtthal1' place, and with him two of his Indians; whom I enterteined untill I sent word to the generall to prepare himselfe to receive him: in which time he and I talked of many severall particulars. About sixe a clocke I conveyed him aboord the Good counsel! admirall: there he discovered unto us what had bene %J*j^^d done at the towne, as fortification, and sending their ^en wives away, &c. advising us to receive no more delayes, men. but to come up presently before the towne with our ships. About ten a clocke came a canoa, and brought downe Joseph Dory and Steven Repose, who tolde us that on Saturday the governour would meet our generall, and talke with him, praying us in the meane time to use our ordinary business of cooperage, carpenters worke, filling water, fishing, and washing, &c. but not to set up forge, nor oven, untill speech had with the governour. After this answere, we dined together aboord the gallion: after dinner we left the messengers sitting in the cabbin, and went upon the poope; where the generall demanded the advice of his assistants, whether it were not best to stay these men while we had them or not, or whether it were best to go up with our ships to the towne or no. 193 xi Whereunto ech man paused to make answere: wherefore I delivered my opinion; which was, that we were forbidden to use violence to any nation for trade. The Minion of Secondly, I considered that divers of our nation, worLondonsome- ghipfull merchants, and now adventurers in this voyage, for traffique. " a (l the Minion hither, and begun a trade, which with our forcible dealing might be spoiled, and our nation brought in hatred. s et o ut Lastly, that with force we were not like to atteine so much commodity, as we were in possibility to have with courtesie. Heereupon all was concluded, and to passe away: to whom the generall gave the three cloakeclothes, to Joseph Dory, to Steven Repose, to ech of them one, which were before cut out for them: and so friendly we and they departed about two a clocke after noone. to Paul Baudevese, and they suffered Three Spanish About foure of the clocke this afternoone we saw three saile of ships come bearing in about ships dis- the point, , . , it covered. r« °, , themselves which assoone as they saw us, ankered upon the barre, and put in readinesse, sending from one ship to another with their boats, and blowing off their ordinance, meaning to take u s: and we before night, getting our men and other necessaries from the shore, which were busie on land, armed our ships to defend our selves. Then went I aboord the admirall to know what he meant to d o: who determined to set his watch in warlike sort; and so he did: for after the trumpets and drum had sounded, he shot off a great piece, as they before had done; and presently the viceadmirall shot at me, whom I answered with another, and so top-mast, ceased. We then set up our main-top, and rigged before eleven of the clocke the same night. In the meane while they let slip their ankers and cables, and came driving and towing with their boats in upon [III. 766.] us, meaning to have boorded u s: and being neere our admirall, he hailed tell of them; who whence they were, thinking by spending of time to get 194 refused t<wtxt.the to let slip an anker and at s. Vincent. thwart my f ^ j^ % ps then came they all driving downe the gallion my sjpffe with a haulser to let an anker and cable slip to avoid aboord of him: to whom I called still to beware, and to shoot at them in time. At length he let flie at them, The fight beyet was glad them: haulse, so that I was faine cable to shun the gallion. All this while the ordinance and small shot plied of all parts, and I was faine to send to ride by, for shee was loose, and with the flood drave up within me. Then was the viceadmirall on my broad side, who was well payed before, yet I left not galling of him, til I thought our powder spent in vaine to shoot at him, he was so torne, and broken downe by us. About foure of the clocke it rained so fast, that we could scant discerne one the other, the Moone being gone downe, yet rid the admirall, and the rereadmirall, but a little ahead of u s: during which time, we paused, and made ready all our munition. The 25 day, by day-light, we saw the viceadmirall The Spanish sunke hard by us, so that his yards which were hoised wvadmiraU acrosse, and his tops, and that over head, was above s!in i. ? f e r . r . .. hnglisn. the way going, their water: most or their men were gotten away in the boats, saving about fourtie persons which hung in shrowds, and toppes, whom I advised our generall to send for away, and had made ready, and well manned the our pinnesses; but being upon generall called them backe, and would not suffer them to goe. There were three of their boats also going for them from their ships; at whom I shot, and made them to retire, and leave them upon the shrowds. At length our generall sent for two of the men away: which his pinnesse brought the one was heaved over boord, because he was sore hurt, not like to live; and y^ Greeke he was a Marsillian; the other was a Greeke, borne Zante, boatswaine of the viceadmirall: men, some swam away upon rafts, some were drowned, ^ ere we™ in told the to him; the rest of the Generall that j • A i-u u • u r» 4.W 4.' and some remained still hanging on her. By this time it was faire day-light, and I called to our generall 600 and odde in the „ o to ish ships. wey, and drive downe to them, who required mee to goe first and anker on their quarter, and he would follow, and anker on their bowes. I weyed, and went downe, and ankered by them; yet not so nere as I meant, for the ebbe put me off to the Northwards. There rid I alone, spending shot at them, and they both at me, foure houres, before our admiralls anker would come up; during which time I had some spoile done; but when our admirall came, she had her part, and eased me very well. At length our admirall began to warpe away, and being come without me, set saile, and began to stand out into the sea: I went aboord of him to know his pleasure. Who determined to get out of shot; but could not, because the winde scanted on them. The Edward before she could get up her ankers, endured many more shot, after the gallion was further off a good way then she, and sometime the gallion had two or three. Thus we ended about two of the clocke after noone: the rest of this day and part of the night, we spent in mending, fitting, and putting our ordinance and furniture in order for the next morning, thinking they would have bene with us. The 26 day in the morning we could not see them, because they were gone up the river: wee manned our boats and pinnesses, and weyed two ankers and one cable, that they let slip the night before: as our men were weying the third anker, the bwoy-rope brake, and so we lost that anker. Our admirall had an anker of twelve hundred, and a good cable of eleven inches, and we had an anker about sixe hundred, with a piece of a basse cable, and bwoy-rope nothing worth. After dinner I went aboord the admirall, to confer with him, who determined to go off to sea, and thither I caried Senor Pinto to interpret the Indian language, with an Indian named Peter, which fled from the bay where we rid in a canoa, and brought with him a Spaniards caliver, flaske, and touch boxe, to goe with us, whom our admirals boat met, and brought him aboord to the admirall. Hee tolde us that the Spaniards had brought many dead men on land, and buried them, and also landed many hurt men in their bay, and that there were certeine Spaniards gone over thorow the woods to looke after us. Then the Generall, captaine Hawkins, and master Maddox came aboord of mee to viewe my hurt men, and harmes of my shippe, both men, shippe, and tackle; and I also went aboord him to peruse his hurts, who had but one man, a sailer, slaine. The 28 day in the morning died Lancelot Ashe, of a hurt; who departed very godly. This day we stood to the Northwards: and in getting in our ankers and skiffe, we were put 3 leagues to leeward of Fiddle ile, but the gallion rid still. The 29 day in the morning, seeing my selfe put to Where the sea from the admirall, I assembled master Walker, master g^nandthe Shawe, master Jeffries, the master, the masters mate, and ve™t™re Je™' the pilot, to whom I shewed that I was desirous to severed, and goe backe to seeke our admirall, whereunto the master, never met pilot, and masters mate answered directly, that wee could afierwar^ not fetch the ile where wee left them, and to meete them [III. 767.] in going backe it was very unlikely and to us dangerous many wayes, aswell for falling into the laps of the Spaniards, as to be put on a lee shoare: whereupon all the rest advised me to stand off into the sea, whereunto I assented, remembring withal, that time spent con- sumed victuall, and howe long wee had beaten up and downe in the same bay before, to get in with calmes and contrary windes. Thus wee concluded that M. Walker should set downe each mans opinion, and wee set to our handes, and from hencefoorth hee to keepe a Register of all our proceeding, as M. Maddox did abord the Admirall. The first day of February, wee went East by south, and East southeast with a stoute gale: and went the same course the 3. 4. and 5. dayes following. the preacher dieth. Variation of the Compasse. THE ENGLISH VOYAGES The 5. day about 10. a clocke in the forenoone M. Walker died, who had bene weake and sicke of the bloodie flixe 6. dayes, wee tooke a view of his things, and prised them, and heaved him over bord, and shot a peece for his knell. The 14. day I called into my cabbin the two marchants, the Master and the Pilot, shewing them our wants of victuals and other necessaries: whereupon they and I concluded, that it was best for us to returne to our countrey, with as litle losse of time and expense of victuals as might be, being without hope of reliefe upon this coast, and yet to keepe the coast of Brasil to friend for feare of extremitie. The 17. day in the morning having much raine, wee saved above two tunne of water, of which we were very glad. The 18. day I observed the variation of the compasse, which varied one point, and a halfe to the Southwards, by our ordinary compasse of London. The second day of March the Master, Pilot, & I agreed to fetch the yle of Fernando Loronha. From the 3. day to the 10. day we went West, and by South, and ran in for the shoare. The 10. day we saw the land, which was sandie hilles with woods on it. The 11. day seeking to goe a shoare, wee sawe foure men, which weaved to us with a white shirt, and we weaved to them with a flagge of truce: At length one of them swamme to our boats side, and there lay in the Sea talking with us, almost an houre: in the ende, being partly perswaded by Pinto, who talked with them in the Indian-tongue, and partly entised with such trifles as I shewed him, hee came into our SkifFe, and called to his companions on shoare, who came abord swimming: wee delivered them certaine barricos to fetch us them full of fresh water: after, there came downe 40. Indians, boyes, women, and men, and with them a French boy, but the former Indians deceived us of our barricos. Whereupon Pinto and Russell swamme a shoare to seeke water, but found none. The same day wee sailed to a place where boats might land, & I went a land in my Skiffe, and found the Indians, and Frenchman which were with mee the day before, and they brought our three barricos full of fresh water: for which I rewarded them with some trifles. In the meane time our boat went ashoare, and our men with some of the Indians brought us twentie barricos more of fresh water, and I my selfe went to shoare and brought 23. hennes of India. The 12. day betimes in the morning, wee manned our boat and Skiffe, and tooke some trifling things to shoare, and barricos : at our first arrivall the rude Indians flocked together, wading to the Skiffe wherein I was, begging and wondering about us : First I caused them to fetch 27. barricos of water, whom I rewarded with small bells, &c. In the meane time they brought hens to me, wading to the Skiffe, for I kept my selfe alwayes afloat, and for their hens I gave them a knife, and a smal looking glasse. All this while M. Blackcoller our Pilot, Thomas Russel, Marke Thawghts were still on shoare, and would not tarry abord: In the ende, fearing some treacherie, because all the Indians were slipped on shoare from mee, I called Treason of the our men away, and suddenly they layed handes on our ^n^ansmen ashoare, and with their bowes shot thicke at us in the boats, and waded into the water to us, laying hands on our Skiffe, yet God of his mercie delivered us from their hands, with the losse of five men slaine, and others hurt. Thus we got abord with 40. hens, ducks, turkies, and parrats, and three hogsheads of water: and I caried a Frenchman abord with mee, named Jaques Humfrey, Jaques who was by chance in the boat with me when this fray Humfrey a J Frenchman 1 b e S a n - saved. • . J The 17. day we tooke three sharks in the morning. From that day to the first of April, wee went our course, sometime with raine, and sometime with variable T HE ENGLISH VOYAGES windes, & so til the 4. of April: which day we saw 4. birds with long tailes, which hovered about the ship, and in the afternoone we saw and tooke up many weedes which drave thicke in the sea, which we judged to be driven with the East windes from the yles of Cape verde. From this day till the n. day we went our course sometime Northeast, sometime Northwest according to the winds: upon this 11. day George Coxe one of our Carpenters, having the night before broken up the hold, and stolne wine, and drunken himselfe drunke, being A desperate actm and so drowned himselfe. taken in the roome, lept overbord out of the beake head The 12. day wee spied our foremast to be perished in the hownes, and durst not beare our foretop saile upon it, but went hence with our sailes, next hand, North all day and night. From hence to the 20. day we went Northeast and Variation of by North. This day I observed the variation of the and I noted that the South point of the theCompasse. c o m p a s s e: compasse caried more then halfe a point to the Westwards. The 25. day of May wee went betweene the East northeast, and the Northeast with a small gale till five a clocke in the afternoone: then had we sight of land, which rose ragged to the Northwards like broken land, we being about five leagues off: that yle bare Northeast by North of us, and the Northermost part bare North by East of us, with a rocke a sea bord: we then sounded and had fiftie and five fadome grey sand, and maze great store in i t: so wee stood in Northeast till eight a clocke, and then behelde it againe being within foure leagues of it, bearing as before, but wee coulde not make it, for some thought it to bee the foreland of Fontenay, some judged it the yle of Ussant: then we sounded againe in 55. fadome browne sand, and little maze in it: at eight a clocke at night we went about, and stoode off South southwest one watch, then the wind shrinked to the Southwest, that we could lye but South southwest sixe glasses, so that at three a clocke wee cast about, and lay Northwest sixe glasses, and North northwest a watch being then eight a clocke the next day. The 26. day wee lay as nigh as wee coulde betweene the North and the North northeast, and saw the same land againe, and made it to bee the foreland of Fontenay, and the ragges to bee the Seames, which bare now East Northeast of us: and wee stoode on till tenne a clocke, then being within two leagues of the rockes and lesse, wee cast about and stoode off Southwest, because wee could not double the uttermost rockes: when we were about we drave to the Southwards very faste, for the ebbe set us West southwest, and being spring tides, it horsed us a pace to leewards, for the space of one houre: then with the flood which was come, we drave againe to windewards: at twelve at noone it was calme till 6. afternoone, then wee stoode about larbord tacked, South southwest one watch, then at midnight wee cast about and stoode over North till foure aforenoone. The 27. day having brought the land East southeast of us, we made it to be Sylly being before deceived, and The yle of went hence East by North to double Grimsbie, leaving The bishop and his clearks to the Southwestwards, which we before tooke to be The Seames. ^^ At 7. a clocke in the afternoone we sawe the lands end of England, which bare East by North off us, and is 7. leagues off from Sylly. The 29. day at sixe a clocke, beforenoone we had brought the Ramhead North of us, and were within a league of it, and went in Northeast next hand, being thicke and foggie, and little winde : so that at eleven a clocke we ^f came to got in within the yland, and there by mistaking of a sounding, our ship came aground betweene the yle and the maine, and there sate till 4. a clocke in the afternoone that it was halfe flood. PlimmuthThe 30. day about 9. a clocke, with much adoe I furnished away P. Jeffries, M. Symberbe, and William THE ENGLISH VOYAGES Towreson with letters, after dined at M. Blaccollers, and made many salutations with divers gentlemen. they had furnished The 31. I wrought abord all day, and put our ship, and things in order: Afternoone I having pitie of some poore men of Milbrooke, which were robbed the night before by a pirate named Purser, which rid in Cawson bay, I consented to goe out with the Edward in company of a small shippe which to bee their Master, so about five of the clocke in the afternoone, came a hundreth men of theirs abord of mee: About twelve a clocke wee set saile, and by three afore day wee were gotten to the windwards of him, then hee set saile, and went hence to the Eastwards, and outsailed us, because our consort would not come neere him: after a small chase which we gave him to no effect, wee returned into our old road, and there moared the ship about nine of the clocke in the forenoone, and hence went all the Milbrooke men againe ashore from mee. And thus I ended a troublesome voyage. Earle of Cumberland, in the yere 1586. intended for The South sea, but performed no farther then the latitude of 44. degrees to the South of the Equinoctial, Written by M. John Sarracoll marchant in the same voyage. raigne, wee departed He 26. day of June, in the yeere 1586. and in the 28. yeere of the Queenes majesties from Gravesend in two ships; the Admirall called The red dragon, and the other The barke Clifford, the one of the burden of 260. tunnes, with 130. men, and the other of the burden of 130. tunnes, with 70. men: the Captaine of the Admirall was M. Robert Withrington, Of the vice-admirall M. Christopher Lister, both being furnished out at the costs and charges of the 2 02