between the Hands of Maluco, and the cape of Buena Esperanza, in the latitude of 34 degrees to the South of the Line. Item, From the 20 day of May unto the 11 day [III. 837.] of July, we found the winds for the most part betweene the South and the Southeast, being then betweene the cape of Buena Esperanza, and 15 degrees unto the Southward of the line. Item, From the 11 day of July unto the 18 day of August, we found the winds for the most part betweene the Northeast and Eastnortheast, being then betweene latitude of 15 degrees to the Southward of the line, and 38 degrees unto the Northwards of the line. the A letter of M. Thomas Candish to the right honourable the Lord Hunsdon, Lord Chamberlaine, one of her Majesties most honourable Privy Councell, touching the successe of his voyage about the world. [light honourable, as your favour heretofore hath bene most greatly extended towards me, so I humbly desire a continuance thereof: and though there be no meanes in me to deserve the same, yet the uttermost of my services shall not be wanting, whensoever it shall please your honour to dispose thereof. I am humbly to desire your honour to make knowen unto her Majesty the desire I have had to doe her Majesty service in the performance of this voyage. And as it hath pleased God to give her the victory over part of her enemies, so I trust yer long to see her overthrow them all. For the places of their wealth, whereby they have mainteined and made their warres, are now perfectly discovered: and if it please her Majesty, with a very small power she may take It hath pleased the Almighty the spoile of them all. to suffer mee to circompasse the whole globe of the in at the Streight of Magellan, and world, entring returning by the cape de Buena Esperanza. In which voyage I have either discovered or brought certeine that intelligence of all the rich places of the world I ever were knowen or discovered by any Christian. navigated alongst the coast of Chili, Peru, and Nueva Espanna, where I made great spoiles: I burnt and sunke 19 sailes of ships small and great. All the villages and townes that ever I landed at, I burnt and spoiled: and had I not bene discovered upon the coast, I had taken great quantitie of treasure. The matter of most profit unto me was a great ship of the kings which I tooke at California, which ship came from the Philippinas, being one of the richest of merchandize that ever passed those seas, as the kings register and merchants accounts did shew: for it did amount in value to * in Mexico to be solde. Which goods (for to conteine the least that my ships were not able part of them) I was inforced to set on fire. From the cape of California, being the uttermost part of all Nueva Espanna, I navigated the Islands of the Philippinas hard upon the coast of China; of which countrey I have brought such intelligence as hath not bene heard of in these parts. The statelinesse and riches of which countrey I feare to make report of, least I should not be credited: for if I had not knowen sufficiently the incomparable wealth of that countrey, I should have bene as incredulous thereof, as others will be I sailed along the Hands of the Malucos, where among some of the heathen people I was well intreated, where trade as freely as the our countrey men may have Portugals, if themselves. From thence I passed by the cape of Buena Esperanza, and found out by the way homeward the iland of S. Helena, where the Portugals use to relieve themselves: and from that iland God hath suffered me to returne into 377 that have not had the like experience. they will prostrate at her Majesties feet, desiring the Almightylong to continue her reigne among us: for at this day she is the most famous and victorious prince that liveth in the world. Thus humbly desiring pardon of your honour for my tediousnesse, I leave your lordship to the tuition of the Almighty. Plimmouth this ninth of September 1588. Your honours most humble to command, THOMAS CANDISH. Certeine notes or references taken out of the large map of China, brought home by M. Thomas Candish 1588. |He great kingdome of the Mogores is upon the Northwest, and falleth upon Tanassarin beyond Malaca, and joyneth upon Bengala : they are men of warre, and use no fight but on horsebacke: they go in their apparell like Portugal?- 2 A city, wherein is captaine a Chinian, a man very deformed, having under him many men of warre: he maketh warre both against the Tartarians and the Mogores; lying betweene them: and lieth without the circuit of the wall. [III. 838.] 3 Certeine hils, beyond which the Tartarians do inhabit, who heretofore were great friends with the Chinians, and now mainteine continuall warres against them, so great, that sometimes there are slaine in a battell 100000 of men adjoyning upon Moscovie: and they have in their warres all kinde of armour. 4 The province of Cansas hath 4 great cities, and 20 small cities, and 77 townes & castles: it conteineth in length 55 leagues, it hath 362000 houses of great men that pay tribute, and 13900 men of warre: and