A petition made by certaine of the company of the Delight of Bristol unto the Master of the said ship Robert Burnet, one of the consorts of M. Chidley, being in the Streights of Magellan the 12. of February 1589. to j|E have thought good to shew unto you (being our Master) our whole mindes and griefes in writing: that whereas our Captaine Matthew Hawlse, and Walter Street doe beginne take into the Captaines cabin this 12. of Febr. both bread and butter, (such as was put in for the provision of the shippe and company) only to feed themselves, and a few others, which are of their messe: meaning thereby rather to sterve us, then to keepe us strong and in health: And likewise upon the same, hee hath taken into his cabin certaine furniture, as swords, caleevers, and musquets: We therefore not well knowing their intents herein, except by certaine wordes cast out unwares, wee may conjecture,,that your death, which God forbid, by them hath bene determined: doe all most humbly desire you being our Master, and having charge of the shippe, and us, this present voyage committed unto you, to consider: First, that by Gods visitation wee have lost 16. men, and that so much the rather because they were not alotted such necessary provision, as was in the ship to be had. Also to consider the great losse of 15. of our men with our, boat at Penguin-yland within the Streights of Magellan: and of 7. good and serviceable men besides neere Port famine: and of three anckers, and our Carpenter. Over and besides all these calamities to consider how you have (without all reason and conscience) bene overthwarted^ disgraced, and outcountenanced by your mate Street, and Matthew Hawlse: Also what danger you now are subject unto, your death having bene so often 385 2 B conspired, and what danger we should be in, if it were (which God forbid) effected. Furthermore, to weigh with your selfe the great want of many necessaries in our ship: namely that we have but 6. sailers, (besides your selfe and your mate Street, whom wee dare not trust,) Also that wee have but one ancker, likewise the lacke of our boate and a Carpenter, of ropes, of pitch, [III. 841.] treynailes, bolts, and plankes, and the want of a skilfull Chirurgian. And whereas a view being taken of our provision there was found but five moneths victuals of three bread, meale, greets, and pease, and also but moneths victuals of beefe, penguins and porke, three hogsheads of wine, ten gallons of aquavitae (whereof the sicke men could not get any to relieve them,) foure hogsheads of syder and 18. flitches of bacon, &c. the company hath but three flitches. Also the said Captaine Hawlse and Street have taken and seased upon 17. potts of butter, with certaine cheese, and an hogshead of bread at a time, and have bene thereof possessed to their owne private uses: And have not onely immoderately spent the companies provision in butter, cheese, aquavitae, &c. but have also consumed those sweete meates, which were layed up in the shippe onely for the reliefe of sicke persons (themselves being healthy and sound, and withholding the said meates from others in their sickenesse) and even at this time also (by reason of the small store of our provision, wee being enforced to come to a shorter allowance) they the saide Captaine Hawlse and your mate Street, doe finde themselves agrieved at the very same allowance, wherewith other men are well contented. And although (besides our ordinary allowance, and more then all the rest of the company) they only have their breakefasts permitted unto them, yet they complaine that the company goeth about to famish them, whereas indeed they doe what lyeth in them to famish the company by feeding themselves fat, which doe no labour at all. These things being well weighed, you ought likewise to consider the long time that wee have lien here in these Streights of Magellan, having benc at, and seven or eight times, tenne leagues beyond Cape Froward, we have had but a small gale of winde with us: neither could wee come to an ancker, the water being so deepe: and (you know) the place is so dangerous, that wee were once embayed, and coulde scarce get out againe: And likewise, What fogges and mists are here already? Much more here wil be, the winter and darke nights being at hand, & we having not so much as a boate to seeke out any roade to ride in, saving a small weake boate made of mens chestes, in which it is not convenient to goe on shoare in a forreine countrey, where wee must goe with force: and having but one ancker left us, there is but little hope of life in us, as you may sufficiently judge, if wee should lose either the saide ancker or our boate, and therefore wee dare not put the same in danger for feare of loosing them. Also wee having lien here these sixe weekes and upward, the winde hath continued in the North-west directly against our course, so that wee can no way hope to get through the Streights into the South sea this yeere, and if we could, yet our provision is not sufficient, having spent so much thereof, in this our lingering aboade. Nay wee have scarcely victuals ynough to cary us home into England, if they bee not used sparingly, and with very good government. Therefore wee doe againe most humbly desire you to con- sider and have regard unto the premisses, as you tender your owne safetie and the safetie of us which remaine alive, that wee may (by Gods helpe) returne backe into England, rather then die here among wilde and savage people: for if wee make any longer abode in this place, it will bee (without all doubt) to the utter decay and losse, both of our selves, and of the shipper and in returning backe, it may please God, that we may finde our fifteene men, and our boat at Penguinyland (although this bee contrary to the mindes of Matthew Hawlse, and your mate Street) and having found them, wee doe not despaire in Gods mercie, but that in our returne home-ward, hee will send us purchase sufficient, if wee would joyne our selves together in prayer, and love one another. And thus doing (as wee shalbe bound) even so wee will also heartily pray for the continuance of your good estate, and wel-fare, and for the length of your dayes, to the pleasure of Almightie God. Lastly, wee doe most humbly beseech you to consider, that (after the losse of so many men and all the casualties aforesaid, as we were taking in of water by Port Famine, our boate-swaine, the hooper, and William Magoths being on shoare) Matthew Hawlse did hallow to have them in all the haste come on-bord: saying therewithall these words: He that will come in this voyage, must not make any reckoning to leave two or three men on shore behinde him, whereas we had so lately lost all the foresaide men, having then but sixe sailers left us on-bord. Also the saide Matthew Hawlse did cary a pistoll for the space of two dayes secretly under his gowne, intending therewithall to have murthered Andrew Stoning, and William Combe, as by confession of Hawlse his man, William Martin, it is manifest: for the saide William Martine reported unto two of his friends, viz. Richard Hungate, and Emanuel Dornel, that he kneeled upon his knees one whole houre before Matthew Hawlse in his owne cabin, desiring him, for Gods cause, not to kill either of them, especially because the saide Stoning and Martin came both out of one towne. Also the said Hawlse, at our second time of watering in the place aforesaid, came into the Gunners roome to speake with you (your selfe with the master Gunner Thomas Browne, and his mate William Frier being then present) demanding of you, if he should send certaine men to Port famine being two leagues from the ship by land. Thomas Browne answered him [III. 842.] presently, that he should send none, for feare least the wind might arise, and by that meanes we should loose so many of our men more: to whom Matthew Hawlse replied that it was not material, for that he had made choyce of a company for the very same purpose, whose names were Emmanuel Dornel, Richard Hungate, Paul Carie, John Davis, Gabriel Valerosa, a Portugal!, and Peter a Britaine, and the Spaniard which we had taken The Spaniard in at the same place, at our first time of watering. i^en^t ** A And thus we end, desiring God to sende us well into our native countrey. In witnesse whereof wee have subscribed our names. Port Famine. r> J 11 • ^ • • ^ J J J ii 1^, Thomas Browne, Gunner, John Morrice, &c. The last voyage of the worshipfull M. Thomas Candish esquire, intended for the South sea, the Philippinas, and the coast of China, with 3. tall ships, and two barks: Written by M. John Jane, a man of good observation, imployed in the same, and many other voyages. He 26. of August 1591, wee departed from Plimmouth with 3. tall ships, and two barkes, The Galeon wherein M. Candish went himselfe being Admiral, The Roebucke vice admirall whereof M. Cocke was Captaine, The Desire Rereadmirall whereof was Captaine M. John Davis (with whom and for whose sake I went this voyage) The Blacke pinnesse, and a barke of M. Adrian Gilbert, whereof M. Randolfe Cottonv was Captaine. The 29. of November wee fell with the bay of Salvador Baya & SaI~ upon the coast of Brasil 12. leagues on this side Cabo Frio, where wee were becalmed untill the second of December: at which time wee tooke a small barke bound A barke taken. for the River of Plate with sugar, haberdash wares, and Negros. The Master of this barke brought us unto an yle called Placencia thirtie leagues West from Cabo Frio, Isja je where wee arrived the fift of December, and rifled sixe or Placencia. or' ,