then is the Carenero bound, if it bee either by fire, water, or sinking, or any other misfortune, to pay for the valew of the ship. The Carena of a shippe of one hundred tunnes being done so substantially as they use to doe it, will cost two hundred Duckets, of two hundred tunnes, foure hundred Duckets, of three hundred tunnes, sixe hundred Duckets, and so according to the greatnesse of the shippe. It would be done here in England for one third part of the money, by reason that the necessaries that goe to it are better cheape here by much, and the calkers farre better cheape by two parts. This Carena may not be given at any hand but in a river where no tempest can arise, as in this river of London in such a place, where at al times the sayd ship may ride aflote: it may not be done in any dangerous harbour, where the winde may bring up the waves of the Sea, neither where the Sea may heave and set. The calking of Sivill is so substantially done, that in one day one calker doeth not throughly calke past one yarde and an halfe in one seame, or two yardes at the most, and to that he doeth, the master calker is at hand to oversee him, and this done, the Carenero doeth with his ballast set her upright, and so shee beginneth to lade. Examen de los maestros y Pilotos, que navegan en las flotas de Espanna para las Indias del mar oceano, escrito por Pedro Dias Piloto, natural de la Isla de la Palma, 1586. Rimeramente pide al Piloto mayor, que es al presente Alonso de Chiavez, que lo admita al examen, por quanto es natural y sufficiente para ello. Manda el Piloto mayor, que haga enformacion, de como es marinero, y platico de aquella parte, de que se quiere examinar. Luego presenta cinco o seis testigos de los Pilotos examinados, de como es buen marinero, y suf448 Alonso de Chiavez ficiente para ser Piloto, y como es natural de los Reynos de Espanna; y que no es de casta de Moro, ni Judeo, ni Negro. Y hecha la enformacion, presenta la al Piloto mayor. Y visto el Piloto mayor la enformacion ser buena, manda que el Cathedratico Rodrigo Zamorano lo admita Rodrigo Zaa la Cathedra. Y alii se juntan a vezes quatorze o ™>ranoCathc- quinze que pretenden examinarse, y acuden alii a una casa, que El Cathedratico tiene para aquello efeto, a las ocho de la mannana, y estan dos oras, y otras dos a la tarde. El Cathedratico tiene por costumbre de leer en la Cathedra una ora, y otra ora ocupan en preguntarse los unos a los otros muchas cosas convenientes a la arte de navegar en presencia del Cathedratico. Y el que no responde a proposito, El Cathedratico le emienda, y le dize de la manera que es cade cosa. Y este estudio dura nos meses, en los quales no ha de faltar de ir dos vezes al dia, como tengo dicho. Y despues de aver oido la Cathedra estos dos meses, [HI. 865.] LaSaladel van a la Sala del Examen, que es en la Contratacion. 1 alh esta el Jriloto mayor, y los de mas pilotos, qui son por lo menos veinte cinco: y alii estando todos assentados por su orden, manda el Piloto mayor, que lean las enformaciones; y despues de aver leidas las enformaciones o testimonios, pregunta el piloto mayor al piloto y maestro, que se quiere examinar, de que parte de las Indias se quiere examinar ? Y luego el piloto responde, que de Nueva Espanna, o de Nombre de Dios. Y otros, que no son platicos de estas tierras, dizen, que de Santo Domingo, y Puerto rico, y Cuba y luego demanda el Piloto mayor, que tienda la carta en la mesa, y en presencia de los demas pilotos parta de la barra de San Lucar para las Islas de Canaria, y de alii para las Indias, hasta Uegar a aquella parte de donde se examina, y buelve para Espanna, a tornar, a la Barra de San Lucar, de donde partio. Y el Piloto mayor le preguntas Que si yendo navegando por la mar le diese un viento contrario, que 449 2 F remedio haria para que su nao no trabajasse tanto en la mar ? Y el le responde lo mejor que entiende. Luego le pregunta uno de los pilotos por las reglas del Sol5 y de la Estrella del norte, y que cuenta le hara en todo tiempo del anno ? A lo qual ha de responder el piloto que se examina a todo aquello que le preguntaren. Y luego le pregunta otro por las sennas de las tierras que estuvieren en el camino, hasta llegar al puerto de donde se examina. Y luego pregunta otro, que si con tormenta se le quebrasse los arboles, Que remedio haria ? Y otros le preguntan, Que si la nao abriesse un agua, a donde peligrassen las vidas, que remedio haria para tomarla con menos riesgo ? Y otros le preguntan, que si le faltasse el timon, que remedio haria ? Y otros le preguntan por la cuenta de la Luna, y de las mareas. Y otros le preguntan, Que si lo tomasse un corsario, y lo dexasse sin carta y sin astrolabio, y otros instrumentos para tomar la altura del Sol y de la Estrella del norte, que orden tendria para hazer los ? Otros le preguntan otras preguntas necessarias a un marinero, que quiere ser piloto. A todo esto esta attento, respondiendo a todo. Y despues que todos le an preguntado todo lo necessario, le mandan, que saiga fuera de la sala, paraque a solas de cada uno su boto debaxo de juramento en un libro, que prometen La numerate d eleaon de los maestros,y plata, que alii esta para aquel eieto, tantas havas, y pilotos. ' d e z ir verc iad. y luego ponen dentro de un vaso de 1 tantos garvanzos, como ai pilotos dentro de la sala: y va r *_ 1 t. r . , & r , cada uno por su orden; y el que le parece que es sufficiente, saca una have, y el que le parece, que no lo es, saca un garvanzo. Y despues que todos an sacado, mira el piloto mayor los botos que tiene; y si halla que tiena tantos botos en su favor como en contrario, manda que haga otro viaje: y si tiene mas botos en su Carta del ex- favor q ue en contrario, luego le dan una carta del amen. 1 1 •"* 1 J 1 11 l~ »i • examen nrmada del puoto mayor, y del Lathedratico, y del Escrivano, y sellada con el sello de la Contratacion. Y teniendo esta carta, luego da de presente al piloto mayor, y al Cathedratico para guantes y gallinas, conforme que cada uno puede, que es de ordinario dos o tres ducados. Y luego se puede concertar por piloto en qualquier navio que quisiere, para aquella parte dedonde se examino. Y si hallare en las Indias algun navio que tenga piloto no examinado, lo puede botar fuera, y venir el piloto examinado en el navio por el mismo concierte, que el otro piloto tenia hecho. Suelen llevar los pilotos de partido y concierte por Sueldo de los un viaje de yr y bolver, conforme que es el navio. Si P'llot05es de ciento tonelladas, dozientos ducados, y dozientos y cinquenta; y si es de quatrocientas o de quinientas, Ueva de partido; y mas, todos los dias que estuviere en tierra, quatro las naos grandes siempre llevan los pilotos mas viejos, porque el son mas experimentados y mejores pilotos que los manzebos, que comienzan a navegar, y a ser pilotos. reales para su comida. Y El piloto no tiene mas trabajo ni mas cuidado que Maestros y sus en la navegacion: porque los maestros de los navios °ffictos' tienen cuidado de fretar, y aderezar sus naos, y pagar a los marineros, y hazer todo lo que es menester para su nao: porque el piloto no viene a la nao, si no es todo quando los visitadores vienen a visitarla, si tiene lo necessario para el viage. Los visitadores son quatro hombres qui estan puestos Los quatro por el rev, y estos son hombres muy entendidos, y vistt^°J'eh y vienen a visitar los navios, antes que tomen carga, por ver si estan bien aderezados para hazer el viage. Y despues que estan los navios cargados, buelven otra vez a visitarlos, por ver si tienen todas las cosas necessarias, conforme a la Prematica; y si tienen todos los marineros, Prematica. y bastimentos, y polvere, y artilleria, y balas, y todo lo de mas necessario para el viaje. Y si alguna cosa les falta, les mandan con graves penas que lo compren, antes que salgan del puerto. Suelen llevar los navios que van a las Indias un Escrwanoysu escrivano que tiene cargo de tomar por memoria todas las las mercaderias que se cargan en la nao, y tomar $ i [III. 866.] marcas, para por ellas entregar la carga a sus duennos, despues de aver acabado su viaje: y sirve tanbien, si un hombre caesse enfermo, para hazer testamiento y otros recaudos que se suelen hazer delante un escrivano: y gana por su sueldo en un viaje tan to como dos marineros. Primero navio Tiene el general de las flotas por costumbre, despues de aviso. q ue U e ga a l as embiar un navio de aviso, para dar relacion al rey, de como ha Uegado. Y despues j n ^ a S) ^ Segundo navio q Ue e s t an p r e stas para partir despacha otrio navio de e aviso. a v i S Oj p a ra hazer relacion, de como estan ya prestas para partir, con otras particularidades. Dos naos de guerra. y an en j as flotas dos naos grandes, la una por Capitana, ^ j a o t ra ^or Almiranta, cada una de seiscientas y de sietecientas tonelladas, que no llevan mas que bastimentos y soldados para defensa de la defensa de la demas flota: y lleva cada una como docientos soldados: y estas se pagan de las mercaderias que vienen en la flota a uno por ciento, y algunas vezes a uno y medio por ciento. Ay en la casa de la Contratacion de Sevilla una tabla que sirve de Aranzel, escrita con letras de o r o; en que stan avaliadas todas las mercaderias que se embarcan para las Indias. EN esta tabla se puede saber quantas botijas hazen una tonellada de vino y quantos quintales y quantos bariles, y quantos coiFres sea una tonellada. Y todas mercaderias estan alii taxadas, para pagar los derechos al rey, y el jflete al maestro. Y alii esta puesto que ningun maestro puede llevar a las Indias ningun passagero, ni frayle, ni clerigo, ni otras personas, ni estranieros de los reynos de Espanna, sin licencia del Rey. Y mas, que no puerde llevar mercaderias fuera de la Prematica, y todo lo que llevaren, lo lleven registrado, so pena de la vida. Y mas, que ningun maestro ni piloto puede llevar instrumentos que no sean firmados por el piloto mayor Alonzo de Chiaves, y el cosmografo Cathedratico Roderigo Zamorano: como son la carta, el astrolabio, la balestilla, y el regimiento. Y mas, que yendo en la compannia de la flota, obedescan al General, y no hagan mas de lo que el mandare, so pena de la vida. T he same in English. The examination of the Masters and Pilots which saile in the Fleetes of Spaine to the West Indies : Written in the Spanish tongue by taken by Sir Pedro Dias a Spanish pilot Richard Grinville 1585. First they make suit unto the Pilot major (who at this present is called Alonzo de Chiavez) that he would admit them to examination, because they are naturall Spaniards, and sufficient for the same. Hereupon the Pilot major commandeth the party to The witnesse be examined, to give information that he is a mariner, °ffive or 5^xe and well practized in those parts, about which hee desireth ** °s' to be examined. And then immediately he bringeth five or sixe pilots before examined to give testimonie that he is a good mariner, and sufficient to become a pilot, that he is a Spaniard borne, and that he is not of the race of the Moores, Jewes or Negros. Having made this information, hee presenteth it unto The pilots adthe Pilot major. And the Pilot major seeing the in- formation to be good, willeth the Kings publique reader Kings reader. of navigation (who is now Roderigo Zamorano) to admit him to his lectures. Whither there doe resort foureteene or fifteene persons that desire to be examined: and they Theyhearethe come to a certaine house which the kings reader hath *f*n& readers appointed unto him for the same purpose, at eight of the fames'a^day clocke in the morning: and then they stay two houres, for two and two houres likewise in the afternoone: in one of moneths, tZ^L tionsoftheart of navigation before the Kings reader who is their moderatour. The hall of examination. [III. 867.] pilotTexamination. THE ENGLISH VOYAGES which houres Zamorano readeth unto them, and in the other they aske one another many particulars concerning t he a rt of n a v i g a t ; on 'm th e preSence of the said kings reader: and him that answereth not to the purpose the sayd reader instructed! more perfectly, and telleth him how everything is. And this exercise continueth two mOneths, during which time the examinates must not faile to bee present twise in a day, as is aforesaid. And having heard the kings reader those two moneths, they resort then unto the hall of examination which is t he Contractation house, where there are assembled ; n the Pilot major and divers other pilots, to the number of 25 at the least; who all sitting there in order, the Pilot major demandeth of him that would be examined, of I n d i es he desireth to be examined: w h at P a rt of Whereto the examinate answerdth, that he would bee examined concerning Nueva Espanna, or of Nombre de Dios and Tierra Firma. And others that are not experienced in those partes, crave to be examined of Santo Domingo, Puerto rico, and Cuba. t he Then the Pilot major commandeth the examinate to spread a sea-chart upon the table, and in the presence of the other pilots to depart or shewe the course from the barre of Sant Lucar to the Canarie-Islands, and from thence to the Indies, till he come to that place whereof he is to bee examined, and then also to returne backe to the barre of Sant Lucar in Spaine, from whence he departed. Also the Pilot major asketh him, if when he saileth upon the sea, hee be taken with a contrary wind, what remedie he is to use, that his ship be not too much turmoiled upon the sea ? And the examinate answereth him aswell as he can. Then one of the other pilotes opposeth him about the rules of the Sunne and of the North-starre, and how hee ought to use the declination of the Sunne at all times of the yeere: whom the examinate is bound to answere in every thing that hee demandeth. Then another asketh him of the signes and markes of those lands which lye in his way to that haven whereof he is examined. And then another demandeth, that if his mastes should be broken by tempest, what remedy hee would use ? Others aske him, if his ship should take a leake, to the hazarding of the lives of himselfe and his company, what remedy he would find to stop the same with least danger? Others aske him, what remedy, if his rudder should chance to faile ? Others oppose him about the account of the Moone and of the tides? Others aske him if a Pirate should take him and leave him destitute of his Chart, his Astrolabe, and his other instruments serving to take the height of the Sunne and of the starre, what course hee would take in that extremitie? Others demand other questions needfull for a mariner to know, which desireth to be a pilot. Unto all which the examinate is very attentive, and answereth to every particular. After they have all asked him so much as they think Themanerof expedient, they bid him depart out of the hall, to the their electionende that every one of them may severally bee sworne upon a booke, that they will speake the trueth. Then they put into a certaine vessell of silver standing there for the same purpose so many beanes, and so many peason as there are pilots within the hall: and every one putting his hand into the vessell in order, he that thinketh the partie examined to be sufficient, taketh up a beane, and he that thinketh him not sufficient, taketh up a pease. Lette/Stestt' And after that all have taken out what they please, the ™™rt nfw Pilot major looketh what voyces the examinate hath: and pilots exaif he finde him to have as many voyces for him as against mination and him, he commandeth him to make another voyage: but afpj°^ony if he hath more voyces for him then against him, then ^^ J^ they give him letters testimoniall of his examination Pilot major, signed by the Pilot major, by the* kings reader, and the the kings secretary, and sealed with the seale of the Contractation re*der-> and house. And upon the receipt of these letters testimoniall, ^J^aiflf9 the new pilot giveth a present unto the Pilot major, and the Contracts the kings reader, for their gloves and hennes, every one tion house, according to his abilitie, which is ordinarily some two or three ducats. And then he may take upon him to be pilot in any ship whatsoever, unto that place for which he was examined : and if he finde in the Indies any ship under the charge of a pilot not before examined, hee may put him out of his office, and may himself take charge of that ship for the same wages that the other pilot agreed for. The pilots wages for making a voyage outward and homeward is according to the burthen of the ship. If she be of 100 tunnes, hee hath 200 or 250 ducats: and if shee bee of 400 or 500 tunnes, he taketh for his wages 500 or 550 ducates: and if she be bigger, he hath a greater allowance: over and besides all which, he hath every day while he remaineth on land, foure reals for his diet. And the greater shippes are alwayes committed unto the more ancient pilots, because they are of greater experience and better skill, then the yonger sort which newly take upon them to be pilots. The pilot undertaketh no farther travell nor care, but in directing the course or navigation: for the masters ot the ships take charge of the freighting and preparing; their ships, and to pay the mariners, and to doe all things needefull for the ship ; for the pilot commeth not unta the shippe, untill the visitours come to visite the same, to see whether he hath all things necessary for the voyage. The visitours are foure men which are appoynted by Foure Visitours. fat k[ngy and these are men of great understanding : and they come to visite the shippes before they take in their lading, to see whether they be well prepared to make the voyage. And after the ships bee laden, they returne againe to visite them the second time, to see whether J/^Contracta l ^ turnkousT*~ °f [III. 868.] h a ve al* t h i n g s necessary, according to the orders t he Contestation house: and whether they have all their mariners, victuals, pouder, shot, and ordinance, and all other things necessary for the voyage. And if they want any thing, they charge them upon grievous penalties> to provide the same before they set out of the haven. The ships that goe to the Indies are wont eche of them to have with them a Notarie, whose charge is to keepe a note of remembrance of all the marchandize which is laden in the ship, and to take the marks thereof, therby to deliver the commodities in the ship to their particular owners, after they have finished their voyage, and he serveth likewise to make willes, and other instruments, which are wont to be made by a Notarie, if any man chanceth to fall sicke. And his wages in eche voyage is as much as the wages of two mariners. The Generall of the fleetes useth continually, after Thefirstbarke hee is arrived in the Indies, to send into Spaine a barke °fAvi$0of Aviso, to advertise the king of the state of his arrivall; And after the fleetes be ready to come home, he dispatcheth another pinnesse of Aviso to certifie them how The secon<t the fleetes are now ready to set saile, with other par- b*rk.e °f ticularities. There go with the fleetes two great ships, the one as Admirall, the other as Viceadmirall, of the burthen of 400 or 500 tunnes, which carry nothing but victuals and souldiers for the wafting of the rest of the fleete, and these are payd out of the marchandize which come in the fleete, after the rate of one in the hundred, and sometime at one and an halfe in the hundred. There is in the Contractation house of Sivil a table which serveth for an Aranzel, or table of rate or taxation, written in letters of gold, wherein the values of all kind of marchandize, which are embarqued for the Indies, are set downe. j|Y this table a man may know how many Botijas A ta^e °f or jarres make a tunne of wine, or how many ra!e?y}rc'n set J up in the Lonpackes, or how many quintals, or how many tractation 1 1 J • , barrels, or how many chests make a tunne. house. And all marchandize have their rates set downe, to pay the king his customes and the Master his due fraight. to the Indies, without And therein is set up in writing that no Master maylicence, carry any passenger especially no learned men, nor any fryer, or clergyman, nor any body else without licence of the king : nor any strangers not borne in the kingdomes of Spaine. Moreover, that they may not carry away any marchandize not comprized in the foresaid orders, under paine of death : and that all goods which they carry with them, they ought to carry the same registred; under paine of death. Furthermore, that no Master nor Pilot may carry any Chart, nor Astrolabe, nor Crosse-staffe, nor regiment, without they bee signed and sealed by the Pilot major Alonzo de Chiavez, and the Cosmographer the kings reader Rodrigo Zamorano. Moreover, that going in company with the fleete, they doe and obey all such things, as their Generall shall command them, under paine of death. Written by me Pedro Dias borne in the Isle of' Palma one of the Canaries, upon the request and gratification of M. Richard Hakluyt, in February 1586.