A testimony of the right and appendances of the crown of the kingdom of Britaine , taken out of M . Lambard his & pKatovotda , fol . 137 . page . 2 . 5 A . D . 5I7 - The same in English . ARthur which was sometime the most renowned king of the Britains , was a mighty , and valiant man , and a famous warrior . This kingdom was too little for him , & his mind was not contented with it . He therefore valiantly subdued all Scantia , which is now called Norway , and all the Islands beyond Norway , to wit , Island and Greenland , which are aPPERTAINING unto Norway , Sweveland , Ireland , Gotland , Denmarke , Semeland , Windland , Curland , Roe , Femeland , Wireland , Flanders , Cherilland , Lapland , and all the other lands & Islands of the East sea , even unto Russia ( in which Lapland he placed the Easterly bounds of his British Empire ) and many other Islands beyond Norway , even under the North pole , which are appendances of Scantia , now called Norway . These people were wild and savage , and had not in them the love of God nor of their neighbours , because all evil comes from the North , yet there were among them certain Christians living in secret . But king Arthur was and exceeding good Christian , and caused them to be baptised , and throughout all Norway to worship one God , and to receive and keep inviolably for ever , faith in Christ only . At that time all the noble men of Norway took wives of the noble nation of the Britaines , whereupon the Norses say , that they are descended of the race and blood of this kingdom . The aforesaid king Arthur obtained also in those days of the Pope & court of Room , that Norway should be for ever annexed to the crown of Britaine for the enlargement of this kingdom , and he called it the chamber of Britaine . For this cause the Norses say , that they ought to dwell with us in this kingdom , to wit , that they belong to the crown of Britaine : for they had rather dwell here then in their own native country , which is drieand full of mountains , and barren , and no grain growing there , but in certain places . But this country of Britaine is fruitful , wherein corn and all other good things do grow and increase : for which cause many cruel battles have be oftentimes fought betwixt the Englishmen and the people of Norway , and infinite numbers of people have be slain , & the Norses have possessed many lands and Islands of this Empire , which unto this day they do possess , neither could they ever afterwards be fully expelled . But now at length they are incorporated with us by the receiving of our religion and sacraments , and by taking wives of our nation , and by affinity , and marriages . For so the good king Edward ( who was a notable maintainer of peace ) ordained and granted unto them by the general consent of the whole kingdom , so that the people may , and ought from henceforth dwell and remain in this kingdom with us as our loving sworn brothers .