Part of and Epistle written by one Yvo of Narbona unto the Archbishop of Bordeaux , containing the confession of and Englishman as touching the barbarous demeanour of the Tartars , which had lived long among them , and was drawn along perforce with them in their expedition against Hungarie : Recorded by Mathew Paris in the year of our Lord 1243 . THe Lord therefore being provoked to indignation , by reason of this and other sins committed among us Christians , is become , as it were , a destroying enemy , and a dreadful avenger . This I may justly affirm to be true , because and huge nation , and a barbarous and inhumane people , whose law is lawless , whose wrath is furious , even the rod of Gods anger , overrunneth , and utterly wastes infinite countries , cruelly abolishing all things where they come , with fire and sword . And this present Summer , the foresaid nation , being called Tartars , departing out of Hungarie , which they had surprised by treason , laid siege unto the | | Neust . it . very same II town , wherein I my self abided , with many thousands of soldiers : neither were there in the said 5 ° town on our part above 50 . men of war , whom , together with 20 . crossbows , the captain had left in garrison . All these , out of certain high places , beholding the enemies vast army , and abhorring the beastly cruelty of Antichrist his accomplices , signified forthwith unto their governor , the hideous lamentations of his Christian subject ' s , who suddenly being surprised in all the province adjoining , without any difference or respect of condition , fortune , sex , or age , were by manifold cruelties , all of them destroyed : with whose carcases , the Tartarian chieftains , and their brutish and savage followers , glutting themselves , as with delicious cates , left nothing for vultures but the bore bones . And a strange thing it is to consider , that the greedy and ravenous vultures disdained to pray upon any of the relics , which remained . Oide , and deformed women they gave , as it were , for daily sustenance , unto their Canibals : the beautiful devoured they not , but smothered them lamenting and scritching , with forced and unnatural ravishments . Like barbarous miscreants , they quelled virgins unto death , and cutting ofF their tender paps to present for dainties