with their bows , and other engines . Of the hides of beasts being tanned , they use to shape for themselves light , but yet impenetrable armour . They ride fast bound unto their horses , which are not very great in stature , but exceedingly strong , and maintained with little provender . They use to fight constantly and valiantly with javelins , maces , battle - axes , and swords . But specially they are excellent archers , and cunning warriors with their bows . Their backs are slightly armed , that they may not flee . They withdraw not themselves from the combat , till they see the chief Standard of their general give back . Vanquished , they ask no favour , and vanquishing , they show no compassion . They all persist in their purpose of subduing the whole world under their own subjection , as if they were but one man , and yet they are more then millions in number . They have 60000 . Courriers , who being sent before upon light horses to prepare a place for the army to encamp in , will in the space of one night gallop three days journey . And suddenly diffusing themselves over and whole province , and surprising all the people thereof unarmed , unprovided , dispersed , they make such horrible slaughters , that the king or prince of the land invaded , cannot find people sufficient to wage battle against them , and to withstand them . They delude all people and princes of regions in time of peace , pretending that for a cause , which indeed is no cause . Sometime they say , that they will make a voyage to Colen , to fetch home the three wise kings into their own country ; sometime to punish the avarice and pride of the Roman , who oppressed them in times past ; sometime to conquer barbarous and Northern nations ; sometime to moderate the fury of the Germanes with their own meek mildness ; sometime to learn warlike feats and stratagems of the French ; sometime for the finding out of fertile ground to suffice their huge multitudes ; sometime again in derision they say , that they intend to go on pilgrimage to S . James of Galicia . In regard of which sleights and collusions certain undiscreet governors concluding a league with them , have granted them free passage thorough their territories , which leagues notwithstanding being violated , were and occasion of ruin and destruction unto the foresaid governors etc .