subdere ( Dei favente gratia ) coegi . Quapropter & ego Christi gloriam , & laudem exaltare , & ejus servitium amplificare devotus disposui , & per meos fideles Fautores , Dunstanum viz . Archiepiscopum , Athelwoldum , & Oswaldum episcopos ( quos mihi patres spirituales , & Consiliatores elegi ) magna ex parte , secundum quod disposui , effeci , etc . And again this in another Monument . OMnipotentis Dei , etc . Ipsius nutu & gratia suffultus , Ego / Edgarus Basileus dilectae Insulae Albionis , subditis nobis sceptris Scotorum , Cumbrorum , ac Brytonum , & omnium circumcirca Regionum , quieta pace perfruens , studiosus solicit de laudibus creatoris omnium occupor addendis : Ne nunc inertia , nostrisque diebus ( plus aequo ) servitus ejus tepescere videatur , etc . 18 . mei terreni Imperii anno , etc . Anno Incarnationis Dominicae , 973 . Ego TEdgarus totius Albionis Basileus hoc privilegium ( tanta roboratum authoritate ) crucis Thaumate confirmavi . So that by all these rehearsed Records , it is most evident that the peaceable king Edgar , was one of those Monarchs , in whose hands ( if life had sufficed ) the incredible valve and privilege granted by God and nature unto this British monarchic , might have be peaceably purchased in such sort , as the very blessing and favour of the divine Trinitie hath laid means for our industry to attain to , and enjoy the same by . And though sundry other valiant princes and kings of this land I could recite , which in times passed have either by intent gone about , or by wise and valiant exploit , have meetly well prospered towards this Islandish appropriate supremacy attaining , yet never any other reasonable means was used , or by humane wit , or industry can be contrived , to all purposes sufficient , but only by our sea forces prevailing , and so by our invincible enjoying all within the sea limits of our British royalty contained . To which incredible political mystery attaining , no easier , readier , or perfecter plate and introduction , is ( as yet ) come to my imagination , then is the present and continual service