unto their magistrates , they engorged themselves with their bodies . Howbeit , their espials in the mean time descrying from the top of and high mountain the Duke of Austria , the King of Bohemia , the Patriarch of Aquileia , the Duke of Carinthia , and ( as some report ) the Earl of Baden , with a mighty power , and in battle array , approaching towards them , that accursed crew immediately vanished , and all those Tartarian vagabonds retired themselves into the distressed and vanquished land of Hungarie ; who as they came suddenly , so they departed also on the sudden : which their celerity caused all men to stand in horror and astonishment of them . But of the said fugitives , the prince of Dalmatia took eight : one of which number the Duke of Austria knew to be and English man , who was perpetually banished out of the Realm of England , in regard of certain notorious crimes by him committed . This fellow , on the behalf of the most tyrannical king of A . D . 1243 . the Tartars , had be twice , as a messenger and interpreter , with the king of Hungarie , menacing and plainly foretelling those mischiefs which afterwards happened , unless he would submit himself and his kingdom unto the Tartars yoke . Well , being allured by our Princes to confess the truth , he made such oaths and protestations , as ( I think ) the devil himself would have been trusted for . First therefore he reported of himself , that presently after the time of his banishment , namely about the 30 . year of his age , having lost all that he had in the city of Aeon at dice , even in the midst of Winter , being compelled by ignominious hunger , wearing nothing about him but a shirt of sack , a pair of shoes , and a hair cap only , being shaved like a fool , and uttering and uncouth noise as if he had be dumb , he took his journey , and so traveling many countries , and finding in diverse places friendly entertainment , he prolonged his life in this manner for a season , albeit every day by rashness of speech , and inconstancy of heart , he endangered himself to the devil . At length , by reason of extreme travail , and continual change of air and of meats in Caldea , he fell into a grievous sickness , insomuch that he was