as he chiefly in this Empire did put in proof and ure triumphantly , whereupon his surname was Pacificus , most aptly and justly . This peaceable king Edgar had in his mind about six hundred years past , the representation of a great part of the self same Idaea , which from above only , & by no men devise hath streamed down into my imagination , being as it becomes a subject careful for the godly prosperi tie of this British Empire under our most peaceable Queen Elizabeth . For , jEdgarus pacificus , Regni sui prospiciens utilitati , Flores pariter & quieti , quatuor millia octingentas sibi ’ robustas Historiarum . congregavit naves e quibus mille ducentas , in plaga Angliae Orientali , mille ducentas in Occidentali , mille ducentas in pelago con stituit , ut ad defensionem regni sui , contra exteras nationes , bellorum discrimina sustinerent . O wisdom imperiali , most diligently to be imitated , videlicet , prospicere , to foresee . O charitable kingly parent , that was touched with ardent zeal , for procuring the public profit of his kingdom , yea and also the peaceable enjoying thereof . O , of and incredible mass of treasure , a kingly portion , yet , in his coffers remaining : if then he had , ( or late before ) any wars , seeing no notable tax , or contribution public is historically mentioned to have be for the charges levied : if in peace he himself flourished so wealthily : Oh marvellous political ! , & princely prudency , in time of peace to foresee , and prevent , ( and that most puissantly , and invincibly ) all possible malice , fraud , force , and mischief foreign . O most discreet liberali tie to such 1 17 B Australi , mille ducentas in Septentrionali excellent uses , powering out his treasure so abundantly . O faithful English people ( then , ) and worthy subject ' s , of such and Imperiali and godly Governor . O your true , and willing hearts , and blessed ready hands ( then , ) so to impart such abundance of victuals for those huge Navies maintenance : so (