The voyage of Nicholas de Lynna a Franciscan Friar , and and excellent Mathematician of Oxford , to all the Regions situate under the North pole , in the year 1360 . and in the reign of Edward the 3 . king of England . The words of Gerardus Mercator , in the foot of his general Map , upon the description of the Uorth parts . The same in English . TOuching the description of the North parts , I have taken the same out of the voyage of James Cnoyen of Hartzevan Buske , which allegeth certain conquests of Arthur king of Britaine : and the most part , and chiefest things among the rest , he learned of a certain priest in the king of Norwayes court , in the year 1364 . This priest was descended from them which king Arthur had sent to inhabit these Islands , and he reported that in the year 1360 , a certain English Friar , a Franciscan , and a Mathematician of Oxford , came into those Islands , who leaving them , and passing further by his Magical ! Art , described all those places that he saw , and took the height of them with his Astrolabe , according to the form that I ( Gerard Mercator ) have set down in my map , and as I have taken it out of the aforesaid James Cnoyen . He said that those foure Indraughts were drawn into and inward gulf or whirlpool , with so great a force , that the ships which once entered therein , could by no means be driven back again , and that there is never in those parts so much wind blowing , as might be sufficient to drive a Corn mill . Giraldus Cambrensis ( who flourished in the year 1210 , 302 under king John ) in his book of the miracles of Ireland , hath certain words altogether alike with these , videlicet : Not far from these Islands ( namely the Hebrides , Island etc . ) towards the North there is a certain wondered whirlpool of the sea , whereinto all the waves of the sea from far have their course and recourse , as it were without stop : which , there conveying themselves into the secret receptacles of nature , are swallowed up , as it were , into a bottomless pit , and if it chance that any ship do pass this way , it is pulled , and drawn with such a violence of the waves , that eftsoons without remedy , the force of the whirlpool devoureth the same . The Philosophers describe foure indraughts of this Ocean sea , in the foure opposite quarters of the world , from whence many do conjecture that as well the flowing of the sea , as the blasts of the wind , have their first originali . A . D . 1360 . There is a notable whirlpool on the coast of Norway , called Malestrande , about the latitude of 68 .