The league between Carolus Magnus and Offa King of Mercia concerning safe trade of the English Merchants in all the Emperors Dominion . This Offa died in the year of our Lord 795 . partem hic apponam . 310 IN the mean season Offa by often legacies solicited Charles le maigne the king of France , to be his friend : albeit he could not easily find king Charles any whit inclined to further and promote his crafty attempts . Their minds were so alienated before , that , bearing haughty stomachs on both parts , even the mutual traffic of Trajfyue their Merchants was prohibited . The Epistle of Albinus tnhtblted - is a sufficient testimony of this matter : part whereof I will here put down . I know not ( quoth he ) what will become of us . For there is of late , by the instigation of the devil , some discord and variance sprung up between king Charles and king Offa : insomuch that sailing to and from is forbidden unto the Merchants of both their dominions . Navigation Some say that we are to be sent , for the obtaining of a firbn < tien - peace , into those parts . And again , after a few lines . Now ( quoth he ) out of Charles his own words , I will make report of the league concluded between him and Offa . Charles by the grace of God king of the Franks and Lombards and Senator of the Romans , unto the reverend and his most deer brother Offa king of the Mercians sends greeting . First we do render unto almighty God most humble thanks for the salvation of souls , and the sincerity of the Catholic faith , which we , to your great commendation , have found signified in your letters . As touching those pilgrimss , who for the love of God and their own souls health , are desirous to resort unto the Churches of the holy Apostles , let them go in peace without all disturbance . But if any be found among them not honouring religion , but following their own gain , they are to pay their ordinary customs at places convenient . It is our pleasure also and commandment , that your merchants shall have lawful patronage and protection in our dominions . Who , if in any place they chance to be afflicted with any injust oppression , let them 311 a league between Carol . Mag . and K . Offa . Protection of the English Merchants . make their supplication unto us , or unto our Judges , and we will see justice executed to the full .