a recompense . And some of their articles are concerning injuries offered before 20 , 22 , 23 , 24 . years past . Also their articles are so obscure that they will never , or very hardly be able to declare or prove them . Howbeit there is reserved the very same liberty unto them , that was before unto the Hamburgers . Item , they of Lubec propounded 23 . articles , the Lubec . sum whereof extended unto 8690 . nobles and and half : whereupon it was agreed , that they should have paid unto them 550 . nobles . There was reserved the same liberty unto them , which was unto the men of Stralessund . GnpeswM . Item , they of Gripeswold exhibited 5 . articles , the sum whereof amounted unto 2092 . nobles and and half . For the which there was promised satisfaction of 153 . nobles and and half . And the said men of Gripeswold have of the goods of English men in possession , to the valve of 22015 . nobles , 18 . S , as it is reported by them of Linne . And the same liberty is reserved unto them that was unto the Hamburgers . Campen . Item , they of Campen propounded ten articles , the sum whereof extended unto 1405 . nobles . There is no satisfaction promised unto them : but the same liberty is reserved unto them , which was unto the other above mentioned . Item , the ambassadors of England demanded of the citizens of Rostok & Wismer , for damages & injuries by them committed against the subject ' s of the foresaid sovereign king 32407 . nobles , 2 . s . ro . worser . And albeit every of the foresaid cities sent one of their burgomasters unto the town of Hage in Holland , to treat with the English ambassadors , it was in the end found out , that they had not any authority of negotiating or concluding ought at all And therefore they made their faithful promises , that every of the said cities should send unto our sovereign Lord the king one or two procurator or procurators sufficiently instructed to treat & conclude with our said sovereign lord the king about the damages and injuries aforesaid at the feast of the nativity of Saint John the Baptist .