, and the king of Polonia , concluded a perpetuali league with the said king . Howbeit the citizens of Dantzig secretly going about to obtain their freedom , that the foresaid Order might have no dominion over them , made suit unto the Polonian king to be their Protector . This 8 Conradus died in the year 1450 . The 28 . was Lewis ab Ellerichshausen . Under this man there arose a dangerous sedition in Prussia between the chief cities and the knights of the Order . The citizens demanded liberty , complaining that they were oppressed with diverse molestations . Whereupon they privily made suit unto Casimir then king of Polonia . The Master of the Order seeing what would come to pass began to expostulate with the king , that he kept not the peace which had be concluded between them to last for ever . Also Frederick the Emperor commanded the Prussians to return unto the obedience of the knights , who by the dint of their swords had released that province out of the hands of Infidels , and had bought it with the shedding of much blood . Notwithstanding the popular sort persisting still in their stubborn determination , proceeded at length to open war . The cities adhering unto the king usurped diverse Castles belonging to the Master , took certain Commanders and knights , yea , and some they slew also . Fiftie and five towns conspired together in that rebellion : but thinking their estate and strength not sure enough against their own governors without foreign aid , they chosen king Casimir to be their lord . Hereupon the Polonian king marched into Prussia with a great army , taking possession of such cities as yielded themselves unto him , and proceeding forward against Marieburg , besieged the castle and the town . In the mean season the Master having hired and army of Germane soldiers , suddenly surprised the king at unawares in his tents , and slew about 300 . Polonians , took prisoners 136 . noblemen , spoiled their tents , took away their horses , victuals , and armour , insomuch