Now as concerning the cities of the Hans . Hamburg . TO Nprimis the Hamburgers exhibited nine articles , wherein X they demanded restitution for certain damages offered , as they said , by the English men , the valve of which losses amounted unto the sum of 9117 . nobles , 20 . pence . For the which , after due examination , there was promised restitution to the sum of 416 . nobles , 5 . shillings . Beside the two articles propounded against them of Scardeburg , the sum whereof was 231 . pounds , 15 . S . 8 . d . concerning thee which there was sentence given in England by the commissioners of our lord the king , the 34 execution whereof was promised unto the said Hamburgers by the ambassadors of England : leave and licence being reserved unto the said Hamburgers , of declaring or explaining certain obscure articles by them exhibited , which declaration was to be made at the feast of Easter then next to come , or within one year next ensuing the said feast , unto the chancellor of England for the time being , and of proving the said articles and others also , which have not as yet sufficiently be proved . Which being done they are to have full compliment and execution of justice . Also by the Hamburgers there are demanded 445 . nobles from certain of the inhabitants of Linne in England . Which sum , if it shall proved to be due unto any English men , the Hamburgers are to rest contented with those goods , which they have already in their possessions . Item , they of Breme propounded sixe articles , wherein Breme . the sum contained amounteth unto 4414 . nobles . And there was no satisfaction promised unto them . But the same liberty and licence was reserved unto them , in like manner as before unto the Hamburgers . Item , they of Stralessund propounded 23 . articles , Stralessund . whereof the sum amounted unto 7415 . nobles , 2o . worser . for the which there was promised satisfaction of 253 . nobles , 3 - q . Also here is a caveat to be observed : that they of Stralessund had of English men ' s goods a great sum particularly to be declared , which will peradventure suffice for