shall decease , or already are deceased in either of the said countries , and then it shall be free and lawful for the plaintiff to prosecute his right against the goods or heirs of the party deceased . Also , for the executing of the premises the terms under written are appointed : namely the first , from the Sunday whereupon Quasi modo geniti is to be sung next ensuing , until the seventh day following : The second upon the feast of the holy Trinitie next to come , and for seven days following : The third upon the eight day after Saint John Baptist next to come , & for seven days following : The fourth , last , and peremptory term shall be upon the feast of S . Michael next to come , and upon seven days next following . And from thenceforth all causes which concern death , or the maiming of a member , with all actions proceeding from them , are to remain altogether void and extinct . And if peradventure any one of the foresaid ambassadors , shall in the mean season die , then the other two shall have authority to choose a third unto them . And if after the date of these presents any cause great or small does arise or spring forth , it must be decided in England and in Prussia , as it hath been And ancient accustomed in times past and from ancient times . custom . Also , it is farther concluded and agreed upon , that all 4 . lawful merchants of England whosoever shall have free The privi - licence and authority , with all kinds of ships , goods , dges and merchandises , to resort unto every port of the land i ^ r ' of Prussia , and also to transport all such goods and Prussia . merchandises up farther unto any other place in the said land of Prussia , and there with all kinds of persons freely to bargain and make sale , as heretofore it hath from ancient times be accustomed . Which privilege is granted in all things and by all circumstances unto the Prussians in England . And if after the date of these presents , between the said kingdom of England , and land of Prussia any dissension or discord ( which God forefend ) should arise : then the foresaid sovereign