Now concerning the Livonians who are subject unto the great Master of Prussia . INprimis , that the Master of Prussia demanded of the said English ambassadors , at their being in Prussia , on the behalf of them of Livonia , who are the said Master his liege people , to have restitution of their losses , unjustly ( as he say ) offered unto them by the English , namely , for the robbing and rifling of three ships . The valve of which ships and of the goods contained in them , according to the computation of the Livonian merchants , doth amount unto the sum of 8037 . pound , 12 . shillings 7 . pence . Howbeit afterwards the truth being inquired by the said ambassadors of England , the loss of the Livonians exceeds not the sum of 7498 . pound , 13 . shillings , 10 . pence halfpenny farthing . Item , forasmuch as in the said ships , on the behalf of the said Master , and of certain cities of the Hans , there are alleged above 250 . men very barbarously to be drowned , of whom some were noble , and others honourable personages , and the rest common merchants & mariners , there was demanded , in the first diet or convention held at Dordract , a recompense at the hands of the said English ambassadors : albeit this complaint was exhibited in the very latter end of all the negotiations , in form of a schedule , the tenor whereof is in writing at this present , & begins in manner following : Cum vita hominum etc . Howbeit in the last convention held at Hage , as is aforesaid , it was concluded between n 33 c A . D . I4O7 . These ships were taken by the English the 20 . of July 1404 . the ambassadors of England , and the messengers and commissioners of the land of Prussia , and of the cities of the Hans ; that our said sovereign lord the king , should , of his great piety , vouchsafe effectually to devise some convenient and wholesome remedy for the souls of such persons as were drowned . Item , that our said sovereign lord the king will signify in writing his full purpose & intention as touching this matter , unto the aidermen of the Hans merchants residing at Bruges , upon the sixteenth day of March next following . Otherwise , that from henceforth all amity and friendship , between the realm of England and the land of Prussia shall be dissolved . Neither is it to be doubted , but that a great part of the said goods , for the which they of Livonia do demand restitution , namely wax and furs , redounded unto the use and commodity of our sovereign lord the king . And also our said sovereign lord the king gave commandment by his letters , that some of the said goods should be delivered unto others . And a great part of them is as yet reserved in the town of Newcastle . One Benteld also hath the best of thee said three ships in possession . Also it is reported and thought to be true , that certain Furriers of London , which will be detected in the end , have had a great part of the said goods , namely of the Furs .