^ episwich . commanded certain J ships , merchandises , wares , and goods , found in certain havens , to be delivered unto them . Howbeit , as touching other goods , which are perhaps perished or wanting by infortunate dissipation or destruction , and for the which the said messengers of yours demand satisfaction to be made unto them within a certain time by us limited : may it please your honour to understand , that in the absence of our said sovereign lord the king , being as yet far distant from us , we can in no wise limit or set down any such term of time . Notwithstanding , at the prosperous return of our sovereign , we are determined to commune with him about this matter . Of whose answer so soon as we be certified , we purpose to signify his intention unto you by our letters . Since also ( right reverend and mighty lord ) your said messengers are contented , for the present , to accept of our offer aforesaid , as indeed by all reason they ought thereat to rest content , especially whereas by this means they shall the more speedily attain unto the effect of their purposes ( to the short and wished execution and performance of which offer , we will , by Gods help , endeavour , to the utmost of our ability ) may it be your will and pleasure , that as in the kingdom of England , your merchants and subject ' s are courteously entreated : even so the merchants and liege people of our sovereign lord the king and of his kingdoms peaceably frequenting your parts , either in regard of traffic or of any other just occasion , may there in like manner friendly be used , and with your merchants and subject ' s suffered to communicate , and to have intercourse of traffic , enjoying the commodities of the ancient league . By this also the fervent zeal and affection which you bear unto the royal crown of England shall undoubtedly appear : albeit between the famous houses of England and of Prussia , the bands of unfeigned love and friendship have been successively confirmed and kept inviolable in times Note well . past . And thus ( right reverend and mighty lord ) • wishing unto you increase of honour and prosperity , we take our leaves . Written at London the fift of October , in the year of our lord 1403 . By the chancellor , the treasurer , and other lords of the hono : counsel of the king of England and France , being personally present at London . A . D . 1404 . 1403 .