of the land of Prussia , and to make sale of them in the said land , as hath heretofore from ancient times be accustomed . Also sundry other commodious privileges unto the realm of England were then ordained and established : as in the indentures made for this purpose it does more manifestly appear . Item , the said English ambassadors being arrived in the land of Prussia , demanded of the said Master general , a reformation and amends , for the damages and injuries offered by the Prussians unto the liege people of our sovereign lord and king , written in fifteene articles , which losses amounted unto the sum of 4535 . nobles . Item , the said Master general , beside the articles exhibited unto our sovereign lord the king ( as it is above mentioned ) delivered unto the said ambassadors diverse other articles of certain injuries offered ( as he say ) unjustly by English men , unto his subject ' s , which amounted unto the sum of 5100 . nobles . Item , it was afterwards concluded , that upon the first 1406 . of May next then ensuing , namely in the year of our Lord 1406 . or within the space of one year immediately following there should be made a convenient , just , and reasonable satisfaction , for all molestations unjustly offered on both parts , as well on the behalf of our sovereign lord the king , as of the foresaid Master general . Which satisfaction not being performed , the Prussians with their goods & merchandises , within three months after the end of the said year next following , were without molestation or impediment , enjoined to depart out of the realm of England with their ships and goods , and the English men likewise , out of the territories and dominions of the said Master general , & both of them , without any further admonition , to abstain & separate themselves , from both the countries aforesaid . For the performance of which premises , the ambassadors on both parts being sufficiently instructed , were appointed to meet the first day of May , at the town of Dordract in Holland .