A letter of Henry the fourth king of England etc . unto Frater Conradus de Jungingen the master general of Prussia . HEnrie etc . to the most noble and mighty personage of sacred religion Fr : Conradus de Jungingen Master general of the order of the Dutch knights of S . Marry , our most deer friend , greeting , and continual perfection of amity . When as your messengers and ambassadors were of late personally present in Holland , and there expected 83 the arrival of our ambassadors until the first day of the month of November last expired , that there might be by way of friendly conference a remedy provided in regard of certain injuries pretended to be offered , by both our subject ' s one against another , for the public commodity of both parts , we were determined to have sent unto Dordract , at the foresaid day , our well - beloved and faithful knight William Sturmy , and our well - beloved clerk John Kington , upon our ambassage - affairs : having as yet in our desires , for a peaceable ending of the matter , ( which , our foresaid ambassadors , by reason of the shortness of time , or the finding out of some other remedy and happy conclusion of all and singular the foresaid attempts concerning the principali business , could by no means at that instant attain unto ) that upon some other more convenient day ( to the end your ambassadors might not return home altogether frustrate of their expectation ) there might be , after the wonted friendly manner , a conference & agreement with your foresaid ambassadors , even as by other letters of ours directed unto your said ambassadors the second day of the month of November aforesaid we have delivered our mind unto them . But it fortuned not long before the departure of your ambassadors into their own country , that no sufficient shipping could be found wherein our said ambassadors might have secure and safe passage unto Dordract , or Middleburgh , neither was it thought that they should get any passage at all , till the ships at Middleborough were returned into our kingdom , by the force whereof they might be the more strongly wafted over . And so by reason of the departure of your ambassadors , all matters remain in suspense till such time as the said ambassadors shall again meet with ours to add perfection unto the business as yet imperfect . Wherefore ( our friend unfeignedly beloved ) desiring from the bottom of our heart that the integrity of love , which hath from ancient times taken place between our & your subject ' s , may in time to come also be kept inviolable , we have thought good once again to send one of our foresaid ambassadors , namely William Esturmy knight to Dordract , giving him charge thither to make haste , and there to stay , till some of your messengers , at your commandment do in time convenient repair unto that place , there ( by Gods assistance ) to bring the matter unto and happy conclusion . May it please you therefore of your unfeigned friendship , without all inconvenience of delay , to return , not unto us , but unto our forenamed knight and answer in writing , what your will and determination is . Neither let it seem strange unto you , that we have not at this present sent our forenamed John Kington clerk together with the said William : for the cause of his abided with us is , that he may in the mean season employ his care and diligence about those matters which must be preparatives for the final conclusion of the foresaid business . Honourable sir , and most deer friend , we do most heartily wish increase of prosperity and joy unto your person . Given in our palace of Westminster the 14 . day of Feb . in the year of our Lord 1407 . 1407 .