. And for fault of justice to be executed , by the said governors and keepers , our sovereign lord the king above nam , after he shall conveniently be requested by the parties damnified , is bound within three months next ensuing ( all lawful impediments being excepted ) to make correspondent , just , and reasonable satisfaction , unto the said parties endamaged . Otherwise , that it shall be right lawful for the said lord the Master generail , to arrest , and after the arrest to keep in safe custody the goods of the English merchants being in the land of Prussia , to the condign satisfaction of such injuries , as have be offered unto his subject ' s , until his said subject ' s be justly and reasonably contented . Likewise also in all respects , the same justice is to be done unto the English by the said Lord the Master general and his subject ' s in Prussia , even as it hath be enacted and decreed in the above written clause , beginning , Casterum ne per etc . In English . Howbeit lest that etc . for the said Master general , and his subject ' s by the foresaid ambassadors of England , and the commissioners of the said lord the Master generail , that in like cases justice ought to be administered on the behalf of himself , and of his subject ' s in the realm of England . And that all and singular the covenants above written , may in time to come , by the parties whom they concern , firmly and inviolably be observed ; the forenamed ambassadors , messengers , and commissioners , all and every of them , for the full credit , probation , and testimony of all the premises , have unto these present Indentures , made for the same purpose , caused every one of their seals with their own hands to be put . One part of the which indentures remains in the custody of the English ambassadors , and the other part in the hands of the commissioners of Prussia . Given at the castle of Marienburgh in Prussia , in the year of our Lord 1405 . upon the 8 . day of the month of October .