day above nam , in the year of our Lord 1407 . Fr . Wernherus de Tettingen , commander in Elbing , general vice - master and lieutenant in the room of the Master general of the Dutch knights of the Order of S . marry etc . of late deceased . The letters of Henry the 4 . king of England etc . unto Ulricus de Jungingen Master general of Prussia , 1408 . wherein he does ratify and accept the last agreement made at Hage in Holland . HEnry etc . unto the honourable and religious personage Fr . Ulricus de Jungingen Master general of the Dutch knights of S . marry etc . our most deer friend , greeting and daily increase of our accustomed amity and friendship . We do by these presents give your honour to understand , that our faithful & well - beloved William Esturmy knight , and Master John Kington clerk , our ambassadors and messengers sent of late on our behalf , unto the presence of your predecessor for the redressing of certain grievances and damages being contrary to justice offered against us and our liege subject ' s by the people & subject ' s of your predecessors , & against them also by our subject ' s as it is aforesaid , in friendly manner to be procured , of late returning out of the parts of Alemain made relation unto us and to our counsel , that having conferred with your forenamed predecessor about the foresaid affairs , the particulars following were at length concluded : namely first of all , that at a certain day and place they should meet in Holland with his ambassadors and messengers , to hold a friendly conference between them about the redressing and reformation of the grievances and damages aforesaid : and that they should by the equal weight of diligent examination ponder , & in the balance of justice discuss & define all & singular the foresaid grievances & damages inflicted on both parts . Howbeit at length after sundry prorogations then made & continued on this behalf , our ambassadors & messengers aforesaid upon the 28 . of August last passed , assembling themselves for our part at the town of Hage in Holland , the hon . & 0f ^ ug ^ t2 discreet personages Arnold Heket