time , and that for diverse respects , both because restitution unto the parties robbed consisted herein , and also because the said restitutions and satisfactions are to be made unto poor people , widows , orphans , and other miserable creatures , diversely and miserably slain and oppressed : notwithstanding we being moved with hearty & fervent zeal and speciali affection unto your royal crown of England , and having due regard and consideration of your most excellent Majesty , upon the advice of our honourable brothers our counsellers , do thankfully receive , & by the tenor of these presents totally ratify and approve such satisfactions of the foresaid sums howsoever due unto our subject ' s both Prussians and Livonians , in friendly sort to be performed at such times and seasons limited and prefixed by your highness as are expressed in your majesties letters , and also of other sums which within one year immediately ensuing after the feast of Easter last passed , by sufficient proofs to be made on their part before your chancellor at your city of London shall be found due unto them . Conditionally that without inconvenience of delay and impediment they be performed as they ought to be , according to the premises . In like manner also we our selves within the terms of payment above mentioned will procure satisfaction to be without fail performed unto your subject ' s endamaged , with the sum of 766 . nobles , being in regard of their losses , of the which they have given up sufficient informations , due unto them : and with other like sums also which are by sufficient proofs , within the year 1408 . aforesaid , and in manner and form prescribed to be exhibited before our treasurer at our city of Dantzik . The almighty vouchsafe prosperously and long time to preserve your majesties royal person . Given at Sept . 27 . , our castle of Marienburgh the 27 . of September , in I +° 8 , the year of our Lord 1408 . Fr . Ulricus de Jungingen master general of the order of the Dutch knights of S . Maries hospital of Jerusalem .