sixe pence , half penny , farthing , recom - 89 pense to be performed unto the Livonians , in regard of the damages and injuries ( which in very deed proceeded not of our consent ) by our subject ' s offered unto them , as it is afore said , and within three years after the feast of Easter next ensuing the said sums of money to be paid at three payments , and by three equal portions . Conditionally that unto our subject ' s which be endamaged correspondent satisfaction be likewise on your part within the term of the foresaid three years performed , with paying the sums of 766 . nobles and of 4535 . nobles , demanded on our behalf , and also with the payment of such sums as within one year immediately ensuing the feast of Easter aforesaid , shall found by sufficient declarations and proofs to be made on the behalf of our subject ' s ( as is aforesaid ) to be due . Even as we in like manner will make satisfaction unto your subject ' s within our city aforesaid . Now as touching the request of your ambassadors and of the Livonians , whereby we were required to procure some wholesome remedy for the souls of certain drowned persons , as conscience and religion seems to challenge ( in regard of whom we are moved with compassion , and do for their sakes heartily condole their mishaps ) you are ( our entire friend ) of a certainty to understand , that after we shall be by your letters advertized of the number , state , and condition of the said parties drowned , we will cause suffrages of prayers and diverse other wholesome remedies profitable for the souls of the deceased and acceptable to God and men , religiously to be ordained and provided : upon condition , that for the souls of our drowned country men there be the like remedy provided by you . The almighty grant unto your self and unto your whole Order , that you may prosperously triumph over the enemies of Christ his cross . Given under our privy seal at our palace of Westminster the 26 . of March , in the year of our Lord 1408 . and in the ninth year of our reign .