burgomaster of the 1407 . town of Dantzik , & John Crolowe , for the behalf of your subject ' s of Prussia , and Tidman de Meule , & John Epenscheid for the behalf of Livonia , being assembled as messengers and commissioners about the redress and reformation aforesaid , did then and there demand in certain articles , of our ambassadors and messengers abovenamed 25034 . nobles & half a noble , for the grievances & damages offered ( as it was then said ) to your subject ' s of Prussia , and 24082 . nobles , 12 . S . 8d . in recompense of the damages offered unto those your subject ' s of Livonia . And when the substance of those articles about the grievances & losses aforesaid was by the said ambassadors and messengers thoroughly examined and discussed , by their general consent it was finally agreed , that your subject ' s , in consideration of all and singular the foresaid grievances and damages offered unto them by our people , should within three years after the feast of Easter next ensuing , at three equal payments receive from us , namely they of Prussia , 8957 . nobles , and they of Livonia 22496 . nobles , sixe pence , half penny , farthing , and no more , so that we our selves thought good to condescend thereunto . Howbeit , forasmuch as certain other articles of your subject ' s of Prussia , and also certain articles in the behalf of our subject ' s containing grievous complaints in them , being propounded before the ambassadors & messengers aforesaid , for the attaining of reformation in regard of the damages & grievances offered on both parts , could not as then , for the great obscurity of diverse of the said articles , and also for want of sufficient proof at the last meeting appointed and held by the foresaid ambassadors at the town of Hage in Holland , sufficiently to be examined , discussed , and defined , it was agreed upon by the ambassadors and messengers of both parts , that from the 15 . day of October then last expired unto the feast of Easter now next ensuing , and from thenceforth within one whole year immediately following , the plaintiffs of both parts