Another branch of a statute made in the tenth year of the reign of Henry the sixt concerning the state of the English Merchants in the dominions of the king of Denmarke . ITem because that our sovereign Lord the king at the grievous complaint to him made in this Parliament by the commons of his realm of England being in this Parliament is informed , that many of his faithful liege people be greatly impoverished , undone , & in point to be destroyed by the king of Denmarke & his lieges ' , which be of the amity of the king our sovereign Lord , because that they do daily take of his said faithful subject ' s their goods , so that they have taken of merchants of York and Kingston upon Hui goods & merchandises to the valour of v . M . li . within a year , and of other lieges ' & merchants of the Realm of England goods & cattals to the valour of xx . M . li . whereof they have no remedy of the said king of Denmarke , nor of none other , forasmuch as none of them comes within the Realm of England , nor nothing have in the same Realm of England , & that the goods be taken out of the same Realm : The king willing to provide remedy for his said liege people , hath ordained & established , that if the goods of any of you said his lieges ' be or shall taken by the said king of Denmarke or any of his said lieges ' , the keeper of the privy seal for you time being , shall have power to make to you party grieved letters of request under the privy seal , w ‘ out any other pursuit to be made to any for restitution to be had of the goods so taken & to be taken . And if restitution be not made by n 113 H such letters , the king our sovereign lord by the advice of his counsel shall provide to the party grieved his covenable remedy , according as you case requires . Incipit liber de custodia Maris praserAm arcti inter Doveram 13 Galisiam . Sigismond died • 438 - He was here 14 . 16 . Videns imperator Sigismun - dus duas villas inter cateras singlice scilicet Cait st am i3 Doveream , ponens suos duos digitos super duos suos oculos , ait reg : Frater , custodite istas duas villas sicut duos vestros oculos . The Noble was coined by Edward the third . Anno