the Sovereign authority into his own hands , and left behind him foure sons , Vulodimir , Isoslauus , Weceslauus , and Vuszevolodus . The foresaid Vulodimir son of Jaroslaus kept his residence at the ancient city of Kiow standing upon Kioto . the river of Boristhenes , and after diverse conflicts with his kinsmen , having subdued all the provinces unto himself , was called Monomachos , that is , the only champoin . This man ( for I think it not amiss to report those things which their own Manuscript Chronicles make mention of ) waged war against Constantine the Emperor of Constantinople , and when he had wasted & overrun Thracia , being returned home with great and rich spoils , and making preparation for new wars , Constantine sent Neophytus the Metropolitan of Ephesus and two Bishops , with the governor of Antiochia , and Eustaphius the Abbot of Jerusalem , to present rich and magnificent gifts unto him ; as namely , part of the cross of our Saviour Christ , a crown of gold , a drinking cup curiously made of Sardonyx stone , a cloak set all over with precious stones , and a golden chain ; commanded them to salute him by the name of Czar ( which name , as it may be proved by many arguments , signifies a king , and not and Emperor ) and concluded a most inviolable league of amity and friendship with him . The foresaid Vulodimir begat Vuszevolodus the second . This Vuszevolodus left eight sons behind him , Miscislaus , Isoslaus , Stoslaus , Teropolcus , Weceslaus , Romanus , Georgius , and Andrew . The sons of George were Roseslaus , Andrew , Basilius , and Demetrius . 185 Demetrius begat George , who in the year 1237 . was slain by one Bathy , a Tartarian duke , which Bathy wasted Moscovia , and subdued the same unto himself . Since which time the Russians were tributary to the Tartars , and were governed by such dukes as they pleased to set over them . Howbeit the Tartars so greatly abused that authority , that when they sent their ambassadors unto the prince of Moscovie , he was constrained