but only for and incredible desire of enlarging his dominions . Howbeit what impulsive causes of little or no moment happened in the mean season , we will in another place more plainly declare . Notwithstanding he was very often and in diverse battles vanquished by Plettebergius the great master of the Dutch knights : but it is not to the purpose to stand any longer upon this discourse . He was married first unto marry the Duke of Tyversky his daughter , and of her he begat John , unto whom in his life time he surrendered his Dukedom , and married him unto the daughter of Stephan the Palatine of Moldavia : which John , after he had begotten his son Demetrius , deceased before his father . Afterwards Ivan Vasilowich aforesaid married a wife called Sophia being daughter unto Thomas Palaelogus , which is reported to have had her dowry out of the Popes treasury , because the Moscovite had promised to conform himself unto the Romish Church . This Sophia being a woman of a princely and aspiring mind , and often complaining that she was married unto the Tartars vassal , at length by her instant intreaty and continual persuasions , and by a notable stratagem she cast off that slavish yoke very much unbeseeming so mighty a prince . For whereas the Tartarian Duke had his procurators and agents in the Moscovites court , who dwelled in their own houses built within the very castle of Mosco , and were eye witnesses of all affairs which were there performed : Sophia said she was admonished from heaven to build a Temple in the self same place where the Tartars house stood , and to consecrate it unto Saint Nicholas . Being therefore delivered of a son she invited the Tartarian Duke unto the solemn baptizing of him , and being come , she requested him to give her his house , and obtained it at 189 The yoke of the Tartars shaken of . Basilius . Ivan Vasilowich . his hands . Which house being razed and those Tartarian espials being excluded , the Tartars at length were quite bereft and utterly dispossessed of their authority which they had exercised over the