A brief Treatise of the great Duke of Moscovia his genealogy , being taken out of the Moscovites manuscript Chronicles written by a Polack . TO hath almost ever be the custom of nations , in searching out the infancy and first beginnings of their estate , to ascribe the same unto such authors as lived among men in great honour and endued mankind with some one or other excellent benefit . Now , this inbred desire of all nations to blaze and set forth their own pedigree hath so much prevailed with the greater part , that leaving the undoubted truth , they have betaken themselves unto mere fables and fictions . Yea and the Chronicles of many nations written in diverse and sundry ages do testify the same . Even so the Grecians boasted that they were either Autocthones , that is earthbred , or else lineally descended from the Gods . And the Roman affirm that Mars was father unto their first founder Romulus . Right well therefore and judicially say Titus Livius : Neither mean I to avouch ( quoth he ) ne to disable or confute those things which before the building and foundation of the City have been reported , being more adorned and fraught with Poetical fables then with incorrupt and sacred monuments of truth : antiquity is it to be pardoned in this behalf , namely in joining together matters historical and poetical , to make the beginnings of cities to seem the more honourable . For sith antiquity it self is accounted such a notable argument of true nobility , even private men in all ages have contended thereabouts . Wherefore citizens of Rome being desirous to make demonstration of their Gentry , use to have their ancestors arms painted along the walls of their houses : in which regard they were so puffed up , that oftentimes 182 1580 . they would arrogantly disdain those men , which by their own virtue had attained unto honour . In like sort Poets , when the originali of their worthiness and brave champion was either utterly unknown or somewhat obscure , would oft refer it unto their Gods themselves . So in these our days ( to let pass others