said sum of 114 . nobles unto John Halewater aforesaid : which if he shall not be willing nor able to allege before the first of April next ensuing , that then by the kings authority he must be compelled to pay unto the foresaid John the said 114 nobles . Item by the inhabitants of Caleis ( whose captains were Michael Scot , Bishop , and William Horneby ) 1900 . nobles , which are due unto the foresaid Eggard Scoff , because the said sovereign king hath given them in charge by the said Michael Scot and the rest concerning the payment of the sum aforesaid . Item by John Bilis near unto Crowmer , 68 . nobles , which are due unto Nicholas Wolmersten of Elbing . Which sums of nobles must by the kings authority be levied at the hands of his subject ' s abovementioned , between the time that now is and the feast of the Purification of the blessed virgin which shall fallen in the year of our Lord 1411 . effectually to be delivered and paid unto the said Master general or his lawful procurator , or unto his successors or their lawful pro - 104 curators , at the City of London , upon the feast aforesaid . Item it is covenanted that beside the sums specified in the foresaid letters obligatory made in the behalf of the said sovereign prince , there are due to be paid unto one John Marion of Wersingham lately deceased being in his lifetime the liege subject of the foresaid sovereign prince 200 . nobles of English money in regard of certain injuries and robberies done and committed before the date of these presents against the foresaid John , by one Eghard Scoff7 subject unto the said Master generail , for the full satisfaction of the said damages and robberies to be made unto the said deceased John , his wife , children , heirs or executors by the said Egghard , his heirs , or by the administrators of his goods at the time and place abovementioned . Item it is covenanted , confirmed , and promised , that 10 . for all the injuries and robberies done and committed against one John Dordewant of Elbing , being in his life time subject unto the said Master