many battles with the neighbour countries ' . Howbeit at length Stoslaus was slain by his foe , who making a drinking cup of his skull , engraved thereupon in golden letters this sentence : Seeking after other men ' s , he lost his own . He left behind him three sons , namely Teropolchus , Olega , and Vulodimir . The which Vulodimir having slain his two brothers , became sole governor of Russia , or ( as the Moscovites call it ) Rosseia , his own self . This man beginning at length to loath and mislike the ethnik religion , and the multitude of false gods , applied his mind unto the religion of Christ , and having taken to wife Anna sister unto Basilius and Constantinus Emperors of Constantinople , was together with his whole nation , in the year of Christ 988 . baptised , and embraced the Christian religion , with the rites and ceremonies of the Greek Church , and his name being changed , he was called Basilius . Howbeit Zonaras reporteth that before the time of Vulodimir , Basilius Emperor of Constantinople sent a bishop unto the Russians , by whose means they were converted unto the Christian faith . He reporteth moreover that they would not be persuaded unless they might see a miracle : whereupon the said bishop having made his prayers unto almighty God , threw the book of the Evangelists into the fire , which remained there unconsumed . And that by this miracle they were moved to give credit unto the doctrine of Christ , and to conform themselves thereunto . The sons of Vulodimir were Vuiseslaus , Isoslaus , Jaroslaus , Suatopolcus , Borissus , Glebus , Stoslaus , Vulzevolodus , Stanislaus , Sudislaus , and Podius who 184 died in his childhood . among the residue all Russia was divided by their father , who not being contented with their portions , but invading each other , were most of them slain by their mutual contentions . Borissus and Glebus in regard of their holy conversation were registered for Saints , whose feasts are every year celebrated with great solemnity upon the twelfth of November . At length Jaroslaus only god