Certain notes unperfectly written by Richard Johnson servant to Master Richard Chancellor , which was in the discovery of Vaigatz and Nova Zembla , with Steven Burrowe in the Serchthrift 1556 . and after - i $ 56 ward among the Samoedes , whose devilish rites he describeth . Norway . Roast Etf Lofoot . Finmarke . Wardhouse . Lappia . The Serie - Irst , after we departed out of England we fell with Norway , and on that cost lies Northbern or Northbergen , and this people are under the King of Denmarke : But they differ in their speech from the Danes , for they speak Norsh . And North of Northbern lie the Isles of Roast and Lofoot , and these Islands pertain unto Finmarke , and they keep the laws and speak the language of the Islanders . And at the Eastermost part of that land is a castle which is called the Ward house , and the King of Denmarke doth fortify it with men of war : and the Russes may not go to the Westward of that castle . And East Southeast from that castle is a land called Lappia : in which ’ land be two manner of people , that is to say , the Lappians , and the Scrickfinnes , which Scrickfinnes are a wild people which neither know God , nor yet good fames - order : and these people live in tents made of Dears skins : and they have no certain habitations , but continue in heards and companies by one hundred and two hundreds . And they are a people of small stature , and are clothed in Dears skins , and drink nothing but water , and eat no bred but flesh all raw . And the The Lappians . Lappians be a people adjoining to them & be much like to them in all conditions : but the Emperor of Russia hath of late overcome many of them , and they are in subjection to him . And this people will say that they believe in the Russes God . And they live in tents as the other doe . And Southeast and by South from Lappia 345 Corelia . lies a province called Corelia , and these people are called Kerilli . And South southeast from Corelia lies a Novogardia . country called Novogardia . And these three nations are The Russes , under the Emperor of Russia , and the Russes keep the