Law of the Greeks in their Churches , and write somewhat like as the Greeks write , and they speak their own language , and they abhor the Latin tongue , neither have they to do with the Pope of Rome , and they hold it not good to worship any carved Image , yet they will worship painted Images on tables or boards . And in Russia their Churches , steeples , and houses are all of wood : and their ships that they have are sowed with withes and have no nails . The Kerilles , Russians and Moscovians bee much alike in all conditions . And South from the Moscovians lie the Tartaria . Tartarians , which bee Mahumetans , and live in tents and wagons , and keep in herds and companies : and they hold it not good to abide long in one place , for they will say , when they will curse any of their children , I would thou mightest tarry so long in a place that thou mightest smell thine own dung , as the Christians doe : and this is the greatest curse that they have . Lampasamart And East Northeast of Russia lies Lampas , which is orfaire of the a place where the Russes , Tartars and Samoeds meet Tatars and tw ^ se a yeerej and make the fair to barter wares for Samoeds . wares . And Northeast from Lampas lies the country The Samoeds of the Samoeds , which be about the river of Pechere , country . and these Samoeds be in subjection to the Emperor of Russia , - and they lie in tents made of Dear skins , and they use much witchcraft , and shoot well in bows . Or , Pechora . And Northeast from the river Pechere lies Vaygatz , Taigatz . and there are the wild Samoeds which will not suffer the Russes to land out of the Sea , but they will kill them and eat them , as we are told by the Russes : and they live in heards , and have all their carriages with deer , for they have no horses . Beyond Vaygatz NovaZembla . lies a land called Nova Zembla , which is a great land , but we saw no people , and there we had 346 Foul enough , and there we saw white Foxes and white Bears . And the said Samoeds which are about the banks of Pechere ,