you Nicholas Chancellor to remain Nicholas there , who is our apprentice for years : our mind is Chancellor . he should be set about such business as he is most fit for : he hath been kept at writing school long : he hath his Algorisme , and hath understanding of keeping of books of reckonings . We send you now but 100 Kersies : but against the next year , if occasion serve , we will send you a greater quantity , according as you shall advice us : One of the pipes of seckes that is in the Swallow , which hath 2 round compasses upon the 409 Ehe salt of Russia is not so good as Bay salt . Fox skins white , black , and russet vendible in England . May ^ . 1560 . bung , is to be presented to the Emperor : for it is special good . The nete weight of the 10 puncheons of prunes is 4300 . 2 thirds 1 pound . It is written particularly upon the head of every puncheon : and the nete weight of the fat of almonds is 500 li . two quarters . The raisins , prunes , and almonds you were best to dispatch away at a reasonable price , and principally the raisins , for in keeping of them will be great loss in the weight , and the fruit will decay . We think it good that you provide against the next year for the coming of our ships 20 or 30 bullocks killed and salted , for beef is very deer here . Therefore you were best to save some of this salt that we do send you in these ships for the purpose . The salt of that country is not so good . In this you may take the opinion of the master ' s of the ships . Foxe skins , white , black , and russet will be vendible here . The last year you sent none : but there were mariners that bought many . If any of the mariners do buy any trifling furs or other commodities , we will they shall be registered in our pursers books , to the intent we may know what they be . We desire to know how the Emperor took the letter which we sent in our ships , as and answer to the letter that came in his name and under his seal for the sixe thousand dallers . Thus we rest , committing you to God , from London the fift day of May 1560 . For lack of time the governors have not firmed this letter : which is the copy of the other two letters firmed by them . Yours , William Mericke . Yours , Blaze Sanders .