which you have sent us yet : for we as yet have sold none of them . And whereas we wrote unto you in our former letter , that we would send you a hundred tons of salt , by reason it is so deer here we do send you but nine tons and a half , for it cost here ten pence the bushel the first penny : namely in the Swallow 6 tons and a half , in the Philip and marry one tun and a half , and in the Jesus one tun and a half . The 4 hogsheads of round pewter go in the Swallow and in the Philip and marry N ° 154 pieces , as is aforesaid . We send you three ships , trusting that you have provided according to our former writing good store of lading for them . If ye have more wares then will lade the ships , let it be Train 408 oils that you leave behind : the price is not here so good as it was : it is worth here 9 pound the tun . We think it good you should let the smaller ship bring as much of the train as she can carry : And that the master ' s of the ships do look well to the rummaging , for they might bring away a great deal more then they do , if they would take pain in the rummaging : and bestow the train by it self , and the wax and tallow by it self : for the leakage of the train does fowl the other wares much . As for Allard the skinner , if you think good , he may come home in these ships . We have no doubt but that you Henrie Lane , if you mind to come home now in these ships as you requested , will leave such good order there with our servants as shall be for our most profit and their preferment , if they do their duties diligently and truly . If our friend Master Antonie Jenkinson be returned , and mean to come away in these ships to declare his mind and opinion of his travail , if need require and he be so minded he may return thither by land and be there by the fine of Januarie or before . But as we be uncertain whither he be returned or not : so we know not what he hath done , nor what benefit may rise hereafter of his travail . Therefore in this we remit it to his and your good discretions . we send you Thomas Hawtrey which is our servant for years : our mind is he should be placed , where he may do best service . Also we send