them among my stuff which they have . They asked me then , for what cause I went home over land ? I declared unto them , that the Winter being a warm season , and having intelligence that The frozen Sea was not much frozen , and supposing this Summer it would be navigable , I was only sent to provide a Ship to be sent to pass the said Seas to discover Cataia : which if God granted we might do , it would not only be a commodity to the Realm of Englande , but unto all Christian lands , by the riches that might be brought from thence , if the histories be true that are written thereof . Much other 398 communication I had with them concerning the same voyage . Then he demanded of me what wares we brought into Russia , and what we carried from thence . I declared the same unto them . Then they burdened me , that we brought thither thousandes of ordinance , as also of harness , swords , with other munitions of war , artificers , copper , with many other things : I made them answer , that we had brought thither about one hundred shirts of mail , such old things new scoured as no man in Englande would wear . Other talk they had with me concerning the trade of Mos - covia too long to commit to writing . At my coming hither here were Ambassadors from the towns of Dansk , Lubeck , and Hamburgh , as also out of Liefland to desire this king to be their Captain and head in their intended voyage , which was to stop - And attempt to all such ships as should go out of England for Mos - t ^ Mos covia . Whereunto the King granted , and immediately cwia thee they departed to prepare their ships . So that I am Hans towns afraid that either these our enemies , or the great wars W Easterthat we have with France and Scotland will be and occasion I ™ ®- that you shall have no ships at Colmogro this year . To conclude , although I have no tokens to deliver them , that the tokens taken from me were sent unto , yet I will declare unto them that I had tokens for them , with the mischance . And thus I commit you to Almighty God with the rest of the company , who keep you in health to his holy will and pleasure . By yours to command Thomas Alcocke .