A letter of Thomas Alcocke to the worshipful Richard Grey , and Henrie Lane Agents in Moscovia from Tirwill in Polonia , written in Tirwill the 26 . of Aprill 1558 . MY duty premised unto your worships , with commendations etc . It may please you to be advertised , ill my last I sent from Smolensco , which I trust you have received wl other letters to diverse of our English men , wherein I certified you of my long retaining there , as also of my departure from thence , and how that I had hired a Totar to bring me to Dansk . We came to a certain village on Satterday the sixe and twentieth of Februarie , and there remained that night and Sunday to refresh our horses , intending to have gone away on 396 Munday early . But on Saterday at night one of his neighbours departed to Tirwill , and there declared to the Captain how that at such a place there was a Dutch man that was come from the Mosco , and would ride to Dansk , saying , for the one , I cannot tell what he is . The Captain incontinent rid to the King to show him thereof , so that without any delay there was sent out for me one of the Gentlemen of the Kings house , and one of the Mesnickes of the Town with sixe Officers to take me . They came thither in the night about midnight , and there apprehended me and took all that I had from me : they left me nothing but my clothes to put on my back , and so brought me to Tirwill to the Captains house , where before I dined , I had a pair of fetters clapped on my legs , wherewithal ! I sat until it was Munday in the Easterweeke . On which day , after long and earnest calling to the Captain as he rid by the window , he commanded the Marshal that mine irons should be taken off , but no word I could hear when 1 should be delivered out of captivity till it was Saint George his day : on which day I was had before the Marshal , who declared unto me that the Kings Majesty had showed his mercy and goodness towards me : for his pleasure was that I should be delivered out of prison to depart into England , but no way else . So after I had given thanks for the Kings Majesties goodness showed unto me , I desired him that