and tenne thousand pound of hemp , so it be dressed ready to their hands , year . having two to turn the wheels , and two to wind up . Therefore I have agreed with these two boys to serve the worshipful company foure years a piece . One of them windeth up and is very apt to spin : therefore I will have two other young men Russes to spin , if they can find good sureties for their truth . I have be in hand with these two young men that came out of the Trinitie , and they with me , but under seven pound a year they will not serve , nor Thomas Bunting that was Roger Bunting his servant . Therefore I would have three Russes at the least to spin , five of them will be as good as these three , and will not be so chargeable all , as one of these would be . I think it were good that our Nassada were somewhat strengthened in her floor on both sides with planks of five or sixe inches thick , from the stem to the stern , as I have written to Thomas Hawtrey at 395 White hawks y white bears prohibited without licence . Master Grayes journey to Lampas . 1558 . Vologda . Also if you shall so think meet , your wax and tallow shall be laden in two Dosnickes , for they be meet to go aboard the ships : I do intend to set up and house at Boroseva over against the place whereas the ships shall ride , your advice therein I expect , it shall not cost above three robles , and yet if we will , there shall be two warm rooms in it . As for other matter at this present I have not to trouble you withal , and if it would please you I would be glad to hear some good news of Master Jenkinson . Thus Jesus be with you and be his guide . Postscriptum . As for these our Hawks they be not white , but white and mailed , but indeed are Jarfawkons . These days passed our Olen died . So this year our Master ' s of the company are like to have none , nor any white bears . Neither may any pass out of the realm without a special licence from the Emperor . I intend God willing to go to Lampas , if I do I will take foure or five kerseys with me , but as for money there is small store here to carry . Yours , Richard Grey .