hath be made : which gives occasion of more circumspection and diligence . 14 If the wind and weather will serve , it is thought good rather to go by the Wardhouse then to come in and anchor there , lest any male engine , or danger may be the rather attempted against us , our goods and ships as above . 15 It is thought good that Richard Johnson , late servant to M . Chancellor , shall be sent home in this next return , to instruct the company of the state of the Country , and of such questions as may be demanded of him , for our better advertisements and 377 resolutions , in such doubts as shall arise here : and that he shall have the room of the Captain in such sort , as Master Jenkinson is in this present cocket assigned unto . And if Johnson can not , may not , nor will not return and occupy the said place , then any other person to be preferred thereunto , as by the discretion of our said Captain , with consent of our Agents , shall be thought meet and apt to supply the same . 16 Provided always , that the ships returning be not disfurnished of one such able man , as shall occupy the Captainship in like order , as is , and hath be in such case appointed , as reason and good order requires . 17 Item that all other former order , rules , and devises , made and provided for the good order of our ships , wares , and goods , being not repugnant , contrary or diverse , to these articles , and the contents of the same , shall be , and stand in full force and effect , to be in all respects observed and kept of all and every person and persons , whom the same does or shall touch or concern . In witness of the premises faithfully to be observed and kept , the owners and Master ' s of the said foure ships , together with the said Captain , to these seventeene articles , contained in two sheets of paper , have subscribed their hands . Given in London , the third of May , in the year of our Lord God 1557 . fl Owners of the Primerose . Andrewe Judde . William Chester . Anthony Hickman . Edward Casteline . fl Owners of the John Evangelist . Andrew Judde . William Chester . fl Owner of the Anne . John Dimocke . fl Owner of the Trinitie . R . T .