A Letter of Master Thomas Hawtrey to the worshipful Master Henrie Lane Agent at Colmogro , written in Vologda the 31 . of Januarie 1557 . Worshipful Sir , hearty commendations premised . These may be to advertise you , that yesterday the thirtieth of this present came hither Robert Best , and brought with him two hundred robles , that is , one hundred for this place , and one hundred for you at Colmogro . As for hemp which is here at two robles and a half the bercovite , master Gray hath written to buy no more at that price : for John Sedgewicke hath bought for sixe or seven hundred robles worth at Novogrode for one roble and a half the bercovite , and better cheap : and white Novogrode flax is there at three robles the bercovite . I trust he will do much good by his going thither . As I do understand , Richard Johnson is gone to Novogrode with money to him , I doubt not but Master Grey hath advertised you of all their doings , both at the Mosco and at Novogrod . And touching our doings here , you shall perceive that we have sold wares of this fourth voyage for one hundred and fourtie robles , beside fiftie robles of the second and third voyage since the giving up of my last account , and for wares of the Country , you shall understand 392 that I have bought tried and untried for 77 . robles foure hundred podes of tried tallow , beside foure hundred podes that I have given out money for , whereof God grant good receipt when the time comes , which is in Lent . And in brown flax and hemp I have bought seventeene bercovites , sixe podes and sixteene pound , which cost 28 . robles , eleven altines two pence . And as for other kinds of wares I have bought none as yet . And for masts Masts of 30 . to be provided , you shall understand that I wrote a Jarci !- letter to Totma the 28 . of this present for fiftie masts , to wit , for 25 . of fifteene fathoms , and 25 . of fourteen fathoms , to be and arshine and a half at the small end . And more , I have written for 30 . great trees to be two arshines and a half