A Letter of Master Richard Gray one of the first Agents of the Moscovie company to Master Henrie Lane at Mosco , written in i558 - Colmogro the 19 . of Februarie 1558 . Worshipful Sir , after hearty commendations etc . You shall understand that this Lent comes Lampas a to Lampas such a number of men of diverse nations great mars fir w £ th wareS } as hath not be seen these ten years . tk ^ North Thither come many out of Ugori : therefore I would have be there my self , and also have received such money as is owing us in wares by Kerill his brother and Osep Boscovo . For as you well know , thence they will go with their wares to the Mosco , and make us payment with delays , as they have done these other years passed . Colobone and his partner be departed towards Lampas with seven sleds laden with victuals . Others also are gone to that Mart . As touching the bringing of money with you , it will be good , for I assure you since our coming to this country have not so many persons gone to the Sea , as will do this year . Trusting that God will send good store of train oil , I will cause as much cask to be in a readiness as I can , if you shall think it meet to send some money before . All 394 our old hemp is spun and wrought in tenne cables from fifteene inches to ten the least , and thirteene Hausers from sixe inches to three inches : and all may weigh white eight and twenty thousande pound weight and upward . There is in hemp ockam five thousand pound two hundred weight in twelve sacks at the least : the flax that came down in the Nassada ' s with those seven podes that came last is all spun with a good part of that hemp that came last . God send more shortly , for all that is here and that is coming in the three other sleds , will be dispatched by the fourth week in Lent . Within these few days I bought thirteen podes , seven pound of hemp that cost two robles , twenty eight altines , foure pence , which together with that that was bought before , shall be laid in dipping and sounding lines , for it is very good . There are spent above fiftie barrels of tar already : you shall What quanti - understand that these eight workmen will spin ^ afhempeZ . and lay above fourescore