Another letter to the foresaid parties . 1560 . THis letter before written is the copy of one sent you by Thomas Alcock , trusting that he was with you long since . The 26 day of the last month we received a letter from him , dated in Stockholme in Sweden the 14 day of January , and we perceive by his letter that he had talked with a Dutch man that came lately from the Mosco , who informed him that our friend Master Antony Jenkinson was returned to the Mosco in September last passed , but how far he had been , or what he had done , he could not tell . Also he wrote that one John Lucke a Joiner was taken by the Liefelanders , and put in prison . As yet we have not herd from the said John Luck , nor know not whither he be released out of prison or not . We suppose that by him you wrote some letter which as yet is not come to our hands : so that we think he is yet in prison , or Stockholme . John Luck taken prisoner in Lieflande . 4 ° 7 otherwise dispatched out of the way . The fifteenth day of December we received a letter from Christopher Hodson , dated in the Mosco the 29 of July , by the way of Dansk : which is in effect a copy of such another received from him in our ships . You shall understand that we have laden in three good ships of ours these kind of wares following : to wit , in the The Swallow . Swallow of London , Master under God Steven Burrow , 34 farthels N ° 136 broad short clothes , and foure farthels N ° 58 Hampshire Kersies : and 23 pipes of bastards and seckes , and 263 pieces of raisins and 4 hogsheads N ° 154 pieces of round pewter , and ten hogsheads and poncheons of prunes , and one dryfatte with Almonds . The Philip And in the Philip and marry , Master under God Thomas and Marie . 25 farthels N ° 100 broad clothes , and three farthels N ° 42 Hampshire Kersies , and thirtie pipes of seckes and bastards , and 100 pieces of raisins . And in The Jesus . the Jesus of London , Master under God Arthur Pette , 10 farthels N ° 40 broad short clothes , and twenty seven pipes of bastards and seckes , as by the Invoices herewith enclosed may appear : Also you shall receive such necessaries as you did write to be sent for the rope makers : trusting that you shall have better success with them which you shall send us in these ships , then with the rest