he would be a mean that I might have the remainder of such things as were taken from me restored unto me again . He made me answer , that I might thank God that I escaped with my head , and that if ever there came any more of us through the land , they should not so do . The week before Easter they delivered me my Corobia again with all things that were therein . They took from me in money nine Hunger ' s gylderns in gold , five shillings foure pence in Lettoes money , fourtie Altines in Russe money , whereof twentie and more were for tokens , half and angel and a quarter of Master Doctor Standishes , 397 Doctor Standish theEmper - ours Phisitlon . with his gold ring . Your two pieces of money ( Master Gray ) that you sent to your wife and daughter , with my two pieces of Boghary money . Of all this I had eight Hunger ' s gilderns delivered me the thirde week of mine imprisonment to pay for my charges , which stood me in a Doller a week . So that at the day of my delivery 1 had but three gyldernes left me . For the rest I made a supplication , to the Captain and had the like answer given me as the Marshal gave me . So that all the rest of the things before written are lost , and no recovery to be had , which grieveth me more for the tokens sakes then doth mine eight weeks imprisonment . They have also my sword , my boots , my bow and arrows that I bought at Smolensco , which cost me foure marks , my sled , my felt , the comhold , a book of the Flowers of godly prayers , and my book wherein my charges were written . Of all these I can get nothing again , not so much as my two books . After I had remained there five and thirtie days , I was had before the Captain up into a great chamber to be examined for letters and of the cause of my coming through the Country . In the Captains company was one of the Lords of Dansk . They demanded of me where my letters were , I declared unto them that I had none : your Officers ( said I ) took me when I was in my bed , they searched me and took all that I had from me , if there be any they shall find