Certain notes gathered by Richard Johnson ( which was at Boghar with M . Anthony Jenkinson ) of the reports of Russes and other strangers , of the ways of Russia to Cathaya , and of diverse and strange people . The first note given by one nam Sarnichoke a Tartarian subject to the Prince of Boghar , which are also Tartars bordering upon Kizilbash or Persia , declaring the way from Astracan , being the furthest part of Russia , to Cathaya as followeth . wllrst from Astracan to Serachick by land , travailing ml Sail by leisure as Merchant ' s use with wares , is io . days journey . * Or , urgeme . From Serachick to a town nam * Urgenshe , 15 . days . From Urgenshe to Boghar , 15 . days . From Boghar to Cascar , 30 . days . From Cascar to Cathaya , 30 . days journey . By the same party a note of another way more sure to travel , as he reporteth . FRom Astracan to Turkemen by the Caspian sea , 10 . days with barks . From Turkemen by land specially with Camels , bearing the weight of 15 . poodes for their common burdens , is 10 . days to Urgenshe . From Urgenshe to Boghar , 15 . days . Note . At this City of Boghar is the mart or meeting place between the Turkes and nations of those parts and the Cathayans . Also the toll there is the 40 . part to be paid of Merchandizes or goods . From thence to Cascar is one months journey , and from Cascar ( being the frontier of the great Can , having many towns and forts by the way ) is also a months travel for merchant ' s by land to Cathay . 480 Further , as he hath herd ( not having be in those parts himself ) ships may sail from the dominions of Cathaia unto India . But of other ways , or how the seas lie by any coast he knoweth not . The instruction of another Tartarian merchant dwelling in the city of Boghar , as he hath learned by other his countrymen which have be there . First from Astracan by sea to Serachick is 15 days : affirming also that a man may travel the other way before written by Turkemen . From Serachick to Urgence is 15 days . From Urgence to Boghar also 15 days .