dwell Samoeds , and their country is called Molgomsey , whose meat is flesh of Olens , or Hearts , and Fish , and do eat one another sometime among them - selves . And if any Merchants come unto them , then they kill one of their children for their sakes to feast them withal . And if a Merchant chance to die with them , they bury him not , but eat him , and so do they eat them of their own country likewise . They be evil of sighed , and have small noses , but they be swift and shoot . very well , and they travail on Hearts and on dogs , and their apparel is Sables and Hearts skins . They have no Merchandise but Sables only . 2 Item , on the same coast or quarter beyond those 483 [ I . 337 - J Traveling on dogs y hearts . people , and by the sea side also does dwell another kind of Samoeds in like manner , having another language . One month in the year they live in the sea , and do not come or dwell on the dry land for that month . 3 Item beyond these people , on the sea coast , there is another kind of Samoeds , their meat is flesh and fish , and their merchandise are Sables , white and black Foxes ( which the Russes call Pselts ) and Hearts skins , and Fawns skins . The relation of Chaggi Memet a Persian Merchant , to Baptista Ramusius , and other notable citizens of Venice , touching the way from Tauris the chief city of Persia , to Campion a city of Cathay over land : in which voyage he himself had passed before with the Caravans . FRom Tauris to Soltania . From Soltania to Casbin . From Casbin to Veremi . From Veremi to Eri . From Eri to Boghara . From Boghara to Samarchand . From Samarchand to Cascar . From Cascar to Acsu . From Acsu to Cuchi . From Cuchi to Chialis . From Chialis to Turfon . From Turfon to Camul . From Camul to Succuir . From Succuir to Gauta . From Gauta to Campion . 20 5 25 20 20 10 13 15 5 6 ► days journey . 6 4 6 Which Campion is a city of the Empire of Cathay in the province of Tangut , from whence the greatest quantity of Rubarbe comes .