Note . These last 30 days journey is without habitation of houses : therefore travellers lodge in their own tents , carrying with them to eat , their several provisions : and for dryness there be many wells of fair water at equal baiting places not far distant daily to be had . From Boghar to Taskent easy traveling with goods , is 14 days by land . From Taskent to Occient 7 days . From Occient to Cascar 20 days . This Cascar is the head town or city of another prince , lying between Boghar and Cathaia , called Reshit can . From Cascar to Sowchick 30 days journey , which Sowchick is the first border of Cathay . From Sowchick to Camchick 5 days journey , and from Camchick to Cathay is 2 months journey , all the way being inhabited , temperate , & well replenished with innumerable fruits , & the chief city in that whole land is called Cambalu , which is yet 10 days journey from Cathay . Beyond this land of Cathay , which they praise to be civil & unspeakeably rich , is the country nam in the Tartarian tongue Cara - calmack inhabited with black people : but in Cathay , the most part thereof stretching to the sun rising , are people white and of fair n 481 2 H Angrim . Mandeville speaks hereof . Or Ki faith . Small people . Pechora but six days journey by land or water from Ob . complexion . Their religion also , as the Tartars report , is Christian , or after the manner of Christians , and their language peculiar , differing from the Tartarian tongue . There are no great and furious Bears in traveling through the wales aforesaid , but wolves white and black . And because that woods are not of such quantity there , as in these parts of Russia , but in manner rather scant then plentiful , as is reported , the Bears breed not that way , but some other beasts ( as namely one in Russe called Barse ) are in those coasts . This Barse appears by a skin of one seen here to fell , to be never so great as a big lion spotted very fair and therefore we here take it to be a Leopard or Tiger . Note that 20 days journey from Cathay is a country nam Angrim , where lives the beast that bears the best Musk , & the