The manner of Justice by lots in Russia , written by Master Henrie Lane , and executed in a controversy between him and one Sheray Costromitskey in Mosco . 1560 . AFter the coming home into Russia of Joseph Napea the first ambassador to Queen Marry , I remaining the Agent there , sundry Russian merchants by Josephs procurement obtained letters from the Emperor to freight goods and pass in our ships for England : which thing upon good consideration I answered and refused . They were then driven to credit us and compound in valve until the next return . At which time , notwithstanding good account in the valve of 600 robles , there grew question by their double demand . So in April Triallbycom - Anno 1560 . before my coming from Moscovia , they hator ^ t - obtained trial by combat or letter to have their sum double , or as I proffered 600 robles . For combat I was provided of a strong willing Englishman , Robert Best , one of the companies servants : whom the Russes with their Champion refused . So that we had the words of our privilege put in effect , which were to draw lots . The day and manner of trial appointed by the Emperor at his castle in his palace and high Court of Moscovia was thus . The Emperors two Treasurers , being also Chancelours and chief Judges , sat in court . They appointed officers to bring me , mine interpreter , & the other , through the great press within the rail or bar , and permitted me to fit down some distance from them : the adverse parties being without at the bar . Both parties were first persuaded with great courtesy , to wit , I to enlarge mine offer , and the Russes to mitigate their challenge . Notwithstanding that I protested my conscience to be clear , and their gain by account to be sufficient , yet of gentleness at the magistrates request I made proffer of 100 robles more : which was openly commended , but of the plaintiffs not accepted . Then 411 sentence passed with our names in two equal balls of wax made and held up by the Judges , their sleeves stripped up . Then with standing up and wishing well to the truth attributed to him that should be first drawn , by both consents among the multitude they called a tall gentleman , saying : Thou with such a coat or cap , come up : where room with speed was made . He was commanded to hold his cap , wherein they put the balls , by the crown upright in sighed , his arm not abasing . With like circumspection , they called at adventure another tall gentleman , commanding him to strip up his right sleeve , and willed him with his bore arm to reach up , and in Gods name severally to take out the two balls : which he did , delivering to either Judge one . Then with great admiration the lot in ball first taken out was mine : which was by open sentence so pronounced before all the people , and to be the right and true part . The chief plaintiffs name was Sheray Costromitsky . I was willed forthwith to pay the plaintiffs the sum by me appointed . Out of which for their wrong or sin , as it was termed , they paid tenne in the hundred to the Emperor . Many days after , as their manner is , the people took our nation to be true and upright dealers , and talked of this judgement to our great credit . Note . The former letters dated 1558 , 1559 , and 1560 , t1 - 31 ° ] should all follow M . Jenkinsons voyage to Boghar .