principali thereof is cut out of the knee of the male . The people are taunie , & for that the men are not bearded nor differ in complexion from women , they have certain tokens of iron , that is to say : the men wear the sun round like a boss upon their shoulders , and women on their privy parts . Their feeding is raw flesh in the same land , and in another called * Titay : the Duke there is called Can . They worship the fire , and it is 34 days journey from great Cathay , and in the way lies the beautiful people , eating with knives of gold , and are called Comorom , and the land of small people is nearer the Mosko then Cathay . The instructions of one of Permia , who re - porteth he had be at Cathay the way before written , and also another way near the sea coast , as followeth , which note was sent out of Russia from Giles Holmes . First from the province of Dwina is known the way to Pechora , and from Pechora traveling with Olens or hearts , is sixe days journey by land , and in the Summer as much by water to the river of Ob . 483 The Ob is a river full of flats , the mouth of it is 70 . Russe miles over . And from thence three days journey on the right hand is a place called Chorno - lese , to say in English , black woods , and from thence near hand is a people called Pechey - cony , wearing their hair by his description after the Irish fashion . From Pechey - cony to Joult Calmachey three days journey , & from thence to Chorno Callachay three days tending to the Southeast . These two people are of the Tartarian faith , and tributaries to the great Can . Here follow certain countries ' of the Samoeds which dwell upon the river Ob , and upon the sea coasts beyond the same , taken out of the Russe tongue word by word , and travailed by a Russe born in Colmogro , whose name was Pheodor Towtigin , who by report , was slain in his second voyage in one of the said countries ' . Pon the East part beyond the country of Ugori , the river Ob is the most Westermost part thereof . Upon the sea coast