A copy of the privileges given by Obdolowcan King of Hircania , to the company of English merchant ' s Adventurers for Russia , Persia , and Mare Caspium , with all the lands and countries ' adjoining to the same , obtained by M . Anthonie Jenkinson at his being there about the affairs of the said company , April 14 . Anno 1563 . WE Obdolowcan by the mighty power of God maker of heaven and of earth , appointed and now reigning king of Shirvan and Hircan , of our mere motion and great goodness , at the earnest suit and request of our favoured and well - beloved Anthonie Jenkinson Ambassador , have given and granted unto the right worshipful Sir William Garret , sir William Chester , sir Thomas Lodge , M . Richard Mallarie , and M . Richard Chamberlaine , with all their company of merchant ' s Adventurers of the City of London in England , free liberty , safe conduct , and licence to come or send their factors in trade of merchandise into our countries ' , and to buy and fell with our merchant ' s and others , either for ready money or barter , and to tarry and abide in our country , so long as they will , and to go away when they list , without impediment , let , or hindrance , either of body or goods . And further our commandment and pleasure is , that the said English merchant ' s with their company , shall pay no manner of custom for wares , which they or their factors shall buy or sei within our dominions . And if at any time our customers or other officers , or any of them , do disturb , misuse , force or constrain the said English merchant ' s or any of them , or their factors , to pay any manner of custom or duty for any wares they bring in or carry out of our dominions contrary to this our commandment , and the same be known unto us , then we will that the said customers and officers shall lose & be 39 A . D . I563 - put out of their said offices , with our further displeasure , and the said English merchant ' s to have restored all such money & wares as our customers have taken of them for our said custom . And whensoever the said English merchant ' s or their factors shall bring any manner of wares meet for our treasury , then our treasurer shall take the said wares into our treasury , and shall give unto the said English merchant ' s , either ready money or raw silks , to the valve of their said wares . And wheresoever this our letter of privileges shall be seen and read within our dominion , we straightly will and command that it take effect , and be obeyed in all points . Dated at our place of Javat , the day and year above written , and sealed with our princely seal , and firmed by our Secretary in the 12 . year of our reign .