conferred a while , and so returned to my lodging . Within one hour after in comes to my lodging a duke richly appareled , accompanied with fiftie persons , each of them carrying a silver dish with meat , and covered with silver . The duke first delivered twenty loaves of bred of the Emperor ' s own eating , having tasted the same , and delivered every dish into my hands , and tasted of every kind of drink that he brought . This being done , the duke and his company sat down with me , and took part of the Emperor ' s meat , and filled themselves well of all sorts , and went not away from me unrewarded . Within few nights after the Emperor had will to speak secretly with me , and sent for me in the night by the Long duke : The place was far off , and the night cold , and I having changed my apparel into such as the Russes do wear , found great incommodity thereby . Having talked with him above three hours , towards the morning I was dismissed , and so came home to my lodging , where I remained above six weeks after , before I herd again from the Emperor , who went the next day to Slovoda , the house of his solace . After the end of which sixe weeks , which was about the beginning of April , the Emperor returned from Slovoda aforesaid , and sent for me again to make repair unto him . And being come , I dealt effectually with him in the behalf of our English merchant ' s , and found him so graciously inclined towards them , that I obtained at his hands my whole demands for large privileges in general , together with all the rest my particular requests . And then he commended to my conduct into England , a noble man of his , called Andrew Savin , as his Ambassador , for the better confirmation of his privileges granted , and other negotiations with her Majesty . And thus being dispatched with full contentment , the said Ambassador A second conference with the Emperor . Andrew Savin Ambassador to the Queen . 107 and my self departed , and embarked at S . Nicholas about the end of July , and arrived safely at London in the month of September following .