by no man , not so much as our own country - at Mosco - men suffered to meet us , which bred suspicion in me of some other course intended , then we had hitherto found . We were brought to a house built of purpose by the sPecial Emperor for Ambassadors , fair and large , after the ^ u ^ atMosco ' fashion of that country . bassadours . Two gentlemen were appointed to attend upon me , the one to see us furnished of victuals , and that we lacked nothing of the Emperor ' s allowance : the other to see that we should not go out of the house , nor suffer any man to come unto us , in which they left nothing undone that belonged to their charge . But specially he that looked to our persons so straightly handled us , that we had no small cause to doubt that some evil had be intended unto us . No supplication , suit , or request could take place for our liberty , nor yet to come to his presence . Having passed over 17 weeks in this sort , the Emperor sends word that we should be ready against Tuesday the 20 of Februarie , at eight a clock in the morning . The hour being come that I should go to the Court , Two the two gentlemen Pristaves ( as they call them ) came Pristaves . unto me appareled more princely then before I had ever seen them . They press us to depart , and mounted upon their own horses , and the Ambassador upon such a one as he had borrowed , his men marching on foot , to their great grief . The Ambassador ( being my self ) was conveyed into and office where one of the chancellors doth use to fit , being there accompanied with the two foresaid gentlemen : I tarried two long hours before I was sent for to the Emperor . In the end message being brought that the Emperor was set , I was conveyed by my gentlemen up a pair of stairs thorough a large room , where sat by 105 His admission to the Emperor ' s presence . The Queens present . The Emperor ' s speech to the Ambassador . my estimation 300 persons , all in rich attire , taken out of the Emperor ' s wardrobe for