with two great rye loaves , fish both salt and fresh of diverse sorts , both sea fish and fresh water , one sheep alive , black , with a white face , to be the more grateful unto me , and so with many solemn words inviting me to see their house , they took their leave . Town or habitation at S . Nicholas there is none The English more then about foure houses near the abbey , and house at 8 . another built by the English Company for their own K 0 ‘ use . This part of the country is most part wood , saving here and there pasture & arable ground , many rivers and diverse Islands unhabited , as the most part of the country is , for the coldness in Winter . S . Nicholas stands Northeast : the elevation of the The river of pole 64 degrees . The river that runneth there into the ^ wina . sea is called Dwina , very large , but shallow . This river takes his beginning about 700 miles within the country , & upon this river stands Colmogro , and many pretty villages , well situated for pasture , arable land , wood , and water . The river pleasant between high hills of either side inwardly inhabited , and in a manner a wilderness of high fir trees , and other wood . At Colmogro being 100 versts , which we account for Colmogro . three quarters of a mile every versed , we tarried three weeks , not being suffered to depart before the Emperor had word of our coming , who sent to meet us a gentleman of his house , to convey us , and to see us furnished of victuals , and all things needful , upon his own charge . The allowance of meat and drink was for every day two rubbles , beside the charge of boats by water , and foure score post horses by land , with above 100 carts to carry my wines , and other carriage . Colmogro is a great town built all of wood , not walled , but scattered house from house . The people are 103 And English house with lands at Colmogro . [ I - 377 - J The description of the inland of Moscovie . rude in manners , and in apparel homely , saving upon their festival !