Borough when he came hither to Narve , finding here Christopher Hodsdon aforenamed , both the said Christopher and William together , in the name of sir William Garrard and the rest of their whole company and fellowship , did present unto your highness of those Freebooters taken by our ships 82 . men , which we delivered here unto Knez Voivoda , the 13 . of this month . One man of those Freebooters we have kept by us , whose name is Haunce Snarke a captain . And the cause why we have done it is this : When we should have delivered him with the rest of his fellows unto the Voivodaes officers , there were of our Englishmen more then 50 . which fell on their knees unto us , requesting that he might be reserved in the ship , and carried back into England : and the cause why they so earnestly entreated for him , is , that some of those our Englishmen had be taken with Freebooters , and by his means had their lives saved , with great favour beside , which they found at his hands . Wherefore if it please your highness to permit it , we will carry him home with us into England , wherein we request your majesties favour : notwithstanding what you command of him shall observed . we have also sent our servant to your highness with such bestellings and writings as we found in those ships : whereby your Majesty may see by whom , and in what order they were set out , and what they pretended , which writings we have commended unto Knez Yorive 168 your Majesties Voivoda at Plesco , by our servant . And have requested his furtherance for the safe delivery of them to your majesties hands : which writings when you have perused , we desire that they may be returned unto us by this our servant , as speedily as may be : for these ships which we now have here will be soon dispatched from hence , for that we have not goods to lade above the half of them . And the cause is , we have this winter ( by your majesties order ) be kept from trafficking , to the companies great loss . But hoping your [ I . 402 . J majesty will hereafter have consideration thereof , and that we may have free liberty to traffic in all parts of your majesties Countries , according to the privilege given unto us , we pray for your majesties health , with prosperous success to the pleasure of God . From Narve the 15 of July , Anno 1570 . Your Majesties most humble and obedient , Christopher Hodsdon . William Borough .