The names of such countries as I Anthony Jenkinson have traveled unto , from the second of October 1546 , at which time I made my first voyage out of England , until the year of our Lord 1572 , when I returned last out of Russia . First , I passed into Flanders , and traveled through all the base countries , and from thence through Germanic , passing over the Alpes I traveled into Italy , and from thence made my journey through Piemont into France , throughout all which realm I have thoroughly journeyed . I have also traveled through the kingdoms of Spaine and Portingal , I have sailed through the Levant seas every way , & have be in all the chief Islands within the same sea , as Rhodes , Malta , Sicilia , Cyprus , Candie , and diverse others . I have be in many parts of Grecia , Morea , Achaia , and where the old city of Corinth stood . I have traveled through a great part of Turkey , Syria , and diverse other countries in Asia minor . I have passed over the mountains of Libanus to Damasco , and traveled through Samaria , Galile , Philistine or Palestine , unto Jerusalem , and so through all the Holy land . I have be in diverse places of Affrica , as Algiers , Cola , Bona , Tripolis , the gollet within the gulf of Tunis . 195 A . D . 1572 . [ I . 412 . J I have sailed far Northward within the Mare glacial , where we have had continual day , and sighed of the Sun ten weeks together , and that navigation was in Norway , Lapland , Samogitia , and other very strange places . I have traveled through all the ample dominions of the Emperor of Russia and Moscovia , which extend from the North sea , and the confines of Norway and Lapland , even to the Mare Caspium . I have be in diverse countries near about the Caspian sea , Gentiles , and Mahomeans , as Cazan , Cremia , Rezan , Cheremisi , Mordoviti , Vachin , Nagaia , with diverse others of strange customs and religions . I have sailed over the Caspian sea , & discovered all the regions thereabouts adjacent , as Chircassi , Comul , Shascal , Shirvan , with many others . I have traveled 40 days journey beyond the said sea , towards the Oriental India , and Cathaia , through diverse deserts and wildernesses , and passed through 5 kingdoms of the Tartars , and all the land of Turkeman and Zagatay , and so to the great city of Boghar in Bactria , not without great perils and dangers sundry times . After all this , in An . 1562 , I passed again over the Caspian sea another way , and landed in Armenia , at a city called Derbent , built by Alexander the great , & from thence traveled through MMia , Parthia , Hircania , into Persia to the court of the great Sophy called Shaw Tamasso , unto whom I delivered letters from the Queens majesty , and remained in his court 8 months , and returning homeward , passed through diverse other countries . Finally I made two voyages more after that out of England into Russia , the one in the year 1566 , and the other in the year 1571 . And thus being weary and growing old , I am content to take my rest in mine own house , chiefly comforting my self , in that my service hath be honourably accepted and rewarded of her majesty and the rest by whom I have be employed .