The copy of a letter sent to the Emperor of Moscovie , by Christopher Hodsdon and William Burrough , Anno 1570 . Ost mighty Emperor , etc . Whereas Sir William Garrard and his fellowship the company of English merchant ' s , this last Winter sent hither to the Narve three ships laden with merchandise , which was left here , and with it Christopher Hodsdon one of the said fellowship , and their chief doer in this place , who when he came first hither , and until such time as he had dispatched those ships from hence , was in hope of goods to lade twelve or thirteene sails of good ships , against this shipping , wherefore he wrote unto the said Sir William Garrard and his company to send hither this spring the said number of thirteene ships . And because that in their coming hither we found the Freebooters on the sea , and supposing this year that they would be very strong , he therefore gave the said sir William and his Company advice to furnish the said number of ships so strongly , as they should be able to withstand the force of the Freebooters : whereupon they have according to his advice sent this year thirteene good ships together well furnished with men and munition , and all other necessaries for the wars , of which 13 . ships William Burrough one of the said fellowship is captain general , unto whom there was given in charge , that if he met with any the Dansk Freebooters , or whatsoever robbers and thieves that are enemies to your highness , he should do his best to apprehend and take them . It so happened that the tenth day of this month the said William with his fleet , met with sixe ships of the Freebooters near unto and Island called Tuttee , which is about 50 . versts from Narve , unto which Freebooters he with his fleet gave chase , and took of them the Admiral , 167 A . D . 1570 Five ships of Freeboters taken . wherein were left but three men , the rest were fled to shore in their boats among the woods upon Tutty , on which ship he set fire and burned her . He also took foure more of those ships which are now here , and one ship escaped him : out of which foure ships some of the men fled in their boats and so escaped , others were slain in fight , and some of them when they saw they could not escape , cast themselves willingly into the Sea and were drowned . So that in these five ships were left but 83 . men . The said Wil .