& freedom as there could be no greater , till the time that by reason of wars more and more increasing in those parts , by the which our subject ' s were to make their journey into Persia , they were debarred and shut from that voyage & traffic . The which traffic the said society being eftsoons desirous to renew to the weal and commodity of both our dominions they have now sent into Persia their factors & Agents Arthur Edwards , William Turnbull , Matthew Tailbois , Peter Gerrard merchant ' s , with their associates , whom we beseech your invincible majesty to entertain with that favour wherewith your father did embrace Tho . Bannister 8c Geffrey Ducket , and to enfranchise their whole society with that freedom , that neither they through any their misdemeanours towards your subject ' s , may thereof seem unworthy ( as we hope they will not ) neither we our selves otherwise enjoy them , then with the perpetuali remembrance of your good affection towards us , and with the like favourable inclination of our part towards you . The matter it self 8c tract of time shall sufficiently prove the foresaid manner of traffic unprofitable to neither of us . For so hath one God the chief 213 A . D . 1579 - governor of all things disposed of our affairs on earth , that each one should need other . And as for our people & subject ' s of the English nation , in very deed your majesty shall find them made and fashioned so pliant to the performance of all duties of humanity , that it can never repent you to have granted them this frank traffic , nor shame us to have obtained it for them at your hands . That therefore it may please your majesty to yield unto them this at our request , most earnestly we beseech you . And we ( as it well beseems a prince ) if ever hereafter we may , will show our self not to be unmindful of so great a benefit . We wish your majesty well & prosperously to fare . Given at our palace of Westminster the io . day of June , in the year of our Lord 1579 . and of our reign the 21 .