A remembrance of advice given to the merchant ' s , touching a voyage for Cola abovesaid . 1578 . WHereas you require my counsel after what order the voyage for Cola is to be set forth , I answer that I know no better way then hath be heretofore used , which is after this manner . First of all we have hired the ship by the great , giving so much for the wearing of the tackle and the hull of the ship , as the ship may be in bigness : as if she be about the burden of and hundred tons , we pay fourescore pound , and so after that rate : and thereunto we do victual the ship our selves , and do ship all our men our selves , shipping no more men , nor giving them more wages then we should do if they went of a merchant ' s voyage , for it hath be a great help to our voyage hitherto , to have our men to fish with one boat , & costing us no more charges then it should do , if our men should lie & do nothing saving the charges of salt , & of lines , which is triple paid for again . For this last year passed our men killed with one boat betwixt 9 . or 10 . thousand fish , which yielded to us in money with the oil that came of it , about 15 . or 16 . score pounds , which is a great help to a voyage . And beside all this , our ship did take in so much oil and other commodities as we bestowed 100 . whole clothes in . But because , as I do suppose , it is not the use of London to take ships to fraught after that order before prescribed , neither I think that the mariners will take such pains as our men will : Therefore my counsel is , if you think good , to freight some ship of Hui or Newcastle , for I am sure that you may have them there better cheap to freight , then here at London . Beside all this , one may have such men as will take pains for their merchant ' s . And 208 C . 1598 . furthermore when it shall please God that the ship shall return to come to discharge at Hull , which will be HaU the best the most for your profit for the sales of all such like commodity as comes from that place , as for fish , oil , saieoffish . and Salmon chiefly , he that will seek a better market for the sales then at Hull , he must seek it out of England , for the like is not in England . This is the best way that I can devise , and most for your profit , and if you will , I will also set you down all the commodities that are necessary for such a voyage , and which way also that the Hollanders may within two or three years be forced to leave ofF the trade of Cola which may easily be done . For if my ability were to my will , I would use the matter so that they should either leave off the trade , or else carry light ships with them home again .