the year of our Lord 1557 . the said Deponent was at the place Kegor , in the month of June , the 29 . day being S . Peters day , at which time was a great assembly of people at a mars there , the Russes , Kerils and Lappians on the one side subject ' s to the said mighty prince the Emperor of Russia , and the Norwegians 205 or Norses and people of Finmarke subject ' s to the king of Denmarke on the other part , they did barter and exchange fish for other commodities . The deputy for the Russe had the chief government of the said Mars , and took toll of those people the were subject to his master , and the captain of Wardhouse had then the government of the people subject to his master the king of Denmark . He says also , that between the abbey Pechingo , and the abbey of S . Nicholas in Russia , upon the border of the said coast of Lappia , he hath be upon the shore at diverse places , where fresh rivers fallen into the Sea , where are commonly taken fresh salmons , all which places he does know for certain , that they were farmed out to the subject ' s of the said Emperor , and he the said Emperor received yearly the rend for them . And further he says that it hath be further credibly reported unto him , that there is not any such river or creek of fresh water which falls out of the said country of Lappia into the sea , between the said abbey Pechingo , and the bay of S . Nicholas , but they are all and every of them farmed out , and the Emperor receives the rend for them . The second Item , whither as well before , as also within the Interroga - memory of men , till the time of the grant of the said letters patents any of the English merchant ' s ( saving the merchant ' s of the said society ) subject ' s of this realm of England , have commonly exercised or frequented business or trade in the said villages or towns called the Narve , Kegor , Pechingo , and Cola , or in any of them , or in any ports or territories of the said Emperor of Russia . Thejeponents To tbis Interrogatory the Deponent answereth , that answer . the subject ' s of reajme before the grant of the said letters patents did not commonly exercise , neither frequent or trade to any of the said places called the Narve , Kegor , Pechingo or Cola , or to any of them .