old trade in England , whereof some excellent clothes yet remain : but the art is now lost , and not to be found in the Realm . 6 They have a cunning in Persia to make in buskin ' s of Spanish leather flowers of many kinds , in most lively colours , and these the Courtiers do wear there : to learn which art were no harm . 7 If any Dier of China , or of the East parts of the world , be to be found in Persia , acquaint yourself with him , and learn what you may of him . 8 You shall find Anile there , if you can procure the herb that it is made of , either by seed or by plant , to carry into England , you may do well to endeavour to enrich your country with the same : but withal learn you the making of the Anile , and if you can get the herb , you may send the same dry into England , for possibly it grows here already . 9 Return home with you all the materials and substances that they die withal in Russia , and also in Persia , that your company may see all . io In some little pot in your lodging , I wish you to make daily trials in your art , as you shall from time to time learn ought among them . ii Set down in writing whatsoever you shall learn from day to day , lest you should forget , or lest God should call you to his mercy : and by each return I wish you to send in writing whatsoever you have learned , or at the least keep the same safe in your coffer , that 25 ° COMMISSION TO PET AND JACKMAN aj > . 1580 . come death or life your country may enjoy the thing that you go for , and not loose the charge , and travel bestowed in this case . 12 Learn you there to fix and make sure the colour to be given by log wood : so shall we not need to buy woad so deer , to the enriching of our enemies . 13 Inquire of the price of leckar , and all other things belonging to dying . 14 In any wise set down in writing a true note from whence every of them do come , and where , and in what country each of them does grow , I mean where the natural place of each of them is , as how near to such a city , or to such a sea , or to such a portable river in Russia , Persia , or elsewhere . 15 If before you return you could procure a singular good workman in the art of Turkish carpet making , you should bring the art into this Realm , and also thereby increase work to your company .