selves with such forces as you may or can : trust not too far , neither give place to inconvenience . 10 You will not forget what conference we had touching your passing outward bound by Wardhouse , to view and understand what you can at that place , and to show your selves , to see if there be any there that have a mind to speak with you , for that we think it better then , & thereabouts , then afterwards or else where . 11 While you shall remain in the road at S . Nicholas , be circumspect and careful to have your ships in readiness , and in good order always , and upon all suddens . in 3 ° 5 u The greatest danger unto you in that place will be while you shall shift your ships : therefore you are to consider of it , but the fittest time for you to do the same , will be when the wind is Southerly off the shore , or calm , and at such time you may the better do it without danger . You must take such order among you , that your companies may be always willing and ready to help one the other , and appoint among your selves such ships to shift first , and such after , in such sort and form as you shall think best and most convenient . And while they shall be in discharging , shifting , and lading , let the rest of your companies which have not then to do in lading or discharging , help those ships that shall have labour to do , as well for carrying the barks from ships to the shore , or from shore to the ship with your boats , as also for any other help that they shall have need of . 12 Remember what hath be said unto you touching the moring of your ships , etc . for using advantage against the enemy , if you shall be assaulted in that place . 13 See that you serve God , abolish swearing and gaming , be careful of fire and candles , etc . 14 You are to consult and agree among your selves upon signs , tokens , and good order for the better keeping of company together , and also the manner how and by what means , rescue , aid , or help may be given by one to the other in fight , if you happen to come to it . Thus we pray God to send you a prosperous voyage and safe return .