or one of them to make his courses and directions from time to time during the whole voyage , and all the fleet are to follow and observe the same without straying or breaking of company at any time upon the penalty before specified . 5 The appointing of the ships for Admiral and Viceadmiral , and those men to consult and agree upon the courses and directions of the voyage , as aforesaid , hath be done by the consents and with the liking of you all , and therefore we doubt not but that you will all carefully and willingly observe the premises . 6 Item , we have thought good to put you in mind , that at such times as you may conveniently from time to time , you do assemble and meet together , to consider , consult , and determine upon such articles as you shall 3 ° 4 INSTRUCTIONS FOR RUSSIAN FLEET a . d . 1582 . think necessary to be propounded touching your best safety and defence against all forces that may be offered you in this voyage , as well outward bound , and while you shall remain in the road and bay of S . Nicholas , as also homewards bound , and that which you shall agree upon , or that which most of you shall consent unto , cause it to be set down in writing for record , which may serve for and act among your selves to bind you all to observe the same . 7 We have appointed James Woodcock in the small bark to attend upon you , & to receive his directions from you . You are therefore to remember well what conference and talk hath be had with you here before your going touching you said bark , to what purposes she may best serve , and the manner how to employ her , and thereupon to give your order and direction unto him , as the time and place shall require . 8 Item , if you shall understand as you are outward bound , that the enemy is gone before you to S . Nicholas , remember what advice hath be given you for your stay at Berozova Ustia , till you have by espials viewed and Berozova understood the forces , and the manner of their abided at Ustia . that place . 9 And if in the sea either outward or homeward , or in the time of your abided at anchor at Saint Nicholas , you shall be assaulted by force of any , as enemy whatsoever , you are to defend your