Instructions made by the company of English merchant ' s for discovery of new trades , unto Richard Gibs , William Biggat , John Backhouse , William Freeman , John Haly , and James Woodcock , etc . master ' s of the 9 ships , and one bark that we had freighted for a voyage with them to be made ( by the grace of God ) from hence to S . Nicholas in Russia , and back again : which ships being now in the river of Thames are presently ready to depart upon the said voyage , with the next apt winds that may serve thereunto : and with this Fleet afterwards was joined M . Christopher Carlisle with the Tiger . The 1 of June 1582 . Orasmuch as the number of ships which we purpose to send in this Fleet together for Saint Nicholas in Russia is greater then at any time heretofore we have sent thither , as also for that some speeches are given out that you shall be met withal by such as with force & violence will assault you as enemies , to the end that good 3 ° 3 order may be established among you for keeping together in company , and uniting your forces , as well for the better direction to be had in your navigation , as also for your more safety and strength against the enemy , we have thought good to appoint among you and Admiral and Viceadmiral , and that all of you and every one particularly shall be bound in the sum of one hundred pounds to keep company together . 2 Because the Salomon is the biggest ship , best appointed , and of greatest force to defend or offend the enemy , we do therefore appoint that ship Admiral , which shall wear the flag in the main top . 3 The Thomas Allen being a good ship and well appointed , and for that the master of her is the ancientest master of the Fleet that hath taken charge that way , we do appoint the same ship to be Viceadmiral , and to wear the flag in the foretop . 4 And for that the master of the Prudence is of great experience , and knowledge in that voyage , we do appoint that he with the master of the Admiral and Viceadmiral shall confer , consult and agree upon the courses and directions that shall be used in this voyage , and it shall be lawful unto the master of the Admiral , with the consent of M . Gibs , and M . Biggat ,