not forcibly taken as before time they had be by the Emperor ' s officers or people of authority , 354 DR . GILES FLETCHERS AMBASSAGE a . d . 1588 . either for the use of the said Emperor or of his officers . But in case they have need of the said commodities , the same to be taken at reasonable princes , and for ready money . 6 That the said Company be not charged hereafter with the answering of such debts as are made by any Englishman not being of the society . 7 That the Emperor ' s authorized people shall not hereafter repute any Englishman resiant in that country , to be any factor , servant , or dealer in the said Companies affairs , but such as the Agent shall inregister by name , within the offices where custom is entered in all such places of the land where the said Company have residences to traffic . 8 That the names of such as shall so be inregistred be no longer continued in record , nor themselves reputed as factors or dealers for the said Company , then the Agent shall think good . But in case the said Agent in his discretion shall think meet to strike out of the Register any name of such as have be employed in the Companies service , the said person to be held as private , & whose act in bargaining or otherwise , shall not charge the said Company . 9 That if any English man within the country of Russia be suspected for any notorious crime , as felony , treason , etc . the same be not straightways set upon the * Pudkey , nor otherwise tormented , till such time * It is resting as he shall be convicted by plain and evident proofs : t0 which being done , the whole proceeding to be sent over to the Queen of England . 10 That the said privilege with the additions , shall be published in all towns and parts of the Emperor ' s dominions , where the said Company have traffic . 11 That the said Company shall be permitted to use a sole trade through the Emperors countries , by the river Volga into Media , Persia , Bogharia , and the other the East countries . 12 Whereas there was claimed of the said Company 355 the sum of 23553 . marks of debt , made by certain of their factors for