licenced to return home to his master , being honorably entertained and rewarded , the English ambassador being attended upon with forty persons at the least , very honourably furnished , whereof many were gentlemen , and one M . Humfrey Cole a learned preacher , took his leave of her Majesty at the Court at Greenwich the eighteenth of June , and with the other ambassador , with their several ! companies , embarked themselves at Harwich the two and twentieth of the same , and after a stormy voyage at the Sea , they arrived both in safety in the road of S . Nicholas the three and twentieth of July next following . The Russe ambassador lodged himself at the abbey of S . Nicholas : and the English ambassador was lodged and well entertained by the English merchant ' s , at their house at S . Nicholas , standing in and Island called Rose Island . The Russe ambassador having reposed himself one whole day , took his leave of the English ambassador , and departed towards Mosco . The English ambassador abided yet at S . Nicholas foure or five days , when having made provision of boats , and means to that purpose , he went forward upon his journey towards Mosco , to a town called Colmogro , about foure score miles distant from S . Nicholas . You must here understand that before the English ambassadors going into Russia , there were diverse strangers , but especially certain Dutch merchant ' s , who had intruded themselves to trade into those countries ' . Notwithstanding a privilege of the sole trade thither was long before granted to the English merchant ' s . These Dutch men had already so handled the matter , as they had by chargeable means woonne three of the chiefest counsellors to the Emperor to be their 316 assured friends , namely , Mekita Romanovich , Bodan Belskoy , and Andrew Shalkan the chancellor : for beside daily gifts that they bestowed upon them all , they took so much money of theirs at interest at five and twenty upon the hundred , as they paid to some one of them five thousand marks yearly for the use of