that office at this time , is Boris Pheodorowich Godonoe , brother to the Empress . Of Horse for service in his wars ( beside other for his ordinary uses ) he hath to the number of ten thousand which are kept about Mosco . The next is the Lord Steward of his household at this time , one Gregory Vasilowich Godonoe . The third is his Treasurer , that keepeth all his moneis , jewels , plate , etc . now called Stephan Vasilowich Godonoe . The 413 A . D . 1588 . Alcune Terre Incognite . Confini Settentrionali della Rossia . The Country of China . The coasts of the uttermost Tartars . Certain unknown Countries ' . The Northern coasts of Russia . The Northwest . Master of the Horse . The L . Steward . The L . Treasurer . Controller . fourth his Controller , now Andreas Petrowich Clesinine . Chamberlame The fift his Chamberlain . He that attends that office at this time , is called Estoma Bisabroza Pastelnischay . Tasters . The sixt his Tasters , now Theodor Alexandrowich , and Harbingers . Ivan Vasilowich Godonoe . The seventh his Harbingers , which are three Noble men , and diverse other Gentlemen that do the office under them . These are his ordinary officers , and offices of the chiefest account . Gentlemen of Of Gentlemen , beside them that wait about his the chamber . chamber , and person ( called Shilsey Strapsey ) there are The Gard . two hundred , all Noblemen ' s sons . His ordinary Guard is two thousand Hagbutters ready with their pieces charged , and their match lighted , with other necessary furniture continually day and night : which come not within the house , but wait without in the court or yard , where the Emperor is abiding . In the night time there lodgeth next to his bedchamber the chief Chamberlain , with one or two more of best trust about him . A second chamber off , there lodge sixe other of like account for their trust and faithfulness . In the thirde chamber lie certain young Gentlemen , of these two hundred , called Shilsey Strapsey , that take their Gnomes . turns by forties every night . There are grooms beside that watch in their course , and lie at every gate and door of the Court