The Ambassage of M . Giles Fletcher , Doctor of the Civil Law , sent from her Majestic to Theodor the Emperor of Russia , Anno 1588 . N the year 1588 . was sent Ambassador from her highness into the country of Russia , Giles Fletcher Doctor of the Civil Law , as well to treat with the new Emperor Pheodor Ivanowich , about league and amity , in like manner as was before with his father Ivan Vasilowich , as also for the reestablishing and reducing into order in 353 z the decayed trade of our Englishmen there . Who notwithstanding at his first arrival at the Mosco , found some parts of hard entertainment , by means of certain rumours concerning the late naval victory which was there reported to have fallen on the Spanish side , as also for some dislike conceived against the privileged trade of our English merchant ' s . Yet in the end he obtained of the Emperor many good & equal conditions , and was courteously and honourably dismissed by him . The principali points which he entreated of , and were granted unto him by the said Emperor , were these : 1 A continuation of league and amity between her Highness and the said Emperor Pheodor Ivanowich , in like manner as was before with his father Ivan Vasilowich . 2 A confirmation and reestablishment of the former privileges of the Company of our English merchant ' s , which were infringed and annulled in the principal points , with diverse necessary additions to the same , for the better ordering of their trade in those countries ' hereafter , viz . That the state of the privilege granted before in the names of some private and particular men , be altered in that point , and the same granted by the name and style of their incorporation , viz . To the fellowship of English merchant ' s for the discovery of new trades . 3 That upon every surmise and light quarrel , the said privilege be not revoked and annulled , as before time it hath be . 4 That justice shall be administered to the said Company and their Agent without delay , upon such as shall offer them any despite or injury , or shall exact or impose upon them any payment , taxation or imposition whatsoever , contrary to the freedom of the said grant . 5 That the goods & commodities of the said Company , be