A speciali note gathered by the excellent Venetian Cosmographer M . John Baptista Ramusius out of the Arabian Geographic of Abilfada Ismael , concerning the trending of the Ocean sea from China Northward , along the coast of Tartaric and other unknown lands , and then running Westwards upon the Northern coasts of Russia , and so farther to the Northwest . DEscrivendo poi il predetto Abilfada Ismael i luoghi della terra habitabile , che circuendo il mar Oceano tocca , dice cosi . Rivoltasi 1 ’ Oceano da levante verso la region delle Cine , & v & alia volta di Tramontana , et passata final - mente la detta region , see ne giunge a Gogi & Magogi , cio & alii confini de gli Ultimi Tartari , & di quivi ad 412 Akune Terre che sono Incognite : Et correndo sempre per Ponente , passa sopra li confini Settentrionali della Rossia , et va alia volta di Maestro . The same in English . THe aforesaid Abilfada Ismael describing afterwards the habitable places of the earth , which the Ocean sea in his circuit touches , say in this manner following . The Ocean sea turns from the East towards the Country of the Chinaes , and stretcheth towards the North , and at length having passed the said Country , it reaches unto the Gogi and Magogi , that is , to the confines of The uttermost Tartars , and from thence , unto certain unknown Countries ' : and running still Westward it passes upon the Northern coasts of Russia , and from thence it runneth towards the Northwest , ( which it does indeed upon the coast of Lappia . ) By this most notable testimony it appears , that the Ocean sea compasseth and environeth all the East , Northeast , and North parts of Asia and Europe . The Emperor ' s private or household Officers . THe chief Officers of the Emperor ' s household are these which follow . The first is the office of the Boiaren Conesheva , or master of the Horse . Which containeth no more then is expressed by the name , that is , to be overseer of the Horse , and not Magister equitum , or Master of the Horsemen . For he appoints other for that service , as occasion does require , as before was said . He that bears