, called Estopnick . The Hagbutters or Gunners , whereof there are two thousand ( as was said before ) watch about the Emperors lodging , or bedchamber by course 250 . every night , and 250 . more in the Court yard , and about the Treasure house . His Court or bouse at the Mosco is made cased wise , walled about , with great store of fair ordinance planted upon the wall , and containeth a great breadth of ground within it , with many dwelling houses : Which are appointed for such as are known to be sure , and trusty to the Emperor . 414 Of the private behaviour , or quality of the Russe people . THE private behaviour and quality of the Russe people , may partly be understood by that which hath been said concerning the public state and usage of the Country . As touching the natural habit of Constitution of their bodies , they are for the most part of a large size , thetr bo ^ es - and of very fleshly bodies : accounting it a grace to be somewhat gross and burley , and therefore they nourish and spread their beards , to have them long and broad . But for the most part they are very unwieldy and unactive withal . Which may be thought to come partly of the climate , and the numbness which they get by the cold in winter , and partly of their diet that stands most of roots , onions , garlic , cabbage , and such like things that breed gross humours , which they use to eat alone , and with their other meats . Their diet is rather much then curious . At their Their diet . meals they begin commonly with a Charke or small cup of Aqua vitae , ( which they call Russe wine ) and then drink not till towards the end of their meals , taking it in largely , and all together , with kissing one another at every pledge . And therefore after dinner there is no talking with them , but every man goes to his bench to take his afternoons sleep , which is as ordinary with them as their nights rest . When they exceed , and have variety of dishes , the first are their baked meats ( for roast meats they use little