to seek a wintering place : and missing the said bay fell upon a desert coast in Lappia , entering into a River immediately frozen up , since discovered , nam Arzina Reca , distant East from a Russian Monastery of Monks called Pechingho , from whence they never returned , but all to the number of 70 . persons perished , which was for want of experience to have made caves and stoves . These were found with the ships the next Summer Anno 1554 . by Russe fishermen : and in Anno 1555 . the place sent unto by English Merchant ' s as hereafter appears . Anno 1554 . the said ship Edward Bonadventure ( although robbed homewards by Flemings ) returned with her company to London , showing and setting forth their entertainments and discovery of the countries ' even to the city of Mosco , from whence they brought a privilege written in Russe with the Kings or great Dukes of S . Nicholas Westward 35 miles . Note . Anno 1554 . 331 seal , the other two ships looked for and unknown to them where they were . Anno 1555 . An . 1555 . the said company of Merchant ' s for discovery upon a new supply , sent thither again with two ships , to wit , the Edward Bonadventure , & another bearing the name of the King and Queen , Philip and The King and Marie , whose Majesties by their letters to the said betters5 Moscovite , recommended sundry their subject ' s then ' passing , whereof certain , to wit , Richard Chanceller , George Killingworth , Henry Lane , and Arthur Edwards , after their arrival at the Bay , and passing up Dwina to Vologda , went first up to Mosco , where , upon knowledge of the said letters , they with their train had speciali entertainment , with houses and diet appointed , and shortly permitted to the princes presence , they were with gentlemen brought through the city of Mosco , to the castle and palace , replenished with numbers of people , and some gunners . They entered sundry rooms , ftir - nished in show with ancient grave personages , all in long garments of sundry colours , gold , tissue , baldekin , and