the said company , for payment whereof , their whole stock was in danger of arrest , by public authority : Further also 2140 . rubbles for custom and houserent , he obtained a rebatement of eighteene thousand , one hundred fiftie and three marks of the said debt . The said Ambassador M . Giles Fletcher , as I understand , hath drawn a book entitled , Of the Russe Common wealth , containing : First , a Cosmographical description of the country , which hath these chapters . 1 Of the length and breadth of the country of Russia , with the names of the shires . 2 Of the soil and climate . 3 Of the native commodities of the country . Secondly , a description of their policy contained in these Chapters , viz . 1 Of the constitution or state of the Russe Common wealth . 2 Of their Parliaments , and manner of holding them . 3 Of the Russe Nobili tie and means whereby it is kept in and under , proportion agreeable to that state . 4 Of the manner of governing their provinces or shires . 5 Of the Emperors privy counsel . 6 Of the Emperor ' s customs & their revenues , with the practises for the increase of them . 7 Of the Russe commonalty and their condition . 8 Of their public justice and manner of proceeding therein . 9 Of the Emperor ' s forces for his wars , with the chief officers , and their salary or pay . 10 Of their manner of mustering , armour , and provision for victuali . 11 Of their ordering , marching , charging , and their martial discipline . 356 12 Of their colonies and policy in maintaining their purchases by conquest . 13 Of their borderers with whom they have most to do in war and peace . 14 Of their church offices and degrees . 15 Of their liturgy or form of Church service . 16 Of their manner of administering the Sacraments . 17 Of the doctrine of the Russe church . 18 Of the manner of solemnizing their marriages . 19 Of the other ceremonies of the Russe church . A . D . 1588 . Thirdly , the Oeconomie or private behaviour of the Russe containing these chapters . 1 Of the Emperor ' s household officers , and order of his house . 2 Of the private behaviour and manner of the Russe people .