Master Horsey having received the letters and requests of the Emperor , provided for his journey over land , . and departed from Mosco the lift day of September , thence unto Otver , to Torshook , to great Novogrod , to Vobsky , and thence to Nyhouse in Livonia , to Wenden , and so to Riga : ( where he was beset , and brought forthwith before a Cardinali called Ragevil , but yet suffered to pass in the end : ) From thence to Mito , to Golden , and Libou in Curland , to Memel , to Konings - burgh in Prussia , to Elbing , to Dantzike , to Stetine in Pomerland , to Rostock , to Lubeck , to Hamborough , to Breme , to Emden , and by sea to London . Being arrived at her majesties royal court , and having delivered the Emperor ' s letters with good favour , and gracious acceptance , he was forthwith again commanded to repass into Russia , with other letters from her majesty to the Emperor , and prince Boris Pheodorowich , answering the Emperor ' s letters , and withal requesting the favour and friendship , which his father had yielded to the English merchant ' s : and hereunto was he earnestly also solicited by the merchant ' s of London themselves of that company , to deal in their behalf . Being thus dispatched from London by sea , he arrived in Mosco , the 20 . of April 1586 . and was very honorably welcomed . And 345 M . Horseis voyage from Mosco to England overland . 1586 . for you merchant ' s behoof , obtained all his requests , being therein specially favoured by you noble prince Boris Pheodorowich , who always affected M . Horsey with speciali liking . And having obtained privileges for the merchant ' s , he was recommended from the Emperor again , to the Queen of England his mistress , by whom the prince Boris , in token of his honourable and good opinion of the Queen ' s majesty , sent her highness a royal present of Sables , Luzarns , cloth of gold and other rich things . So that the Company of English merchant ' s , next to their thankfulness to her majesty , are to account M . Horseis pains their speciali benefit , who obtained for them those privileges , which in twentie years before would not be granted . The manner of M . Horseis last dispatch from the Emperor , because it was very honourable , I thought good to record . He was freely allowed post horses for him and his