servants , victuals and all other necessaries for his long journey ; at every town that he came unto from Mosco to Vologda , which is by land five hundred miles , he received the like free and bountiful allowances , at the Emperor ' s charge . New victuali and provision were given him upon the river Dwina at every town by the kings officers , being one thousand miles in length . When he came to the new castle called Archangel , he was received of the Duke Knez Vasili Andrewich Isveno - gorodsky by the Emperor ' s commission into the Castle , , gunners being set in ranks after their use , where he was sumptuously feasted : from thence he was dispatched with bountiful provision and allowance in the Dukes boat , with one hundred men to row him , and one hundred Gunners in other boats to conduct him , with a gentleman captain of the Gunners . Coming to the road where the English , Dutch , and French ships road , the gunners discharged , and the ships shot in like manner 46 . pieces of their ordinance , & so he was brought ta his lodging at the English house upon Rose Island . And that which was the full and complete conclusion 346 of the favour of the Emperor and Boris Pheodorowich towards M . Horsey , there were the next day sent him for his further provision upon the sea by a gentleman and a captain the things following . 16 . live oxen . 70 . sheep . 600 . hens . 25 . flitches of Bacon . 80 . bushels of meal . 600 . loaves of bred . 2000 . eggs . 10 . geese . 2 . cranes . 2 . swans . 65 . gallons of mead . 40 . gallons of Aquavitas . 60 . gallons of beer . 3 . young bears . 4 . hawks . Store of onions and garlic . 10 . fresh salmons . A wild boar . All these things were brought him down by a Gentleman of the Emperor ' s , and another of prince Boris Pheodorowich , & were received in order by John Frese servant to M . Horsey , together with and honourable present and reward from the prince Boris , sent him by M . Francis Cherry and Englishman : which present was a whole very rich piece of cloth of gold , & a fair pair of Sables . This Gentleman hath observed many other rare things concerning those parts , which hereafter ( God willing ) at more convenient time and laisure shall come to light .