A letter of M . Henrie Lane to the worshipful M . William Sanderson , containing a brief discourse of that which passed in the Northeast discovery for the space of three and thirtie years . Aster Sanderson , as you lately requested me , so have I sought , and though I cannot find things that heretofore I kept in writing , and lent out to others , yet perusing at London copies of mine old letters to content one that means to pleasure many , I have briefly and as truly as I may , drawn out as follows : The rough hewing may be planed at your leisure , or as pleases him that shall take the pains . First the honourable attempt to discover by sea Northeast and Northwest nam for Cathay , being chiefly 33 ° procured by privilege from king Edward the sixt , and other his nobility , by and at the cost and suit of M . Sebastian Cabota , then governor for discoveries with sir Andrew Judde , sir George Barnes , sir William Garrard , M . Anthony Hussie , and a company of merchant ' s , was in the last year of his Majesties reign 1553 . The generail charge whereof was committed to one sir Hugh Willoughbie knight , a goodly Gentleman , accompanied with sufficient number of Pilots , Masters , Merchant ' s and Mariners , having three ships well furnished , to wit , The Bona Speranda , the Edward Bonadventure , and the Confidentia . The Edward Bonadventure , Richard A . D . < 554 - Anno 1553 . M . William Burrough was then young , and with his brother in this first voyage . Chanceller being Pilot , and Steven Burrough Master , having discovered Wardhouse upon the coast of Fin - mark , by storm or fog departed from the rest , found Newnox is , the bay of S . Nicholas now the chief port for Russia , - m tO e rM - there wintered in safety , and had aid of the people at a village called Newnox . The other two ships attempting further Northwards ( as appeared by pamphlets found after written by sir Hugh Willoughbie ) were in September encountered with such extreme cold , that they put back