To the Queens most excellent Majestic from the Lord Boris Pheodorovich Godonova . Y the grace of God great Lord and great Duke Theodore Ivanovich governor of Russia , Volodimer , Mosco , and Novgorod , King of Cazan and Astracan , Lord of Vobsko , and great Duke of Smolensco , Otver , Ughori , Perm , Viatsky , Bulgary , and other regions , Lord and great Duke of Novgorod in the low country , of Chernigo , of Rezan , Polotsko , Rostove , Jeroslave , Bealozera , and of Lifland , of Udorsky , Obdorsky , Condinsky , and all the country of Sibery , and commander of all the North parts , and Lord over the country of Iversky , and King of Grusinsky , and of the country of Kabardinsky , Cherchasky , and duke of Igorsky , Lord and ruler of many countries ' more , etc . Most resplendent Queen Elizabeth of England , France , and Ireland , etc . his princely Majesties servant , Lord and Master of his horses , and high Steward of his house , and President of the territories of Cazan and Astracan , Boris Pheodorovich Godonova , unto your most excellent Majesty , great Lady Queen Elizabeth , send my humble commendations . It hath pleased your Majesty to write unto me your gracious and princely letter by your servant Thomas Lind : which letter I received with all humbleness . During the time of the abided of your messenger Thomas Lind here in the Mosco , it pleased God of his mercifulness , and our Lady the mother of God , and holy Saints , by the prayers of our lord and king his Majesty Theodore Ivanovich 434 LETTER FROM BORIS PHEODOROWICH a . d . 1592 - over all Russia governor , the right believer and lover of Christ , to send our Queen and gracious Lady Irene Tfie Empresu a young Princess , to the great joy and comfort of our a kingdom , nam Pheodocine . Wherefore we give all honour and glory to the almighty God unspeakable , whose gifts had been manifold with mercy unto us : for which all we Christians laud and praise God . After all this your servant was occasioned to stay until the coming of your merchant ' s from the sea port . Touching the letters which you