The contents of M . Garlands Commission unto Thomas Simkinson for the bringing of M . John Dee to the Emperor of Russia his Court . A . D . 1586 . After our account 1596 . Riend Thomas Simkinson I pray you go to Brounswik or Cassil and inquire if Master John Dee be there or where he is , and when you find him , certify him how that I have sent you purposely to know where he doth remain , and at your return I will come and speak with him my self . Also you may certify him that the Emperor of Russeland having certain knowledge 445 of his great learning and wisdom is marvelous desirous of him to come into his Country . And hath given me his letter with his hand and golden seal at it for to bring him into the Country with me if it be possible , and for his living show him that he shall be sure of 2000 . pound yearly , and also all provision for his table out of the Emperors kitchen free : and if he think this too little , I will assure him that if he ask as more , he shall have it , and for his charges into the Country , I have sufficient of the Emperors allowance to bring him and all his royally into the Country . And because he may doubt of these proffers , he shall remain at the borders until the Emperor be certified of him , and of his requests , which he would have . And I am sure he shall be conveyed through the land with five hundred horses , and he shall accounted as one of the chiefest in the land next the Emperor . Also show him how that my Lord Protector at my coming away did take me in his arms , and desired me as he should be my friend to bring him with me , and he would give him of his own purse yearly 1000 . rubbles beside the Emperors allowance . All these foresaid grants and demands do I Thomas Simkinson acknowledge to be spoken by Edward Garland to me , and to be sent to declare the same unto Master John Dee . And in witness that this is of a truth I have written the same with my own hand , and thereunto set my name , in Wittingaw , otherwise called Trebona , the 18 . of September , Anno 1586 . By me Thomas Simkinson of Hull .