have a care of 420 LETTER FROM BORIS PHEODOROWICH a . d . 159 ° . them , and for the Queens Majesty of Englands sake , I will take her Merchant ' s into my protection , and will defend them as the Emperors selected people under the Emperor ' s commission : and by mine appointment all his Majesties officers and authorized people shall be careful over them . The Emperor ' s gracious favour towards them was never such as it is now . And where you write that at the port the Emperor ' s Officers fell their wax by commission at a set rate given them , far above the valve , and that they enforce your Merchants to accept it , they deny that they take any such course , but say they barter their wax for other wares , and also put their wax to sale for ready money to your Merchant ' s , according to the worth thereof , and as the price goes in the custom house here . It hath been heretofore deer , and now is sold as good cheap as in any other place , and as they can best agree : they enforce no man to buy it , but rather keep it : therefore your Merchants have no just cause to make any such report . I have expressly given order , that there shall be no such course used to enforce them , but to buy according to their own wills , and to tarry at the port or to depart at their pleasure . And as touching the customs already past , and debts demanded at your Merchant ' s hands , whereof you write : Our Lord great Emperor and great Duke Theodore Ivanowich of all Russia of famous memory hath showed his Majesties especial favour and love , for the great love of his well - beloved sister Queen of England , and by my petition and mediation , whereas there was commandment given to take Marshes whole debt of your Merchant ' s and factors , it is moderated to the half , and for the other half , commandment given it should not be taken , and the Merchant ' s bills to be delivered them . And to the end hereafter that her Majesties Merchants move no contention betwixt our Lord the Emperor and great Duke of Russia , and his well - beloved sister Queen Elizabeth , his Majesty desires order to be given , that English Merchants in great favour with the Emperor . Half the debt of Antony Marsh remitted . 421 your Merchants do deal justly in their traffic , and plainly without fraud or guile . And I will be a favourer of them above all others , under his Majesties authority : Ann . Dam . themselves shall see it . Written in our great Lord the I59O > Emperors city of Mosco in the month of July , 7 ° 99 - 1590 .