A letter from the Lord Boris Pheodorowich to the right honourable Lord William Burghley , Lord high Treasurer of England . Y the grace of God great Lord , King , and great Duke Theodor Ivanovich , governor of Russia , Volodimer , Mosco , and Novgorod , King of Cazan and Astracan , Lord of Vobsco , and great Duke of Smolensco , Otver , Ughory , Perm , Viatsky , Bulgary , and other regions , Lord and great Duke of all Novgorod in the low countries ' , of Chernigo , of Liffeland , of Udorsky , Obdorsky , Condinsky , and all the country of Sibery , and commander of all the North parts , and Lord over the country of Iversky , and King of Grusinsky , and of the countries ' of Kabardinsky , Cherchasky , and Duke of Igorsky , Lord and ruler of many Countries ' more etc . His princely Majesties servant , Lord and Master of his horses , and high Steward of his house , President of the territories of Cazan and Astracan , Boris Pheodorowich Godonova , to the most honourable Counsellor of the most resplendent mighty great Lady Elizabeth Queen of England , France , and Ireland , William Burghley , Lord , and Knight of the Garter , high Treasurer of England , sends greeting . I perceive by your letter that your merchant ' s last 436 LETTER FROM BORIS PHEODOROWICH a . d . ships came home in safety , and that you have received the letters sent by them , by the hands of Francis Cherie , M - Francis one from our Lord and great King of all Russia his Majesty , unto your Queens most excellent Majesty , and one from me to her Highness , and one from my self to you : and the contents thereof you have caused to be read and well understood at large . And whatsoever is therein written concerning Jerome Horsey , you have sought out the ground thereof , and that he is in great displeasure . And her Highness hath written in her letter concerning her Majesties merchant ' s , that whereas I have taken them into protection , she takes it very lovingly and kindly , that for her sake they have received so great kindness . And touching the damages and hindrances which your merchants have sustained by means of the Emperors authorised people and officers , and that they were not permitted to traffic at liberty at the Sea port in the year 1589 , for the space of three weeks , it hath been against the Emperors Majesties will and pleasure , as also against mine . Where you desire and wish that [ I . 5 ° 5