A branch of a letter from M . John Merick , Agent unto the Moscovie company in Russia , closed up in the Mosco the 14 . of March , Anno 1597 . touching the death of Pheodor Ivanowich late Emperor of all Russia , etc . 10 . Febr . 1597 - Aving thus far proceeded with this my answer unto the chiefest points of your worships letters received , my desire was to have sent one unto you long since , as you may perceive by | | the first date : but by reason I could not get leave , I have deferred it of till this instant , for that there was none suffered to pass out of the land . The causes may be judged , for that it pleased God to call out of this world , the Emperor his Majesty , who departed about the 7 . of January : and ever since hath be a mourning time , & no suits for any matter could be herd . But it hath be a very dead season . Yet ( thanks be to God ) through the wise government of Lord Boris Pheodorowich the Lord Protector 448 unto the said late Emperor , since his death all things have be very quiet without any dissension ; as the like in such a great kingdom I have not herd of . And now through the providence of Almighty God , and by surrender of the late Empress Irenia Feodoruna , and the common consent of the Patriarch , Nobles , Bishops , and the whole Clergy , with the whole Commons beside , choice is made of none other but of the said Lord Protector , L . Boris Pheodorowich to Pnnce Bons be Emperor , and great duke of all Russia , who was most unwilling to receive the kingdom , but the people consent chosen would make no other choice , nor have any other . So Emperor of that with much ado and entreaty , it hath pleased his Rusia . Majesty to take upon him the kingdom , and he is absolute Emperor to him and his heirs . And certainly God hath done much for this Country , and hath made the people greatly happy , in that he hath provided and appointed so famous and worthy a Prince : whose excellent government and experience these foureteene years hath be manifest to all Russia . God grant his highness a most prosperous and long reign , with his Lady the Empress , the Prince his son , and the Princess his daughter . All men do rejoice both Russe and strangers for this most famous Emperor . The Coronation is thought shall on the Ascension day next , till which time I cannot depart from Mosco : which is a little before the time that ordinarily I do take my journey from hence . And touching his Majesties favour towards me on your behalf , especially for her Majesties sake , as in foretime it was extraordinary , and so specially showed to me , as to none the like : so hath his highness promised the continuance thereof , with further favour as shall desired . Whereof I have no doubt : for daily I do find the same .