notable preacher of Christian discipline , he would teach his children and nobility , that godliness was to be preferred before riches , yea , before the Monarchic of all the world . He overthrew the false gods of the heathens , and by many laws often revived , he abrogated the worshipping of Images in all the countries of Greece , Egypt , Persia , Asia , and the whole Roman Empire , commanding Christ only by his Edicts to be worshipped , the sacred Gospel to be preached , the Ministers thereof to be honoured and relieved , and the temples of Idols every where to be destroyed . Whithersoever he went he caused the book of the Gospel of Christ to be still carried before him , that thereby it might appear to be a form of faith to all men , and to appertain generally to all nations . He was the first that appointed and Imperiali Diadem , or Crown to the Kings of Britaine . He was most beneficial to all Churches , bestowing upon them lands and fields , and upon the poor , sick persons , widows and orphans , corn and wood , being as careful of them as if he had be their natural father . He used learned men most familiarly , as Eusebius , Lactantius and others , and they are witnesses that this was his usual prayer to God . O Lord we know thee to be the only God , we are sure that thou art the only King , and we call upon thee as our helper : through thee we have got the victory , and thrown the enemy . Sextus Aurelius reporteth , that it was his greatest delight to embrace the study of learning , to favour good Arts , to read , write and meditate , and that he composed many books and Epistles both in the Greek and Latin tongues . He died at Nicomedia , being then 66 . years of age , in the 32 . year of his reign , and in the 339 . year after 275 by thee we have over - the Incarnation of Christ , and was buried at Constantinople , Octavius being then King of Britaine : whose life Eusebius bishop of Caesarea hath written in Greek in 4 . books , which afterwards were translated into the Latin tongue by John Portes a Frenchman .