The voyage of Gutwere and English Lady married to Baldwine brother of Godfreide duke of Bouillon , towards Jerusalem about 1097 . And the 11 . year of William Rufus King of England . He Christian army of Godfrie of Bouillon passing the city of Iconium , alias Agogna in the country of Licaonia , and from thence by the city of Heraclia , came at length unto the ci tie of Marasia , where they encamped , and sojourned there three whole days , because of the wife of Baldwine brother germane of the duke of Loraigne . « 93 Which Lady being long time vexed with a grievous malady , was in extremity , where at length paying the debt due to nature , she changed this transitory life , for life eternal ; Who , in her life time , was a very worthy and virtuous Lady , born in England , and descended of most noble parentage nam Gutwere ; Which , according to her degree , was there most honourably interred , to the great grief of all the whole army . As reporteth William Archbishop of Tyre , lib . 3 . cap . 17 . hist , belli sacri . The same author in the 10 . book 8c first chapter of the same historic concerning the same English Lady , writeth further as follows , Baldwine having followed the wars for a time , gave his mind to marriage , so that being in England he fell in love with a very honourable and noble Lady nam Gutwere , whom he married and carried with him in that first happy expedition , wherein he accompanied his brothers the Lords , duke Godfrey and Eustace , persons very commendable in all virtues and of immortali memory . But he had hard fortune in his journey , because his foresaid wife , being wearied with a long sickness finished her life with a happy end near the city of Marasia , before the Christian army came unto Antioch , where she was honourably buried , as we have declared before . Chronicon Hierosolymitanum in lib . 3 . cap . 27 . makes also mention of this English Lady , which he calls Godwera in this manner . Ac in region Maresch uxor Baldewini nobilissima , quam de regno Angliae eduxit , diutina corporis molestia aggravata , 8c duci Godefrido come - data , vitam exhalavit , sepulta Catholicis obsequiis ; cujus nomen erat Godwera . The same in English . IN this province of Maresch the most noble wife of Baldwine , which he carried with him out of England being visited with daily sicknesses and infirmities of 294 body , and commended to the custody of duke Godfrey , departed out of this life , and was buried after the Christian manner . Her name was Godwera .