The voyage of Ingulphus Abbot of Croiland unto Jerusalem , performed ( according to Florentius Wigorniensis ) in the year of our Lord , 1064 , and described by the said Ingulphus himself about the conclusion of his brief Historic . A . D . 1064 . densis , natus in Anglia , & a parentibus Anglicis , quip urbis pulcherrimae A . D . 1051 . A . D . 1064 , According to Florentine IFigomieneie . 288 IV 289 TO A . D . IO64 . The same in English . IIngulphus and humble servant of reverend Guthlac and of his monastery of Croiland , born in England , and of English parents , at the beautiful ! city of London , was in my youth , for the attaining of good letters , placed first at Westminster , and afterwards sent to the University of Oxford . And having excelled diverse of mine equals in learning of Aristotle , I inured my self somewhat unto the first & second Rhetoric of Tullie . And as I grew in age , disdaining my parents mean estate , and forsaking mine own native soil , I affected the Courts of kings and princes , and was desirous to be clad in silk , and to wear brave and costly attire . And lo , at the same time William our sovereign king 290 now , but then Earl of Normandie , with a great troup of followers and attendants came unto London , to confer with king Edward the Confessor his kinsman . 1051 . Into whose company intruding my self , and proffering my service for the performance of any speedy or weigh tie affairs , in short time , after I had done many things with good success , I was known and most entirely beloved by the victorious Erle himself , and with him I sailed into Normandie . And there being made his secretary , I governed the Earls Court ( albeit with the envy of some ) as my self pleased , yea whom I would I abased , and preferred whom I thought good . When as therefore , being carried with a youthful heat and lusty humour , I began to be weary even of this place , wherein I was advanced so high above my parentage , and with and inconstant mind , and affection too too ambitious , most vehemently aspired at all occasions to climb higher : [ II i . 10 . ] there went a report throughout all Normandie , that diverse Archbishop ' s of the Empire , and secular princes were desirous for their souls health , and for devotion sake , to go on pilgrimage to Jerusalem . Wherefore out of the family of our lord the Earl , sundry of us , both gentlemen and clerks ( principali of whom was my self ) with the licence and good will of our said lord the earl , sped us on that voyage , and travailing thirtie horses of us into high Germanie , we joined our selves unto the Archbishop of Mentz . And being with the companies of the Bishops seven thousand