A second testimony of the foresaid Sighelmus his voyage unto Saint Thomas of India etc . out of William of Malmesbury his second book de gestis pontificum Anglorum , cap . de episcopis Schireburnensibus , Salisburiensibus , Wil - tunensibus . The same in English . Sighelmus being for the performance of the kings alms sent beyond the seas , and travailing unto S . Thomas of India , very prosperously ( which a man would wonder at in this age ) passed through the said country of India , and returning home brought with him diverse strange and precious stones , such as that climate affordeth . Many of which stones are as yet extant in the monuments of the Church . The life and travails of John Erigena . literis Graecis , Chaldaicis , & Arabicis insudavit : [ IL i . omnia 280 The same in English . JOhn Erigene a Britane , descended of honourable parents , and born in the Town of S . David in Wales , seeing the Englishmen to be oppressed with the wars and rapines of the cruel Danes , and all the land in a hurly burly , he in the mean time undertook a long journey , even as far as Athens , and there spent many years in the study of the Greek , Chaidie , and Arabian tongues : he there frequented all the places and schools of the Philosophers , and the oracle also of the Sun , which Aesculapius had built unto himself . And having found at length that which he had with long travel searched , he returned again into Italie , and France , where for his singular learning , he was much favoured of the two Kings Charles and Lewes , and in his being there , he translated into Latin the books of Dionysius Areopagita concerning the Heavenly Hierarchic , which were sent from Constantinople in the year 858 . After this he came back again into his own Country , and was schoolmaster unto Alphred then King of England , and his sons : and upon his request , at his times of leisure , he translated Aristotles Morals , of the Secrets of Secrets , or of the right government of Princes , out of Greek into these three tongues , Chaidie , Arabian , and Latin , 281 A . WORSER 858 . which he did very exquisitely . At the last , being in the Abbie of Malmsburie , whither he went for his recreation , and there according to his manner disputing , and reading to the Students , some of them misliking and hating him , rose against him , and slew him in the year of Christ , 884 .