persons sufficiently provided for such and expedition , we passed prosperously through many provinces , and at length attained unto Constantinople . Where doing reverence unto the Emperor Alexius , we saw the Church of Sancta Sophia , and kissed diverse sacred relics . Departing thence through Lycia , we fell into the hands of the Arabian thieves : and after we had be robbed of infinite sums of money , and had lost many of our people , hardly escaping with extreme danger of our lives , at length we joyfully entered into the most wished ci tie of 291 Jerusalem . Where we were received by the most reverend , aged , and holy patriarch Sophronius , with great melody of cymbals and with torchlight , and were accompanied unto the most divine Church of our Saviour his sepulchre with a solemn procession aswell of Syrians as of Latines . Here , how many prayers we uttered , what abundance of tears we shed , what deep sighs we breathed forth , our Lord Jesus Christ only knoweth . Wherefore being conducted from the most glorious sepulchre of Christ to visit other sacred monuments of the city , we saw with weeping eyes a great number of holy Churches and oratories , which Achim the Sultan of Egypt had lately destroyed . And so having bewailed with sad tears , and most sorrowful and bleeding affections , all the ruins of that most holy city both within and without , and having bestowed money for the re - edifying of some , we desired with most ardent devotion to go forth into the country , to wash our selves in the most sacred river of Jordan , and to kiss all the steps of Christ . Howbeit the thievish Arabians lurking upon every way , would not suffer us to travel far from the city , by reason of their huge and furious multitudes . Wherefore about the spring there arrived at the port of Joppa a fleet of ships from Genoa . In which fleet ( when the Christian merchant ' s had exchanged all their wares at the coast towns , and had likewise visited the holy places ) we all of us embarked , committing our selves to the seas : and being tossed with many storms and tempests , at length we arrived at Brundusium : and so with a prosperous journey traveling thorough Apulia towards Rome , we there visited the habitations of the holy apostles Peter and Paul , and did reverence unto diverse monuments of holy martyrs in all places throughout the city . From thence the archbishop ' s and other princes of the empire traveling towards the right hand for Alemain , and we declining towards the left hand for France , departed asunder , taking our leaves with unspeakable thanks and courtesies . And so at length , of 292 thirty horsemen which went out of Normandie fat , lusty , and frolic , we returned thither scarce twenty poor pilgrim ' s of us , being all footmen , and consumed with leanness to the bore bones . A . D . c . 1097 .