and that for this purpose , the king and the patriarch were coming down unto the city of Acres , and that they were in building of engines , and warlike instruments , to invade the walls and inhabitants thereof : and that in the mean season they were to remain at Japhet , until the kings further commandment were known . Whereupon they all agreed that it should so be done according to the kings commandment ; and answered that they would attend his directions in the haven of Japhet , & would in all points be obedient unto him unto the death . Chap . 4 . THe king came down to Acres with the patriarch , and all his family , building , and making there by the space of fortie days engines , and many kinds of warlike instruments : and appointing all things to be made perfectly ready , which seemed to be most convenient for the assaulting of the city . Assoon as this purpose and intent of the king was come unto the ears of the inhabitants of Sagitta , and that and invincible power of men of war was arrived at Japhet to help the king , they were greatly astonished , fearing that 303 by this means , they should be consumed and subdued by the king by dint of sword , as other cities , to wit , Caesaria , Assur , Acres , Cayphas , and Tabaria were vanquished and subdued . And therefore laying their heads together , they promised to the king by secret mediators , a mighty mass of money of a coin called Byzantines : and that further they would yearly pay a great tribute , upon condition that ceasing to besiege and invade their city , he would spare their lives . Whereupon these businesses were handled from day to day between the king and the citizens , and they solicited the king for the ransoming both of their city and of their lives , proffering him from time to time more greater gifts . And the king for his part , being careful and [ II i . 15 . ] perplexed for the payment of the wages which he ought unto his soldiers , hearkened wholly unto this offer of money . Howbeit because he feared the Christians , lest they should lay it