A Fleet of Englishmen , Danes , and Flemmings , arrived at Joppa in the Holy land , the seventh year of Baldwine the second king of Hierusalem . Written in the beginning of the tenth book of the Chronicle of Hierusalem , in the 8 . year of Henry the first of England . Cap . 1 . TO the same time also in the seventh year of the reign of Baldwine the Catholic king of Hierusalem , a very great warlike Fleet of the Catholic nation of England , to the number of about seven thousand , having with them more men of war of the kingdom of Denmarke , of Flanders and of Antwerpe , arrived with ships which they call Busses , at the haven of the city of Japhet , determining there to make their abided , until they having obtained the kings licence and safeconduct , might safely worship at Hierusalem . Of which navy the chiefest and best spoken repairing to the king , spoke to him in this manner . Christ preserve the Kings life , and prosper his kingdom from day to day ; we , being men and soldiers of Christian profession , have , through the help of God , sailed hither through mighty and large seas , from the far countries ' of England , Flanders , and Denmarke , to worship at Jerusalem , and to visit the sepulchre of our Lord . And therefore we are assembled to entreat your clemency touching the matter , that by your favour and safe conduct we may peaceably go up to Jerusalem , and worship there , and so return . 301 [ II i . 14 . ] [ Chap . 2 . THe king favourably hearing their whole petition , granted unto them a strong band of men to conduct them , which brought them safely from all assaults and ambushes of the Gentiles by the known ways unto Jerusalem and all other places of devotion . After that these pilgrim ' s , & new Christian strangers were brought thither , they offering unto our Lord their vows in the temple of the holy sepulchre , returned with great joy , and without all let unto Joppa ; where finding the king , they vowed that they would assist him in all things , which should seem good