by the mount Thaber , where with great mourning and lamentation , so worthy a prince , and valiant champion was honourably and Catholicly interred . The brother of the said Hugh nam Gerrard , the same time lay sick of a grievous disease . Which hearing of the death of his brother , his sickness of his body increasing more vehemently through grief , he also deceased within eight days after , and was buried by his brother , after Christian manner . Chap . 6 . AFter the lamentable burials of these so famous Princes , the King , taking occasion of the death of these principali men of his army , agreed , making none privy thereto , to receive the money which was offered him for his differing off the siege of the city of Sagitta , yet dissembling to make peace with the Sara - w 305 u A . D . 1107 . cens , but that he meant to go through with the work , that he had begun . Whereupon sending a message unto Japhet , he advised the English soldiers to come down to Acres with their fleet , and to confer and consult with him touching the besieging and assaulting of the city of Sagitta , which rising immediately upon the kings commandment , and forthwith hoisting up the sails of their ships aloft with pendants and stremers of purple , and diverse other glorious colours , with their flags of scarlet colour and silk , came thither , and casting their ancres , road hard by the city . The king the next day calling unto him such as were privy & acquainted with his dealings , opened his grief unto the chief Captains of the English men and Danes , touching the slaughter of Hugh , and the death of his brother , and what great confidence he reposed in them concerning these wars : and that now therefore they being departed and dead , he must of necessity differre the besieging of Sagitta , & for this time dismiss the army assembled . This resolution of the king being spread among the people , the army was dissolved , and the Englishmen , Danes and Flemings , with sails and oars going aboard their fleet , saluted the king , and returned home unto their native countries .