A letter written from Manuel the Emperor of Constantinople , unto Henrie the second King of England , Anno Dom . 1177 . wherein mention is made that certain of king Henries Noble men and subject ' s were present with the said Emperor in a battle of his against the Soldan of Iconium . Recorded by Roger Hoveden , in Annalium parte posteriore , in regno Hen . 2 . fol . 316 , & 317 . 312 313 314 The same in English . IN the year 1177 , Manuel the emperor of Constantinople having fought a field with the Soldan of Iconium , and vanquished him , wrote unto Henry the second king of England in manner following . Manuel Comnenus in Christ the everliving God a faithful emperor , descended of the lineage of Porphyrie , crowned by Gods grace , high , puissant , mighty , always most sovereign , and governor of the Roman ; unto Henry the most famous king of England , his most deer friend , greeting and all good success . Whereas our imperiali highness thinketh it expedient to advertise you our well - beloved friend of all our affairs : We thought it not amiss to signify unto your royal Majesty certain exploits at this present achieved by us . From the beginning therefore of our inauguration 315 our imperiali highness hath maintained most deadly feod and hostility against Gods enemies the Persians , seeing them so to triumph over Christians , to exalt themselves against the name of God , and to usurp over Christian kingdoms . For which cause our imperiali highness hath in some sort encountered them heretofore , and did as it pleased God to give us grace . And we suppose that your Majesty is not ignorant , what our imperiali highness hath often performed for their ruin and subversion . For even now , being urged thereunto , we have determined to lead a mighty army against them , and to wage war against all Persia . And albeit our forces be not so great as we could wish they were , yet have we according to the time , and the present state of things , strongly invaded them . Wherefore our