And ambassage from DONE Ferdinando , brother to the emperor Charles the 5 . unto king Henry the 8 . in the year 1527 . desiring his aid against Solyman the great Turke . Holin - shed . page . 894 . N the 14 . day of March , 1527 . were conveyed from London to Greenwich by the earl of Rutland and others , the lord Gabriel de Salamanca , earl of Ottonburge , John Burgrave of Sylverberge , and John Faber a famous clerk , after bishop of Vien , as ambassadors from DONE Ferdi nando , brother to Charles the emperor , newly elect king of Hungarie and Beam , after the death of his brother in law king Lewes , which was slain by Solyman the Turke the last Summer . This company was welcomed of the high officers , and after brought into the kings presence , all the nobility being present ; and there after great reverence made , M . Faber made a notable oration , taking his ground out of the Gospel , Exiit seminator seminare semen suum : and of that he declared how Christ and his disciples went forth to sow , and how their seed was good that fell into the good ground , and brought forth good fruit , which was the Christian faith . And then he declared how contrary to that sowing , Mahomet had sown seed , which brought forth evil ! fruit . He also showed from the beginning , how the Turkes have increased in power , what realms they had conquered , what people they had subdued even to that day . He declared further what acts the great Turke then living had done ; and in especial , he noted the getting of Belgrade and of the Rhodes , and the slaying of the king of Hungarie , to the great rebuke ( as he said ) of all the kings christened . He set forth also what power the Turke had , what diversities of companies , what captains he had , so that he thought , that without a marvellous great number of people , he could not be overthrown . Wherefore he most humbly besought the king as S . Georges knight , and defender of the faith , to assist the king his master in that godly war and virtuous purpose . To this oration the king by the mouth of Sir Thomas Moore answered ; that much he lamented the loss that happened in Hungarie , and if it were not for the wars He means which were between the two great princes , he thought the Emperor that the Turke would not have enterprised that act : e Frenc wherefore he with all his study would take pain , first , to set and unity and peace throughout all Christendome , and after that , both with money and men he would be ready to help towards that glorious war , as much as any other prince in Christendome . After this done , the ambassadors were well cherished , and diverse times resorted to the court , and had great cheer and good rewards , and so the third day of May next following , they took their leave & departed homeward .