Another voyage to the Isles of Candia and Chio made by the ship the Mathew Gonson , about the year 1535 , according to the relation of John Williamson , then Cooper in the same ship , made to M . Richard Hackluit in the year 1592 . The Mathew Gonson goes into Turkey . He good ship called the Mathew Gonson , of burden 300 tons , whereof was owner old M . William Gonson , paymaster of the kings Navy , made her voyage in the year 153 5 . In this ship went as Captain Richard Grey , who long after died in Russia . Master William Holstocke afterwards Controller of the Queens Navy went then as purser in the same voyage . The Master was one John Pichet , servant to old M . William Gonson , James Rumnie was Master ' s mate . The master cooper was John Williamson citizen of London , living in the year 1592 , and dwelling in Sant Dunstons parish in the East . The M . Gunner was John Godfrey of Bristol . In this ship were 6 gunners and 4 trumpeters , all which foure trumpeters at our return homeward went on land at Messina in the Hand of Sicilia , as our ship road there at anchor , & got them into the Galleys that lay near unto us , & in them went to Room . The whole number of our company in this ship were about 100 . men , we were also furnished with a great boat , which was able to carry 10 tons of water , which at our return homeward we towed all the way from Chio 68 until we came through the straight of Gibraltar into the main Ocean . We had also a great long boat and a skiff . We were out upon this voyage eleven months , yet in all this time there died of sickness but one man , whose name was George Forest , being servant to our Carpenter called Thomas Plummer . In a great lygier book of one William Eyms , servant unto Sir William Bowyer Aiderman of London , bearing date the 15 of November 1533 , and continued until the 4 of July 1544 . I find that he the said William Eyms was factor in Chio , not only for his Master , but also for the duke of Norfolkes grace , & for many other worshipful merchants of London , among whom I find the accounts of these especially , to wit , of his said Master , sir William Bowyer , of William & Nicholas Wilford Merchant - tailors of London , of Thomas Curtis pewterer , of John Starky Mercer , of William Ostrige Merchant , & of Richard Field Draper . And further I find in the said ligier book , a note of the said Eyms , of all such goods as he left in the hands of Robert buy in Chio , who became his Master ' s factor in his room , and another like note of particulars of goods that he left in the hands of Oliver Lesson , servant to William and Nicholas Wilford . And for proof of the continuance of this trade until the end of the year 1552 . I found annexed unto the former note of the goods left with Robert buy in Chio , a letter being dated the 27 of November 1552 in London .