our trade thither was the only cause why the Christian rulers were displaced : for when they paid not their yearly tribute , they were put out by force . Touching the ship that must go , she must observe this order , she must be a ship of countenance , and she must not touch in any part of Spaine , for the times are dangerous , nor take in any lading there : but she must lade in England , either goods of our own , or else of strangers , and go to Genoa or Legorno , where we may be well entreated , and from thence she must make her money to buy wines , by ex - 116 change to Candia , for there both custom & exchange are reasonable : and not do as the Math . Gonson & other ships did in time past , who made sale of their [ II i . 117 . ] wares at Messina for the lading of their wines , and paid for turning their white money into gold after foure and five in the hundreth , and also did hazard the loss of ship and goods by carrying away their money . Thus by the aforesaid course we shall trade quietly , and not be subject to these dangers . Also from Legorno Store ° f h ™ ? 5 to Castilla de la mar , which is but 16 miles from Naples , j * Fas ~ and the ready way to Candia , you may lade hoops , mare for which will cost carolins of Naples 27 and a half the Candia . thousand , which is ducats two and a half of Spaine . And in Candia for every thousand of hoops you shall have a but of Malmesey clear of all charges . Insomuch that a ship of the burden of the Mathew Gonson will carry foure hundreth thousand hoops , so that one thousand ducats will lade her , and this is and usual trade to Candia , as M . Michael Lock can testify . Furthermore , it is not unknown to you , that the oils which we do spend in England for our cloth , are brought out of Spaine , and that very deer , and in England we cannot fell them under 28 pound and 30 pound the tun : I say we may have good oil , and better cheap in diverse places within the straights . Wherefore if you think good to take this voyage in hand , I will inform you more particularly when you please . In the mean time I rest your worships to command . Yours at your pleasure Jasper Campion .