To the worshipful M . William Winter . TO may please your worship to understand , that as concerning the voyage to Chio , what great profit would be got , both for merchants , and also for owners of ships ( as it was well known in those days when the Matthew Gonson , the Trinitie Fitzwilliams , and the Saviour of Bristow , with diverse other ships which traded thither yearly , and made their voyage in ten or twelve months , and the longest in a year ) M . Francis Lambert , M . John Brook , and M . Drauer can truly inform you hereof at large . And by reason that we have not traded into those parts these many years , and the Turke is grown mighty , whereby our ships do not trade as ir5 Gaspar Campion married - in Chio 24 years . they were wont , I find that the Venetians do bring those commodities hither , and do fell them for double the valve that we our selves were accustomed to fetch them . Wherefore , as I am informed by the above nam men , that there is none so fit to furnish this voyage as your self : my request is that there may be a ship of convenient burden prepared for this voyage , and then I will satisfy you at large what is to be done therein . And because the Turke , as I said before , is waxed strong , and hath put out the Christian rulers , and placed his own subject ' s , we may doubt whither we may so peaceably trade thither as we were wont : therefore I dare undertake to obtain a safeconduct , if my charges may be born to go and come . Of the way how this may be done , M . Lock can satisfy you at large . Moreover , I can inform you more of the trade of that country , then any other , for that I have , be in those parts these thirty years , and have be married in the very town of Chio full foure and twenty years . Furthermore , when one of our ships comes thither , they bring at the least sixe or eight thousand carsies , so that the custom thereof is profitable for the prince , and the return of them is profitable to the common people : for in barter of our wares , we took the commodities which the poor of that town made in their houses : so that one of our ships brought the prince and country more gains then sixe ships of other nations . The want of this