The renewing and increasing of and ancient and commodious trade unto diverse places in the Levant seas , and to the chiefest parts of all the great Turks dominions , by the means of the Right worsh . citizens Sir Edward Osburne Aiderman , and M . Richard Staper merchant of London . His trade into the Levant ( as is before mentioned , page 96 of this present volume , whereunto I refer the Reader ) was very usual and much frequented from the year of our Lord 1511 , till the year 1534 , and afterwards also , though not so commonly , 167 The voyage of John Wight , and Joseph Clements to Constantinople . The first voyage of M . William Har - borne to Constantinople . until the year 1550 , when as the bark Aucher under the conduct of M . Roger Bodenham made a prosperous voyage unto Sicilia , Candia , Sio , and other places within the Levant . Since which time the foresaid trade ( notwithstanding the Grand Signiors ample privilege granted to M . Anthony Jenkenson 1553 , and the strong and weighty reasons of Gaspar Campion for that purpose ) was utterly discontinued , and in manner quite forgotten , as if it had never be , for the space of 20 years and more . Howbeit the discreet and worthy citizens Sir Edward Osborne and M . Richard Staper seriously considering what benefit might grow to the common wealth by renewing of the foresaid discontinued trade , to the enlarging of her Majesties customs , the furthering of navigation , the venting of diverse general commodities of this Realm , and the enriching of the city of London , determined to use some effectual ! means for the reestablishing and augmenting thereof . Wherefore about the year 1575 the foresaid R . W . merchants at their charges and expenses sent John Wight and Joseph Clements by the way of Poland to Constantinople , where the said Joseph remained 18 months to procure a safe conduct from the grand Signior , for M . William Harborne , then factor for Sir Edward Osborne , to have free access into his Highness dominions , and obtained the same . Which business after two years chargeable travel and suit being accomplished , the said M . Harborne the first of July 1578 departed from London by the sea to Hamburgh , and thence accompanied with Joseph Clements his guide and a servant , he travailed to Leopolis in Poland , and then appareling himself , his guide , and his servant after the Turkish fashion ( having first obtained the king of Poland his safe conduct to pass at Camienijecz the frontier town of his dominions next unto Turky ) by good means he obtained favour of one Acmet Chaus the Turks ambassador then in Poland , and ready to return to Constantinople , to be received into his come - 168 panie and carovan . And so the fourth of September 1578 he departed with the said Acmet from Leopolis in Poland , and traveling through Moldavia , Valachia , Bulgaria , and Romania , gratifying the Voiavodes with certain courtesies , he arrived at Constantinople the 28 of October next ensuing . Where he behaved himself so wisely and discreetly , that within few months after he obtained not only the great Turkes large and ample privilege for himself , and the two worshipful persons aforesaid , but also procured his honourable and friendly letters unto her Majesty in manner following .