made answer moreover , that no part of it was plowed or laboured , saving only that mountain which was towards the West , and that because they were little troubled with the cruelty of the Turkes , but as for the plain and East part of the Island , there was small seed sown therein , but became in a manner desert , there being left but few inhabitants , and less store of cattle there . Afterwards we departing from thence arrived in * Candia , I for my part being clothed in sackcloth , whereas soon after by the great courtesy of the right honourable Signior Latino Orsino , I was new appareled accordingly , friendly welcomed , and my necessity relieved . From whence I shortly after sailing in a Cypriottes ship ( thanks be to almighty God ) arrived in this City in Health , and am safely come home now at the honourable feet of your highness . The Captains of the Christians slain in Famagusta . THe lord Estor Baglione . The lord Aluigi Martinengo . The lord Federico Baglione . The knight of Asta Vicegovernor . The capitaine David Noce Master of the Camp . The capitaine Meani of Perugia Sergeant Major . The earl Sigismond of Casoldo . The earl Francesco of Lobi of Cremona . The captain Francesco Troncavilla . The captain Hannibal Adamo of Fermo . The captain Scipio of the city of Castello . The captain Charles Ragonasco of Cremona . The captain Francesco Siraco . The captain Roberto Malvezzo . The captain Caesar of Adversa . The captain Bernardin of Agubio . The captain Francesco Bugon of Verona . The captain James of Fabiano . 150 The captain Sebastian deal Sole of Florence . The captain Hector of Brescia , the successor to the captain Caesar of Adversa . The captain Flaminio of Florence , successor unto Sebastian deal Sole . The captain Erasmus of Fermo , successor to the captain of Cernole . The captain Bartholomew of Cernole . The captain John Battista of Rivarole . The captain John Francesco of Venice . The names of Christians made slaves . THe Earl Herocles Martinengo