The Queens Commission under her great seal , [ n . i . 157 . ] to her servant master William Hareborne , to be her majesties Ambassador or Agent , in the parts of Turkey . 1582 . 221 The same in English . ELizabeth , by the clemency of the most good and most great God , the only creator and governor of all things , Queen of England , France , and Ireland , invincible , and most mighty defender of the true faith , against all Idolaters falsely professing the name of Christ , to all and singular persons , to whose sighed and view these our present letters may come , greeting . Whereas the 222 COMMISSION TO WILLIAM HAREBORNE o . 1582 . most renowned , and most invincible Prince Zuldan Murad Can , the most mighty governor of the kingdom of Turkey , and Monarch of the East Empire , hath entered into league and friendship with us , ( which we for our part , as much as lies in us , do purpose solemnly , and inviolably to keep in all times to come ) and whereas for the better countenancing and authorizing of the same , the foresaid renowned Emperor hath granted unto our subject ' s free liberty of traffic , in all the parts of his sacred Empire , with as ample and large a grant of privileges , as is given to other good Princes our neighbours and confederates , the grant of which privileges , we taking very thankfully , and acceptably , are certainly , and thoroughly determined to keep and maintain , with the like goodness and courtesy of mind , desiring nothing more , then with and honourable respect to nourish , and deserve the benevolent affections of good Princes towards us : Know you , that we thinking well , and having good [ II i . 158 . ] confidence in the singular trustiness , obedience , wisdom , and disposition of our well - beloved servant William Hareborne , one of the Esquires of our body , towards us , and our service , do by these presents , make , ordain and constitute him our true and undoubted Orator , Messenger , Deputie , and Agent . Giving and granting unto him power and authority , in our name , and for us