unto other Princes our confederates , privileges , and Imperiali decrees , concerning our most inviolable league with them , so it would please our Imperial Majesty to grant and confirm the like privileges , and princely decrees to the aforesaid Queen . Wherefore according to our humanity and gracious ingrafted disposition , the requests of her Majesty were accepted of us , and we have granted unto her Majesty this privilege of ours agreeable to reason & equity . And we straightly command all our Beglerbegs , and Zanziacbegs our servants , and our Reyz , that is to say , our Judges , and all our customers in all places , havens and passages , that as long as this league and amity with the conditions , and articles thereof , are kept and observed on the behalf of the aforesaid Queen . 1 Our Imperiali commandment and pleasure is , that the people and subject ' s of the same Queen , may safely and securely come to our princely dominions , with their goods and merchandise , and ladings , and other commodities by sea , in great and small vessels , and by land with their carriages 185 and cattles , and that no man shall hurt them , but they may buy and fell without any hindrance , and observe the customs and order of their own country . [ II i . 144 . ] 2 Item , if the aforesaid people and merchants shall at any time in the course of their journeis and dealings by any means taken , they shall be delivered and enlarged , without any excuse or cavillation . 3 Item , if their ships purpose to arrive in any of our ports and havens , it shall lawful for them so to do in peace , and from thence again to depart , without any let or impediment . 4 Item , if it shall happen that any of their ships in tempestuous weather shall be in danger of loss and perishing , and thereupon shall stand in need of our help , we will , and command that our men and ships be ready to help and succour them . 5 Item , if they shall willing to buy any victuals for their money , no person shall withstand them , but they shall buy the same without any disturbance to the contrary . 6 Item ,