right and equity , might no less be condemned . That therefore considered , which of our parts is ordained in this cause which may be to the good liking of your highness , we are most especially to request of your Imperiali Majesty , that through the default and disorder of a sort of evil and wicked disposed persons , you will not withdraw your gracious favour from us , neither to hinder thee traffic of our Subject ' s , which by virtue of your highness sufferance , and power of your licence are permitted to trade into your dominions & countries ' , or that either in their persons or goods they be prejudiced in their traveling by land or by water , promising unto your greatness most faithfully , that the goods whereof your subject ' s by great wrong and violence have be spoiled , shall wholly again be restored , if either by the lives or possessions of the robbers it may any way be brought to pass : And that hereafter ( as now being taught by this [ II i . 14 . 6 . ] evil example ) we will have speciali care that none under the title of our authority shall be suffered to commit any the like wrongs or injuries . Neither they which have committed these evil parts had any power under your highness safeconduct granted unto our subject ' s , but from some other safeconduct , whither it were true or feigned , we know not , or whither they bought it of any person within the government of Marseils : but under the colour thereof they have done that , which the truth of our dealing doth utterly abhor . Notwithstanding howsoever it be , we will surely measure their evil proceedings with most sharp and just correction , and that it shall repent them of the impeachment of our honours , as also it shall and example of our indignation , that others may dread at all times to commit the like offence . Wherefore that our amity might be continued , as if this unfortunate hap had never chanced , and that the singular affection of our Subject ' s towards your Imperiali Majesty vowed , and daily more and more desired , might be conserved and defended , we thereunto do make our humble suit unto your greatness : And for so great goodness towards us and our people granted , do most humbly pray unto the Almighty creator of heaven and earth , ever to maintain and keep your most renowned Majesty in all happiness and prosperity . Dated at our palace of Greenewich the 26 . of June , Anno 1581 .