A brief Remembrance of things to be endeavoured at Constantinople , and in other places in Turkey , touching our Clothing and our Dying , and things that be incident to the same , and touching ample vent of our natural commodities , & of the labour of our poor people withal , and of the generail enriching of this Realm : drawn by M . Richard Hakluyt of the middle Temple , and given to a friend that was sent into Turkey 1582 . Nile wherewith we colour Blew to be brought into this realm by seed or root . 2 And the Art of compounding of the same . 3 And also all other herbs used in dying in like manner to be brought in . 4 And all Trees , whose Leaves , Seeds , or Barks , or Wood do serve to that use , to be brought into this realm by Seed or Root . 5 All little Plants and Busks serving to that use to be brought in . 6 To learn to know all earth ' s and minerals foreign used in dying , and their natural places , for possible the like may here be found upon sighed . 229 7 Also with the materials used in dying , to bring in the excellende of the art of dying . 8 To procure from Muhaisira a city in . / Egypt to Constantinople , the seed of Sesamum the herb , and the same into this realm . Common trade is between Alexandria and Constantinople , and therefore you may easily procure the seeds . Of this seed much oil is made , and many mills set on work about the same in the said Muhaisira , and if this seed may prosper in England , infinite benefit to our Clothing trade may rise by the same . This city is situate upon Nilus the river , and thence this is brought to Venice and to diverse other Cities of Italie , and to Antwerpe . 9 To note all kinds of clothing in Turkey , and all degrees of their labour in the same . 10 To endeavour rather the vent of Kersies , then of other Clothes as a thing more beneficial to our people . 11 To endeavour the sale of such our clothes as be coloured with our own natural colours as much as you can , rather then such as be coloured with foreign colours . 12 To seek out a vent for our Bonettos , a cap made for Barbarie , for that the poor people may reap great profit by the trade . 13 To endeavour vent of knit Stocks made of Norwich yarn , & of other yarn , which brought to great trade , may turn our poor people to great benefit , beside the vent of the substance , of our colours , and of our diverse labour . 14 To endeavour a vent of our Saffron for the benefit of our poor people : for a large vent found , it sets many on work .