hurt , the Jew and M & ngfir a his goods shall make it good , so the Jew takes great ckrisAan ' care of the Christian and his goods that lies in his house , for fear of punishment . 271 And Englishman called Thomas Williams , which is M . John Tiptons man , lies about trade of merchandise in the street called The Soca of the Jewes . This is another officer . Other small customs you pay beside , which may be at two in the hundred : and fir Consullage you pay two in the hundred . [ II i . 177 . ] Notes concerning the trade in Alexandria . Lexandria in Egypt is a free port , and when a man comes within the castles , presently the Ermyn sends aboard to have one come and speak with him , to know what goods are aboard : and then he will set guards aboard the ship to see all the goods discharged . And then from the Ermine you go to the * buy , only for that he will inquire news of you , and so from thence to the Consuls house where you lie . The Venetians have a Consul themselves . But all other nations go to the French nations Consul , who will give you a chamber for your selves apart , if you will so have it . The customs inward of all commodities are ten in the hundred , & the custom is paid in wares also that you buy : for the same wares in barter you pay also ten in the hundred , at the lading of the wares . But if you fell for money , you pay no more custom but the ten aforesaid , and one and a half in the hundred , which is for the custom of the goods you lade for the said money , for more custom you pay not . But for all the money you bring thither , you pay nothing for the custom of the same . And if you fell your wares for money , and with the same money buy wares , you pay but two in the hundred for the custom thereof . And if you steal any custom , if it be taken , you pay double custom for that you steal . The weight of Alexandria is called Pois Forforeine , which is a kintal in that place , which makes at Marseils 109 . U . of Marseils weight , at 15 ounces the pound , which is 103 . lL of 16 . ounces to the li . There