A petition exhibited to the Viceroy for reforma - [ II i . 181 . ] cion of sundry injuries offered our nation in Morea , as also for sundry demands needful for the establishing of the traffic in those parts . Irst that our people may be freed of such wonted molestation , as the Janisers of Patrasso have always from time to time offered them , not regarding the kings commandments to the contrary . That they be removed and called away from thence , and none other remain in their place . 2 That where heretofore the kings commandments have been granted to ours , that no person whatsoever 283 shall forceably take from them any of their commodities , otherwise then paying them before the delivery thereof , for the same in ready money , at such price as they themselves will , and fell ordinarily to others , as also that no officer whatsoever , of the kings or any other , shall force them to buy any commodities of that country , otherwise then the needful , at their own will and pleasure , that the said commandments not heretofore obeyed may be renewed with such straight charge for the execution of the same , as is requisite for their due effect . 3 That whereas sundry exactions and oppressions be offered ours by such Byes , Sanjacbies , justices and Cadies , Janizaries , Capagies , and others , officers of the kings coming down into those parts , who finding there resident no other nation but only ours , will under the name of presents forceable take from them what they please : We do require to obvent these harms , it may be specified by a commandment from the king to which of such his officers , presents may be given , and their sundry value ' s , whereby both they and ours may rest contented , severely prohibiting in the said commandment , that they take no more then that appointed them , and that no other officers but those only specified in that commandment , do forcibly require of them any thing whatsoever . 4 That the Nadir and Customer of the port , having permitted our ship to lade , do not after demand of the merchants any other then the outward custom due to the king for the same goods . And being so laden , may by them and the Cadie with other their inferior officers be visited , requiring for the visiting no more then formerly they were accustomed to pay at their first coming . After which the said ship to depart at the Consuls pleasure , without any molestation of them , or any other officer whatsoever . 5 That Mahomet Chaus , sometime Nadir of Lepanto , and Azon Agon his substitute being with him may be severely punished to the example of others , for often 284 and unjustly molesting our nation , contrary to the kings commandment , which they disdainfully contemned , as also that the said Mahomet restore and pay unto ours thirtie for 300 sacks of currants now taken forcibly out of a bark , coming thither from the hither parts of Morea , to pay the king his custom , and that from hence forth , neither the said Mahomet , Azon Agon , nor any other officer or person whatsoever do hinder or trouble any of ours going thither or to any other place about their affairs . 6 That whereas certain Jewes of Lepanto owing money to our merchants for commodities sold them , have not hitherto satisfied them , notwithstanding ours had from the king a commandment for the recovery of the same debts , but fled and absented themselves out of the Town at the coming of the same , another more forcible commandment may be granted ours , that for nonpaiment , whatsoever may be found of theirs in goods , houses , vineyards , or any other thing , may be sold , and ours satisfied of their said debt , according to equity and reason .