The commandment obtained of the Grand Signior by her Majesties ambassador M . Will . Hareborne , for the quiet passing of her subject ' s to and from his dominions , sent in An . 1584 . to the Viceroys of Algier , Tunis & Tripolis in Barbary . To our Beglerbeg of Algier . E certify thee by this our commandment , that the right honourable Will . Hareborne ambassador to the Queens majesty of England hath signified unto us , that the ships of that country in their coming and returning to and from our Empire , on the one part of the Seas have the Spaniards , Florentines , Sicilians and Malteses , on the other part our countries committed to your charge : which abovesaid Christians will not quietly suffer their egress and regress , into , and out of our dominions , but do take and make the men captives , and forfeit the [ II i . 178 . ] ships and goods , as the last year the Malteses did one , which they took at Gerbi , and to that end do continually lie in wait for them to their destruction , whereupon they are constrained to stand to their defence at any such time as they might meet with them . Wherefore considering by this means they must stand upon their guard , when they shall see any galley afar off , whereby if meeting with any of your galleys and not knowing them , in their defence they do shoot at them , and yet after when they do certainly know them , do not shoot any more , but 275 require to pass peaceably on their voyage , which you would deny , saying , the peace is broken because you have shot at us , and so make prize of them contrary to our privileges , and against reason : for the preventing of which inconvenience the said ambassador hath required this our commandment . We therefore command thee , that upon sighed hereof thou do not permit any such matter in any sort whatsoever , but suffer the said Englishmen to pass in peace according to the tenor of our commandment given , without any disturbance or let by any means upon the way , although that meeting with thy galleys , and not knowing them afar off , they taking them for enemies should shoot at them , yet shall you not suffer them to hurt them therefore , but quietly to pass . Wherefore look thou that they may have right , according to our privilege given them , & finding any that absenteth himself , & will not obey this our commandment , presently certify us to our porch , that we may give order for his punishment , and with reverence give faithful credit to this our commandment , which having read , thou shalt again return it unto them that present it . From our palace in Constantinople , the 1 . of June , 1584 .