copy in English , which I send to the end you may be the better informed of my demand by this our Chaus Mahomet , with whom in all things you are to confer of matters expedient , for the honour of her majesties country , & the commodity , and liberty of poor captives , which if the Viceroy do well consider , according to his wisdom , as the grand Signior doth thereof , he shall well perceive it not only a great honour to his master as aforesaid , to continue this amity with her majesty , but chiefly to the whole estate of his kingdom exceeding profitable , which by this means shall be abundantly served with the chiefest commodities they want , with many other things of more importance to the grand Signior his contentation , not herein to be mentioned . For I know the Viceroys experienced wisdom can well consider thereof , in such sort as he will not deny to accomplish his master ' s commandment , & our earnest 279 The Inventory of our ships and goods sunk and taken by the galleys of Alger . request in so small a matter as this we require , whereof I expect no refusal ! : for thereby he shall increase his honour with the grand Signior , be in credit with her majesty , be void of trouble which hereafter by future suit against him may happen , and his galleys free of such doubtful issue as doth chance , fighting with our ships . Which , as it is well known to all the world , have so great hearts as never cowardly to yield to their enemies . And that therefore in that respect ( after the proverb , like esteem of their like ) they are the more of such a valiant prince as is their Viceroy and his courageous soldiers to be in all friendship cherished and better esteemed . If the captain Bassa had be returned from Capha , I would in like manner have procured his letters , which for that he is not , I doubt nothing but that the grand Signiors will suffice . Thus commending your self and these proceedings to the almighty his merciful direction , I bid you most heartily well to fare . From my mansion Rapamat nigh Pera , this 30 . of March 1585 .