Notes concerning the trade of Alger . He money that is coined in Alger is a piece of gold called Asiano , & Doublaes , and two Doubla ' s make and Asiano , but that for all things which Doubla there . The Asper there is not so good by half & more , as that in Constantinople ; for the Chekin of gold of 270 e Doubla is most used , be sold by Doublaes , is fiftie of their Aspers 1584 . the Turks made at Constantinople is at Alger worth and 150 . Aspers , and at Constantinople it is but 66 . Aspers . The pistolet and royals of plate are most currant there . The said pistolet goes for 130 . Aspers there : & the piece of 4 . royals goes for 40 . Aspers , but oftentimes is sold for more , as men need them to carry up into Turkey . Their Asianos and Doublaes are pieces of course gold , worth here but 40 . S . the ounce , so the same is currant in no place of Turkey out of the kingdom of Alger , neither the Aspers , for that they be less then others be , for they coin them in Alger . The custom to the king is inward 10 . per centum , The custom . to the Turke , to be paid of the commodi tie it self , or as it shall be rated . There is another custom to the Ermine , of one & and half per centum , which is to the Justice of the Christians : the goods for this custom are rated as they are for the kings custom . Having paid custom inward , you pay none outward for any commodity that you do lade , more then a reward to the gate keepers . The weight there is called a Cantare for fine wares , as The weights . metals refined , and spices etc . which is here 120 . lL subtle . Mettle not refined , as led , iron , and such gross wares , are sold by a great Cantare , which is half as big again : so it is 180 . IL subtle of ours here . The measure of corn is by a measure called a The measure . Curtia , which is about 4 . bushels of our measure , and corn is plentiful there and good cheap , except when there happeneth a very dry year . The surest lodging for a Christian there is in a The surest Jewes house : for if he have any