272 is another weight called Pois Gerrin , which is 150 . lL of Marseils weight , by which are sold all things to eat : but spice is sold by the former weight . - From Alexandria to Cairo is three days journey , , Cairo three but you must take a Janissarie with you : & to go ies j ^ wy up thither by water it is 8 . days journey . Royals or dria jand Spaine are currant money there , and are the best money you can carry . And 4 . royals are worth 13 . Medins , and 2 . Medins , are 3 . Aspers . Pistolets and crowns of France and Dollars will go , but of all Royals are best . Rice is not permitted to go out of the land , but is kept for a victuali . But with a present to the buy and Ermine some may pass . All sorts of spices be garbled after the bargain is made , and they be Moors which you deal withal , which be good people and not ill disposed . And after you be searched & have leave to pass , you must presently depart out of the port , and if you do not , they will search you again . And you must depart in the day , for in the night the castles will not suffer you to depart . The duty to the Consul is 2 . in the hundred , for his aid , and meat and drink and all . And the port of Alexandria is good when one is within it with good anchors and cables . Silver is better currant then gold in Alexandria , but both are good . Commonly the Caravans come thither in October from Mecca to Cairo , and from thence to Alexandria , where the merchant ' s be that buy the spices , and therefore the spices are brought most to Alexandria , where each Christian nation remains at the Consuls houses . Yet oftentimes the Christians go up to Cairo to buy drugs & other commodities there , as they see cause . And the commodities there vendible are all sorts of kersies , but the most part blews , and of clothes all colours except mingled colours and blacks . Pepper is usually sold for 24 . ducats the quintal , v 273 s Ginger for 14 . ducats . You must take canvas to make bags to put your commodity in from Alexandria , for there is none . There is also fine flax , and good store of Buff hides .