A commandment for Aleppo . WHen my letters shall come unto you , know that the Queen of England her Ambassador by supplication certified how that before this time we had given our commandment that the sum of 70 ducats , & other merchandise belonging to one William Barret in Aleppo , now dead , saying he was a Venetian , should be given to the Venetians . And if they did find that he was not a Venetian , my will was that they should send all his goods and merchandise to our port into my treasury . But because that man was and Englishman , the Ambassador required that the said goods might not be 290 diminished , but that they might be restored to one of their Englishmen . This business was signified unto us in the nine hundred ninety & fourth year of Mahomet , and in the month of May the io day . This business [ II - i . 184 . ] pertaineth to the Englishmen , who have in their hands our privilege , according to which privilege being in their hands let this matter be done . Against this privilege do nothing , ask nothing of them , but restore to every one his goods . And I command that when my commandment shall come unto you , you do according to it . And if it be according as the Ambassador certified , and that they have the privilege , peruse the same , look that nothing be committed against it and our league , and let none trouble them contrary to it , restore them their goods according to justice , and take heed diligently in this business : if another strange merchant be dead , and his goods and merchandise be taken , if he be neither Venetian , nor Englishman , let not his goods perish among you . Before this time one of our Chauses called Cerkes Mahomet chaus was sent with our commandment to send the money and merchandise of a dead merchant to our port , and hitherto no letters or news is come of this matter , for which you shall be punished . Wherefore beware , and if he that is dead be neither Venetian nor Englishman in verity , do not lose the goods of the said dead merchant , under the name of a Venetian or Englishman , do not to the discommodity of my treasury , for after it will be hard to recover it .