pound more then it was rated . For master Staper rated it but 1100 . li . and it is 1300 . pound , so that our part is 200 . pound . Beside such profit as it shall please God to send thereof : wherefore you shall do very well to speak to M . Staper for the account . And if you would content your self to travel for three or foure years , I would wish you to come hither or go to Cairo , if any go thither . For we doubt not if you had remained there but three or foure months , you would like so well of the place , that I think you would not desire to return again in three or foure years . And , if it should be my chance to remain in any place out of England , I would choose this before all other that I know . My reason is , the place is healthful and 454 LETTERS FROM JOHN NEWBERY a . d . 1583 . pleasant , and the gains very good , and no doubt the profit will be hereafter better , things being used in good order : for there should come in every ship the fourth part of her Cargason in money , which would help to put away our commodities at a very good price . Also to have two very good ships to come together , would do very well : for in so doing , the danger of the voyage might be accounted as little as from London to Antwerpe . Master Giles Porter and master Edmund Porter , went [ II i . 247 - ] from Tripolis in a small bark to Jaffa , the same day that we came from thence , which was the 14 day of this present , so that no doubt but long since they are in Jerusalem : God send them and us safe return e . At this instant I have received the account of M . Barret , and the rest of the rings , with two and twentie ducats , two medines in ready money . So there is nothing remaining in his hands but a few books , and with Thomas Bostocke I left certain small trifles , which I pray you demand . And so once again with my hearty commendations I commit you to the tuition of the almighty , who always preserve us . From Aleppo the 29 of May 1583 . Yours assured , John Newberie .