Another letter of the said M . Newberie , written to Master Leonard Poor of London , from Alepo . Right well - beloved , my very hearty commendations unto you , and the rest of my friends remembered . My last I sent you was the 25 . of February last , from Deal out of the Downs , after which time with contrary winds we remained upon our own coast , until the 11 . day of March , and then we set sail from March u . Falmouth , and the thirteenth day the wind came contrary with a very great storm , which continued eight days , and in this great storm we had some of our goods wet , but God be thanked no great hurt done . After which time we sailed with a fair wind within the Straights , and so remained at Sea , and anchored at no 453 Amber greese . Sope . Broken glass . place until our coming into the road of Tripolis in Syria , which was the last day of April . This was a very good passage . God make us thankful for it . The foureteenth day of this present we came from Tripolis , and the twentieth day arrived here in Alepo , and with the help of God to morrow or next day , we begin our voyage towards Babylon and Balsara , and so into India . Our friend Master Barret hath him commended to you , who hath sent you in the Emanuel a ball of Nutmegs for the small trifles you sent him , which I hope long since you have received . Also he hath by his letter certified you in what order he sold those things , whereof I can say nothing , because I have not seen the account thereof , neither have demanded it : for ever since our coming hither he hath be still busy about the dispatch of the ship , and our voyage , and I likewise in buying of things here to carry to Balsara , and the Indies . we have bought in currall for 1200 . and odd ducats , and amber for foure hundreth ducats , and some soap and broken glass , with all other small trifles , all which things I hope will serve very well for those places that we shall go unto . All the rest of the account of the Bark Reinolds was sent home in the Emanuel , which was 3600 . ducats , which is 200 .