firm land begin to come to Goa , and they come from all parts , as well from Balagvate , Bezenegar , as also from Sudalcan , and other places . The monson wherein the Moors of the firm land depart from Goa . They depart from Goa betwixt the 10 and 15 day of November . Note that by going for the North is meant the departing from Goa , for Chaul , Diu , Cambaia , Daman , Basaim , Ghassain , and other places unto Zindi : and by the South is understood , departing from Goa , for Cochin , and all that coast unto Cape Comori . The first monson from Goa for Ormus . The ships depart in the month of October from Goa , for Ormus , passing with Easterly winds along the coast of Persia . The second monson from Goa to Ormus . The ships depart about the 20 of Januarie passing by the like navigation and winds as in the first monson , and this is called of the Portugals and Indians Entre - monson . The third monson from Goa to Ormus . The ships depart betwixt the 25 of March , and 6 of Aprill , having Easterly winds , till they pass Secutra , and then they find Westerly winds , and therefore they set their course over for the coast of Arabia , till they come to Cape Rasalgate and the Straight of Ormus , and this monson is most troublesome of all : for they make [ II i . 279 . ] two navigations in the heighth of Seylan , which is 6 degrees and somewhat lower . The first monson from Ormus for Chaul and Goa . The ships depart from Ormus for Chaul , and Goa in the month of September , with North and Northeast winds . The second monson from Ormus for Chaul and Goa . The second monson is betwixt the five and twentie and last of December , with like winds as the former monson . The third monson from Ormus for Chaul , and Goa . The third monson the ships depart from Ormus , for Chaul and Goa , betwixt the first and 15 of April , and they sail with Southeast winds , East and Northeast winds , coasting upon the Arabia side from Cape Mos - andon unto Cape Rasalgate , and having lost the sighed of Cape Rasalgate