The voyage passed by sea into Aegypt , by John [ II i . 281 . ] Evesham Gentleman . Anno 1586 . He 5 of December 1586 we departed from Gravesend in the Tiger of London , wherein was Master under God for the voyage Robert Rickman , and the 21 . day at night we came to the Isle of Wight : departing from thence in the morning following we had a fair wind , so that on the 27 day we came in sighed of the rock of Lisbone , and so sailing along we came in sighed of the South Cape , the 29 of the same , and on the morrow with a Westerly wind we entered the straights : and the second of January being as high as Cape de Gate , we departed from our fleet towards Argier . And the 4 day we arrived at the port of Argier aforesaid , where we stayed till the first of March . At which time we set sail towards a place called Tunis , to the Eastward of Argier 100 leagues , where we arrived the 8 of the same . This Tunis is a Tunis . small city up 12 miles from the sea , and at the port or road where shipping doe ride , is a castle or fort called Goletta , sometime in the hands of the Christians , but now of the Turkes : at which place we remained till the third of Aprill : at which time we set sail towards Alexandria , and having sometime fair winds , sometime contrary , we passed on the 12 day between Sicilia and Malta ( where near adjoining hath been the fort and hold of the knights of the Rhodes ) and so the 19 day we fell with the Isle of Candy , and from thence to Alexandria , where we arrived the 27 of April , and there continued till the 5 of October . The said city of Alexandria is and old thing decayed or The descrip - ruinated , having be a fair and great city near two fan ofAlex - miles in length , being all vaunted underneath for provision andria . of fresh water , which water comes thither but once every year , out of one of the foure rivers of paradise ( as it is termed ) called Nilus , which in September flows near eighteene foot upright higher then his accustomed manner ,