The monsons of the Portingall ships for the Indies . The ships which come from Portugall depart thence ordinarily betwixt the tenth & fifteenth of March , coming the straight way during the month of July to the coast of Melinde , and Mosambique , and from Note . thence go straight for Goa , and if in the month of July they should not be at the coast of Melinde , they can in no wise that year fetch Melinde , but return to the Isle of Saint Helena , and so are not able , that time being passed , to fetch the coast of India , and to come straight for Goa . Therefore ( as is abovesaid ) they return to the Island of Saint Helena , and if they cannot make the said Island , then they run as lost upon the coast of Guinea : but if the said ships be arrived in time upon the coast of Melinde , they set forwards for Goa , and if by the fifteenth of September they cannot fetch Goa , they then go for Cochin , but if they see they cannot fetch Cochin , they return to Mosambique to winter there upon the said coast . Albeit in the year Note . of our Lord 1580 there arrived the ship called San Lorenzo , being wonderful soar sea - beaten , the eight of October , which was accounted as a miracle for that the like had not be seen before . The monson from India for Portugall . The ships depart from Cochin between the fifteenth and last of January , going on till they have sighed of Capo de buona speranza , and the Isle of Saint Helena , which Island is about the midway , being in sixteene degrees to the South . And it is a little Island being fruitful of all things which a man can imagine , with great store of fruit : and this Island is a great succour to the shipping which return for Portugall . And not long since the said Island was found by the Portugales , and was discovered by a ship that came from the Indies in a great storm , in which they found such abundance of wild beasts , and boars , and all sort of vi 33 c fruit , that by means thereof that poor ship which had been foure months at sea , refreshed themselves both with water and meat very well , and this Island they called S . Helena , because it was discovered upon S . Helens day . And undoubtedly this Island is a great succour , and so great and aid to the ships of Portugal ! , that many would surely perish if that help wanted " And therefore the king of Portugall caused a Church to be made there for devotion of S . Helena : where there are only resident Eremits , and all other are forbidden to inhabit there by the kings commandment , to the end that the ships may be the more sufficiently furnished with victuals , because the ships which come Note , from India come but slenderly victualed , because there grows no corn there , neither make they any wine : but the ships which come from Portugall to the Indies touch not in the said Island , because they set out being sufficiently furnished with bred and water from Portugall for eight months voyage . Any other people then the two Eremites abovesaid , cannot inhabit this Island , except some sick man that may be set there a shore to remain in the Eremites company , for his help and recovery . The monson from Goa to Mosambique . The ships depart betwixt the 10 and 15 of Januarie . The monson from Mosambique to Goa . The ships depart between the 8 and last of August , and arrive in Chaul or Goa in the month of October , till the 15 of November . The monson from Ormus to Bengala . The ships depart betwixt the 15 and 20 of June , and go to winter at Teve and depart thence about the 15 of August for Bengala .