s of the said Galleys , three hundred , at seven aspers , foure thousand , five hundred , fourescore and nineteene pounds . The Getti , Boatswain thereof , three hundred , at sixe aspers , is three thousande , nine hundred , fourty and two pounds . The Oda Bassi , Pursers , three hundred , at five aspers , makes three thousand , two hundred , and fourescore pounds . The Azappi soldiers two thousand sixe hundred at foure Aspers , whereof the six hundred do continually keep the galleys , two and twentie thousand , seven hundred fourscore and six pounds . The Mariers Bassi master ' s over the shipwrights and kalkers of the navy , nine , at 20 . Aspers the piece , amounteth to three thousand fourescore and foure pound , foure shillings . The Master Dassi shipwrights & kalkers , one thousand at fourteene aspers , which amounteth by the year , to thirtie thousand , sixe hundred threescore pound . Summa totalis of daily payments amounteth by the year sterling , one million , nine hundred threescore eight thousand , seven hundred thirty five pounds , nineteene shillings eight pence , answered quarterly without default , with the sum of foure hundred fourescore twelve thousand , one hundred fourescore and foure pounds foure shillings eleven pence , and is for every day five thousand three hundred fourescore and thirteene pounds , fifteene shillings ten pence . Annuities of lands never improved , five times more in valve then their sums mentioned , given by the said Grand Signior , as follows . TO the Viceroy for his Timar or annuity 60 . thousand gold ducats . To the second Bassa for his annuity 50 . thousand ducats . To the third Bassa for his annuity 40 . thousand ducats . To the fourth Bassa for his annuity 30 . thousand ducats . To the fifth Bassa for his annuity 20 . thousand ducats . To the Captain of the Janizaries 20 . thousand ducats . To the Jeu Merhorbassi master of his horse 15 . thousand ducats . To the Captain of the pensioners 10 . thousand ducats . To the Captain of his guard 5 . thousand ducats . Summa totalis 90 . thousand li . sterling . Beside these above specified , be