sundry other annuities given to diverse others of his aforesaid officers , as also to certain called Sahims , diminishing from three thousand to two hundreth ducats , esteemed triple to surmount the annuity abovesaid . The Turkes chief officers . THe Viceroy is high Treasurer , notwithstanding that under him be three subtreasurers called Teftadars , which be accountable to him of the receipts out of vi 65 E Europe , Asia and Africa , save their yearly annuity of lands . The Lord Chancellor is called Nissangi Bassa , who sealeth with a certain proper character such licences , safe conducts , passports , especial grants , etc . as proceed from the Grand Signior : notwithstanding all letters to foreign princes so firmed be after enclosed in a bag , and sealed by the Grand Signior , with a signet which he ordinarily weareth about his neck , credited of them to have be of ancient aPPERTAINING to king Salomon the wise . The Admiral gives his voice in the election of all Begs , Captains of Islands , to whom he gives their charge , as also appoints the Subbassas , Bailiffs or Constables over Cities and Towns upon the Sea coasts about Constantinople , and in the Archipelago , whereof he reapeth great profit . The Subbassi of Pera payeth him yearly fifteene thousande ducats , and so likewise either of the others according as they are placed . The Ressistop serves in office to the Viceroy and Chancellor , as Secretary , and so likewise doth the Cogie Master of the Rolls , before which two , pass all writings presented to , or granted by the said Viceroy and Chancellor , offices of especial credit and like profit , moreover rewarded with annuities of lands . There are also two chief Judges nam Cadi Lesker , the one over Europe , and the other over Asia and Africa , which in Court do fit on the Bench at the left hand of the Bassas . These fell all offices to the under Judges of the land called Cadies , whereof is one in every City or town , before whom all matters in controversy are by judgement decided , as also penalties and corrections for crimes ordained to be executed upon the offenders by the Subbassi .