The number of Soldiers continually attending upon the Beglerbegs the governors of Provinces and Sanjacks , and their petie Captains maintained of these Provinces . The Beglerbegs of GRaecia , fourtie thousand Buda , fifteene thousand Sclavonia , fifteene thousand Natolia , fifteene thousand Caramania , fifteene thousand Armenia , eighteene thousand Persia , twentie thousand Usdrum , fifteene thousand Chirusta , fifteene thousand Caraemiti , thirtie thousand Giersul , two and thirtie thousand ■ persons . The Beglerbegs of BAgdat , five and twentie thousand ‘ Balsara , two and twenty thousand Lassaija , seventeene thousand Alepo , five and twentie thousand Damasco , seventeene thousand Cayro , twelve thousand Abes , twelve thousand " persons . Mecca , eight thousand Cyprus , eighteene thousand Tunis in Barbary , eight thousand Tripolis in Syria , eight thousand Alger , fourtie thousand Whose Sangjacks and petie Captains be three hundred sixtie eight , every of which retaining continually in pay from five hundreth to two hundreth Soldiers , may be one with another at the least , three hundreth thousand persons . [ Chief officers Chief officers in his Seraglio about his person . CApiaga , High porter . Alnader Bassi , Treasurer . Oda Bassi , Chamberlaine . Killergie Bassi , Steward . Be these Comptroller . ne tnese peskeroien ) Groom of the chamber . Edostoglan , Gentleman of the Ewer . Sehetaraga , Armour bearer . Choataraga , he that carrieth his riding cloak . Ebietaraga , Groom of the stool . There be many other manner Officers , which I esteem superfluous to write . The Turkes yearly revenue . THe Grand Signiors annual revenue is said to be fourteen Millions and and half of golden ducats , which is sterling five millions , eight score thousand pounds . The tribute paid by the Christians his Subjects is one gold ducat yearly for the redemption of every head , which may amount unto not so little as one Million of golden ducats , which is sterling three hundred threescore thousand pounds . Moreover , in time of war he exacteth manifold sums for maintenance of his Army and Navy of the said Christians . The Emperor payeth him yearly tribute for Hungary , threescore thousand dollars , which is sterling thirteene thousand pound , beside presents to the Viceroy and Bassas , which are said to surmount to twentie thousand dollars . [ it . i . 294 . ] Ambassadors Allowances . THe Ambassador of the Emperor is allowed one thousand Aspers the day . The Ambassador of the French king heretofore enjoyed the like : but of late years by means of 68 displeasure conceived by Mahumet then Viceroy , it was reduced to sixe crowns the day , beside the provision of his Esquire of his stable . The Ambassadors of Poland , and for the state of Venice are not Ligiers as these two abovesaid . The said Polack is allowed 12 . French crowns the day during his abided , which may be for a month . Very seidome do the state of Venice send any Ambassador otherwise , then inforced of urgent necessity : but in stead thereof keep their Agent , president over other Merchants , of them termed a bailiff , who hath none allowance of the Grand Signior , although his port & state is in manner as magnifical as the other aforesaid ambassadors . The Spanish Ambassador was equal with others in Janizaries : but for so much as he would not according to custom follow the list of other ambassadors in making presents to you Grand Signior , he had none allowance . His abided there was 3 . years , at the end whereof , having concluded a truce for 6 . years , taking place from his first coming in November last passed 1580 . he was not admitted to the presence of the Grand Signior .