The voyage of Macham and English man , wherein [ II ii . i . ] he first of any man discovered the Hand of Madera , recorded verbatim in the Portugall history , written by Antonio Galvano . N the year 1344 , King Peter the fourth of that name reigning in Aragon , the Chronicles of his age write that about this time the Hand of Madera , standing in 32 degrees , was discovered by and English man , which was nam Macham , who sailing out of England into Spaine , with a woman that he had stolen , arrived by tempest in that Hand , and did cast anchor in that haven or bay , which now is called Machico after the name of Macham . Madera first discovered by one Macham and Englishman And because his lover was seasick , he went on land with some of his company , and the ship with a good wind made sail away , and the woman died for thought . Macham made Macham , which loved her dearly , built a chapel , or hermitage , to bury her in , calling it by the name of Jesus chapel . Jesus , and caused his name and hers to be written or graved upon the stone of her tomb , and the occasion of their arrival there . And afterwards he ordained a boat made of one tree ( for there be trees of a great compass about ) and went to sea in it , with those men that he had , and were left behind with him , and came upon the coast of Afrike , without sail or oar . And the Moors which saw it took it to be a marvellous thing , and presented him unto the king of that country for a wonder , and that king also sent him and his companions for a miracle unto the king of Castile . In the year 1395 , King Henry the third of that name reigning in Castile , the information which Macham gave of this Hand , and also the ship of his company , moved many of France and Castile to go and discover it , and also the great Canaria , etc . In the year 1417 , King John the second reigning in Castile , and his mother Lady Katherine being Regent , one Monsieur Ruben of Bracamont , which was Admiral of France , demanding the conquest of the Hands of the Canaries , with the title of King , for a kinsman of his nam Monsieur John Betancourt , after that the Queen hath given him them , and helped him , he departed from Sivil with a good army . And they affirm also , that the principali cause which moved him to this , was to discover the Hand of Madera , which Macham had found , etc . ibidem page . 2 . of Anthonio Galvano .