The return of Master William Harborne from Constantinople over land to London , 1588 . Departed from Constantinople with 30 . persons of my suit and family the 3 . of August . Passing through the Countries of Thracia , now called Romania the great , Valachia & Moldavia , where arriving the 5 . of September I was according to the Grand Signior his commandment very courteously entertained by Peter his positive prince , a Greek by profession , with whom was concluded that her Majesties subject ' s there trafficking should pay but three upon the hundreth , which as well his own Subject ' s The letters of as all other nations answer : whose letters to her Majes - the Prince of tje be extant . Whence I proceeded into Poland , where ^ riie ^ Queene Chanceler sent for me the 27 . of the same Letters of the month . And after most honourable entertainment Chancellor of imparted with me in secret manner the late passed and Poland to the present occurrents of that kingdom , & also he writ to l ^ ueene . MajeStie . Thence I hasted unto Elbing , where the 12 . of October I was most friendly welcomed by the Senate of that City , whom I find and judge to be faithfully devoted to her Majesties service , whose letters likewise unto the same were presented me . No less at Dantzik the 27 . of that month I was courteously received by one of the Buroughmasters accompanied with two others of the Senate , & a Civil doctor their Secretary . After going through the land of Pomer I rested one day at Stetin , where , for that you duke was absent , nothing ensued . At Rostoke I passed through the City without any stay , and at Wismar received like friendly greeting as in the other places : but at Lubeck , for that I came late and departed early in the morning , I was not visited . At Hamburg the 19 . of November , and at Stoad the ninth of December in like manner I was saluted by a Boroughmaster and the Secretary , and in all these places they presented me PRINCE OF MOLDAVIA ’ S PRIVILEGE a . d . 1588 . sundry sorts of their best wine and fresh fish , every of them with a long discourse , congratulating , in the names of their whole Senate , her Majesties victory over the Spaniard , and my safe return , concluding with offer of their ready service to her future disposing . Yet the Dantziks after my departure thence caused the Merchants to pay custom for the goods they brought with them in my company , which none other town neither Infidels nor Christians on the way ever demanded . And notwithstanding the premises , I was most certainly informed of sundry of our nation there resident that most of the [ II i . 290 . ] Hanse - towns upon the sea coasts , especially Dantzik , Lubeck , and Hamborough have laden and were shipping for Spaine , great provision of corn , cables , ropes , powder , saltpeter , hargubusses , armour , iron , lead , copper , and all other munition serving for the war . Whereupon I gather their feigned courtesy proceeded rather for fear then of any good affection unto her Majesties service , Elbing and Stoad only excepted , which of duty for their commodity I esteemed well affected .