most gracious and most glorious , the wisest among women , and chosen among those which triumph under the standard of Jesus Christ , the most mighty and most rich governor , and most rare among womankind in the world , the most gracious Queen of England , which follow the steps of the virgin Marry , whose end be prosperous and perfect , according to your hearts desire . I send your Majesty so honourable and sweet a salutation of peace , that all the flock of Nightingales with their melody Cannot attain to you like , much less this simple letter of mine . The singular love which we have conceived one towards the other is like to a garden of pleasant birds : and the Lord God vouchsafe to save and keep you , and send your Majesty and happy end both in this world and in the world to come . After the arrival of your honourable presents from the Court of your Majesty , your Highness shall understand that they came in such a season that every minute ministered occasion of long consolation by reason of the coming of your Majesties Ambassador to the triumphant Court of the Emperor , to our so great contentment as we could possibly wish , who brought a letter from your Majesty , which with great honour was presented unto us by our eunuks , the paper whereof did smell most fragrantly of camfor and ambargriese , and the ink of perfect musk ; the contents whereof we have herd very attentively from point to point . I think it therefore expedient , that , according to our mutual affection , in any thing whatsoever may concern the countries ' which are subject to your Majesty , I never fail , having information given unto me , in whatsoever occasion shall be ministered , to gratify your Majesty to my power in any reasonable and convenient matter , that all your subject ' s businesses and affairs may have a wished and happy end . For I will always be a solicitor to the most mighty Emperor “ 7 This Sultana is mother to Mehemet which now reigneth as Emperor . A . D . * 594 - > 594 - for your Majesties affairs , that your Majesty at all times may be folly satisfied . Peace be to your Majesty , and to all such as follow rightly the way of God . Written the first day of the Moon of Rabie Livol in the year of the Prophet , 1002 .