, Master of his horse , one hundred and fiftie aspers the day , is sterling money , three hundred and eight and twenty pounds . The chief Esquire under him , one hundred and fiftie aspers , is three hundred and eight and twenty pounds . The Agas of the Spahi , Captains of the horsemen , sixe , at one hundred and fiftie aspers to either of them , makes sterling , one thousand , nine hundred , three score and eleven pounds . The Capagi Bassas head porters foure , one hundred and fiftie aspers to each , and makes out in sterling money by the year , one thousand , three hundred , and fourteen pounds . The Sisinghir Bassa , Controller of the household , one hundred and twentie aspers the day , and makes out in sterling money by the year , two hundred , threescore and two pounds , sixteene shillings . The Chaus Bassa , Captain of the Pensioners , one hundred and twentie aspers the day , and amounteth to by the year in sterling money , two hundred , threescore and two pounds , sixteene shillings . The Capigilar Caiasi , Captain of his Barge , one hundredth and twentie aspers the day , and makes out by the year in sterling money , two hundred , threescore and two pounds , sixteene shillings . The Solach Bassi , Captain of his guard , one hundred and twentie aspers , two hundred , three score and two pounds , sixteene shillings . The Giebrigi Bassi , master of the armoury , one hundred and twenty aspers , two hundred , three score and two pounds , sixteene shillings . The Topagi Bassi , Master of the artillery , one hundred and twentie aspers , two hundred , three score and two pounds , sixteene shillings . The Echim Bassi , Physician to his person , one hundred and twentie aspers , two hundred , three score and two pounds , sixteene shillings . To fourtie Physicians under him , to each fourtie aspers , is three thousand , eight hundred , three score and sixe pounds , sixteene shillings . The Mustafaracas spearmen , attending on his person , in number five hundred , to either three score aspers , and makes sterling , threescore