The second voyage to Barbary in the year 1552 . Set forth by the right worshipful Sir John Yorke , Sir William Gerard , Sir Thomas Wroth , Master Frances Lambert , Master Cole , and others ; Written by the relation of Master James Thomas then Page to Master Thomas Windham chief Captain of this voyage . He ships that went on this voyage were three , whereof two were of the River of Thames , That is to say , the Lion of London , whereof Master Thomas Windham was Captain and part owner , of about and hundred & fiftie tons : The other was the Buttolfe about fourescore tons , and a Portugall Caravel bought of certain Portu - gals in Newport in Wales , and freighted for this voyage , of sum sixtie tons . The number of men in the Fleet were and hundred and twentie . The Master of the Lion was one John Kerry of Mynhed in Somersetshire , his Mate was David Landman . The chief Captain of this small Fleet was Master Thomas Windham a Norffolke gentleman born , but dwelling at Marshfield - parke in Somerset shire . This Fleet departed out of King - rode near Bristoll about the beginning of May 1552 . being on a Munday in the morning : and the Munday fortnight next ensuing in the evening came to and anchor at their first port in the road of Zafia , or Asafi on the coast of Barbarie , standing in 32 . degrees of latitude , and there put on land part of our merchandise to be conveyed by land to the city of Marocco : which being done , and having refreshed our selves with victuals and water , we went to the second port called Santa Cruz , where we discharged the rest of our goods , being good quantity of linen and woollen cloth , corail , amber , Jet , and diverse other things well accepted by the Moors . In which road we found a French ship , which not knowing whither it were war or peace between England and France , drew her self as near under the town walls as she could possible , craving aid of the town for her defence , if need were , which in deed seeing us draw near , shot at us a piece from the walls , which came over the Lion our Admiral , between the main mast & her foremast . Whereupon we coming to and anchor , presently came a pins aboard us to know what we were , who understanding that we had be there the year before , & came with the good English leave of their king in merchant wise , were fully satisfied , and gave us good leave to bring our goods peaceably year before on shore , where the Viceroy , whose name was Sibill being xyfo . Manache , within short time after came to visit us , and used us with all courtesy . But by diverse occasions we spent here very near three months before we could get in our lading , which was Sugar , Dates