, Almonds , and Malassos or sugar Syrrope . And for all our being here in the heat of the Summer , yet none of our company perished by sickness . Our ships being laden , we drew into the Sea for a Western wind for England . But being at sea , a great leak fell upon the Lion , so that we were driven to Lancerota , and Forteventura , where , between the two Hands , we came to a road , whence we put on land out of our said ship 70 . chests of Sugar upon Lancerota , with some dozen or sixteene of our company , where the inhabitants supposing we had made a wrongful prize of our caravel , suddenly came with force upon our people , among whom I my self was one , took us prisoners , and spoiled the sugars : which thing being perceived from our ships , they manned [ II ii . 9 . ] out three boats , thinking to rescue us , and drave the Spaniards to flight , whereof they slew eighteene , and took their governor of the Hand prisoner , who was a very aged gentleman about 70 . years of age . But chasing the enemy so far , for our recovery , as powder and arrows wanted , the Spaniardes perceiving this , returned , and in our men ' s retire they slew sixe of them . 139 Then a parley grew , in the which it was agreed , that we the prisoners should be by them restored , and they receive their old governor , giving us a testimony under his and their hands , what damages we had there received , the which damages were here restored , and made good by the king of Spaine his merchants upon our return into England . After we had searched and mended our leak , being returned aboard , we came under sail , and as we were going to the sea on the one side of the Hand , the Cacafuego and other ships of the king of Portugals Armada entered at the other , and came to anchor in the road from whence we were but newly departed , and shot off their great ordinance in our hearing . And here by the way it is to be understood that the Portugals were much offended with this our new trade into Barbarie , and both in our voyage the year before , as also in this they gave out in England by their merchants , that if they took us in those parts , they would use us as their mortali enemies , with great threats and menaces . But by God and good providence we escaped their hands . From this Hand shaping our course for England , we were seven or eight weeks before we could reach the coast of England . The first port we entered into was the haven of Plymouth , from whence within short time we came into the Thames , and landed our merchandise at London , about the end of the month of October , 1552 .