The originali of the first voyage for traffic into the kingdom of Marocco in Barbarie , begun in the year 1551 . with a tall ship called the Lion of London , whereof went as captain Master Thomas Windam , as appears by this extract of a letter of James Aldaie , to the worshipful master Michael Lock , which Aldaie professes himself to have be the first inventer of this trade . lately bene ac - Orshipful Sir , having quainted with your intent to prosecute the old intermitted discovery for Catai , if therein with my knowledge , travel or industry I may do you service , I am ready to do it , and therein to adventure my life to the uttermost point . Truth it is , that I have be by some men ( not my friends ) evil spoken of at London , saying that although I be a man of knowledge in the Art of Navigation and Cosmography , and that I have be the inventer of some voyages that be now grown to great effect ; yet say they maliciously and without just cause , that I have not be willing at any season to proceed in those voyages that I have taken in hand , taking example especially of two voyages . The one was when I was master in the great Bark Aucher for the Levant , in which voyage I went not , but the causes they did not know of my let from the same , nor of the other . But first the very 136 truth is , that I was from the same voyage letted by the Princes letters , which my Master Sebastian Gabota had obtained for that purpose , to my great grief . And as touching the second voyage which I invented for the trade of Barbarie , the living God knoweth that I say most true , that when the great sweat was , ( whereon the chief of those with whom I joined in that voyage died , that is to say , Sir John Lutterell , John Fletcher , Henry Ostrich and others ) I my self was also taken with the same sweat in London , and after it , whither with evil diet in keeping , or how I know not , I was cast into such and extreme fever , as I was neither able to ride nor go : and the ship being at Portesmouth , Thomas Windam had her away from thence , before I was able to stand upon my legs , by whom I lost at that instant fourescore pound . Beside I was appointed by them that died ( if they had lived ) to have had the whole government both of ship and goods , because I was to them the sole inventer of that trade . In the first voyage to Barbary there were two Moors , being noble men , whereof one was of the Kings blood , conveyed by the said Master Thomas Windham into their Country out of England . Yours humble at your commandment , James Alday .