The success of this Voyage in part appears [ U . ii . 56 . ] by certain brief relations extracted out of the second voyage of Sir John Hawkins to the West Indies , made in the said year 1564 . which I thought good to set down for want of further instructions , which hitherto I could not by any means come by , albeit I have used all possible endeavour for the obtaining of the same : Take them therefore in the mean season as followeth . Aster John Hawkins , with the Jesus of Lubeck a ship of 700 . tons , and the Salomon , a ship of 7 score , the Tiger a bark of 50 , and the Swallow of 30 tons , being all well furnished with men to the number of one hundred threescore and ten , as also with ordi nance and victuali requisite for such a voyage , departed out of Plimmouth the 18 day of October in the year of our Lord 1564 . with a prosperous wind : at which departing , in cutting the foresail , a marvellous misfortune happened to one of the officers in the ship , who by the pully of the sheat was slain out of hand being a sorrowful beginning to them all . And after their setting out 10 leagues to the Sea , he met the same day with the Minion a ship of the Queen ' s Majesties , The Minion whereof was captain David Carlet , & also her consort Qu * ™ - the John Baptist of London being bound to Guinea likewise , who hailed one the other after the custom of the sea , with certain pieces of ordinance for joy of their meeting : which done , the Minion departed from him to seek her other consort the Merline of London , which was a stern out of sighed , leaving in M . Hawkins company the John Baptist her other consort . Thus sailing forward on their way with a prosperous wind until the 21 of the same month , at that time a 263 ne firing and sinking of the Merline bound fin - Guinea . great storm arose , the wind being at Northeast about 9 of the clock at night , and continued so 23 hours together , in which storm M . Hawkins lost the company of the John Baptist aforesaid , and of his pinnace called the Swallow , the other 3 ships being soar beaten with the storm . The 23 day the Swallow , to his not small rejoicing , came to him again in the night 10 leagues to the Northward of Cape Finister , having put roomer and not being able to double the Cape , in that there rose a contrary wind at Southwest . The 25 the wind continuing contrary , he put into a place in Galicia called Ferol , where he remained 5 days and appointed all the master ' s of his ships and order for the keeping of good company . The 26