The relation of one William Rutter to M . Anthony Hickman his master touching a voyage set out to Guinea in the year 1562 , by Sir William Gerard , Sir William Chester , M . Thomas Lodge , the said Antony Hickman , and Edward Castelin : which voyage is also written in verse by Robert Baker . Cape verde . Rio de Sestos . The Minion . Orshipfull sir , my duty remembered , this shall to declare unto you the discourse of this our voyage , since our departure out of England from Dartmouth ; at which time I gave you to understand of our departure , which was the 25 of February 1562 . Then having a prosper ous wind we departed from thence , and sailed on our voyage until we arrived at Cavo verde the 20 of March , making no abided there , but sailed along the coast to our first appointed port Rio de sestos , at which port we arrived the third of Aprill in the morning , having the sighed of a Frenchman , who assoon as he perceived us , set sail and made to the sea : in the mean time we came to and anchor in the road : and after that he had espied our flag , perceiving us to be Englishmen , he bore with the shore , & hailed our ships with his ordinance , at which time we the merchant ' s of both the ships were in the river in traffic , and had understanding of the Negroes that he had be there three days before our coming : so we concluded together , that if he sent his pinnace to traffic , we would not suffer him , until we had taken further order with their captain & merchants . In the afternoon the pinnace came into the river , whose men we willed to make no traffic until we had talked further with their captain , whom we willed that night to come aboard our admiral ; which was done . At which said time M . Burton and John Munt went aboard the Minion where the Frenchmen were , & there concluded that they 258 should tarry by us eight days , and suffer us quietly to traffic , wherewith they were not well pleased . Whereupon the next morning they departed from us , sailing alongst the coast to the Eastward towards Potis , which he did to hinder our traffic that way : wherefore the