The voyage of Thomas Stukeley , wrongfully called Marks of Ireland , into Barbary 1578 . Written by Johannes Thomas Freigius in Historia de caede Sebastiani Regis Lusitaniae . Enerant autem ad regem etiam sexcenti Itali , quos Papam subministrarat , Comiti Irlandiae : qui cum Vlissiponem tribus instructis navibus appulisset Regi operam suam condixit , eumque in bellum sequi promisit . Cap . 7 . Totum exercitum divisit in quatuor acies quadratas : In dextro later primum agmen erat Velitum & militum Tingitanorum , eosque ducebat Alvarus Peresius de Tavara : sinistram aciem seu mediam tenebant Germani & Itali , quibus imperabat Marchio Irlandiae , etc . Cap . 11 . Inter nobiles qui in hoc praelio ceciderunt , fuerunt , praeter regem Sebastianum , dux de Avero , Episcopi Conimbricensis & Portuensis , Commissarius generalis a Papam missus Marchio Irlandiae , Christophorus de Tavora , & plures alii . Cap . 13 . 293 A . D . 1578 . Thomas Stukeley was wrongfully endued with this title . [ II ii . 68 . ] The same in English . THere came also to DONE Sebastian the King of Portugal 600 . Italians , whom the Pope sent under the conduct of the * Marques of Irland : who being arrived at Lisbone with three tall ships , proffered his service to the king , and promised to attend upon him in the wars , etc . He divided the whole Army into 4 . squadrons : upon the right wing stood the first squadron , consisting of men lightly armed or skirmishers and of the soldiers of Tangier , general of whom was DONE Alvaro Perez de Tavara : the left or middle squadron consisted of Germane and Italians , under the command of the Marks of Irland , etc . cap . 7 . Of Noblemen were slain in this battle ( beside DONE Sebastian the king ) the duke de Avero , the two bishops of Coimbra & of Porto , the Marks of Irland sent by the Pope as his Commissary generail , Christopher de Tavara , and many others , cap . 13 . IT is further also to be remembered , that diverse other English gentlemen were in this battle , whereof the most part were slain ; and among others M . Christopher Lyster was taken captive , and was there long detained in miserable servitude . Which gentleman although at length he happily escaped the cruel hands of the Moors ; yet returning home into England , and for his manifold good parts being in the year 1586 . employed by the honourable the Earl of Cumberland , in a voyage intended by the Straights of Magellan for the South sea , as Viceadmiral , ( wherein he showed singular resolution and courage ) and appointed afterwards in diverse places of speciali command and credit , was last of all miserably drowned in a great and rich Spanish prize upon the coast of Cornwall .