The Ambassage of Master Henry Roberts , one of the sworn Esquires of her Majesties person , from her highness to Mully Hamet Emperor of Marocco and the King of Fesse , and Sus , in the year 1585 : who remained there as Liger for the space of 3 . years . Written briefly by himself . Pon and incorporation granted to the Company of Barbary Merchants resident in London , I Henry Roberts one of her Majesties sworn Esquires of her person , was appointed her highness messenger , and Agent unto the aforesaid Mully Hamet Emperor of Marocco , king of Fesse , and Sus . And after I had received my Commission , instructions , and her Majesties letters , I departed from London the 14 . of August in the year 1585 . in a tall ship called the Ascension , in the company of the Minion and Hopewell , and we all arrived in safety at Azafi a port of Barbary , the 14 . of September next following . The Alcaide of the town ( being the kings officer there , and as it were Mayor of the place ) received me with all humanity and honour , according to the custom of the Country , lodging me in the chiefest house of the town , from whence I dispatched a messenger ( which in their language they call a Trottero ) to advertise the Emperor of my arrival : who immediately gave order , and sent certain soldiers for my guard and conduct , and horses for my self , and mules for mine own and my companies carriages . Thus being accompanied with M . Richard Evans , Edward Salcot , and other English Merchants resident there in the Country , with my train of Moors and carriages , I came at length to the river of Tensist , which is within foure miles of Marocco : and there by the water side I pitched my tents under the Olive trees : where I met 426 with all the English Merchants by themselves , and the French and Flemish , and diverse other Christians , which attended my coming . And after we had dined , & spent out the heat of the day , about foure of the clock in the afternoon we all set forward towards the City of Marocco , where we arrived the said day , being the 14 . of September , and I was lodged by the Emperors appointment in a fair house in the Judaria or Jury , which is