The Spanish kings commission for the general [ II ii . 114 . ] imbargment or arrest of the English , etc . Licentiate de Escober , my Corigidor of my Signory of Biskay , I have caused a great fleet to be put in readiness in the haven of Lisbone , and the river of Sivill . There is required for the Soldiers , armour , victuals , and munition , that are to be employed in the same great store of shipping of all sorts against the time of service , and to the end there may be choice made of the best , upon knowledge of their burden and goodness ; I do therefore require you , that presently upon the arrival of this carrier , and with as much dissimulation as may be ( that the matter may not be known until it be put in execution ) you take order for the staying and arresting ( with great foresight ) of all the shipping that may be found upon the coast , and in the ports of the said Signory , excepting none of Holand , Zeland , Easterland , Germanie , England , and other Provinces that are in rebellion against me , saving those of France which being little , and of small burden and weak , are thought unfit to serve the turn . And the stay being thus made , you shall have a speciali care that such merchandise as the said ships or hulks have brought , whither they be all or part unladen , may be taken out , and that the armour , munition , tackels , sails , and victuals may be safely bestowed , as also that it may be well foreseen , that none of the ships or men may escape away . Which things being thus executed , you shall advertise me by and express messenger , of your proceeding therein : And send me a plain and distinct declaration of the number of ships that you shall have so stayed in that coast and parts , whence every one of them is , which belong to my Rebels , what burden 8c goods there are , and what number of men VI 417 2D is in every of them , and what quantity they have of armour , ordinance , munition , victuals , tacklings and other necessaries , to the end that upon sighed hereof , having made choice of such as shall be fit for the service , we may further direct you what you shall do . In the mean time you shall presently see this my commandment put in execution , and if there come thither any more ships , you shall also cause them to be stayed and arrested after the same order , using therein such care and diligence , as may answer the trust that I repose in you , wherein you shall do me great service . Dated at Barcelona the 29 of May . 1585 . And thus have you herd the truth and manner thereof , wherein is to be noted the great courage of the master , and the loving hearts of the servants to save their master from the danger of death : yea , and the care which the master had to save so much of the owners goods as he might , although by the same the greatest is his own loss in that he may never travel to those parts any more without the loss of his own life , nor yet any of his servants : for if hereafter they should , being known they are like to taste of the sharp torments which are there accustomed in their Holy - house . And as for their terming English ships to be in rebellion against them , it is sufficiently known by themselves , and their own consciences can not deny it , but that with love , unity , and concord , our ships have ever been favourable unto them , and as willing to pleasure their King , as his subjects any way willing to pleasure English passengers .