the place where the Jewes have their abided , and is the fairest place , and quietest lodging in all the City . After I had reposed my self 3 . days , I had access to the kings presence , delivered my message and her Majesties letters , and was received with all humanity , and had favourable audience from time to time for three years : during which space I abided there in his Court , as her Majesties Agent and Ligier : and whensoever I had occasion of business I was admitted either to his Majesty himself , or to his vice Roy , whose name was Alcaid Breme Saphiana , a very wise and discreet person , and the chiefest about his Majesty . The particulars of my service , for diverse good and reasonable causes , I forbear here to put down in writing . After leave obtained , and and honourable reward bestowed by the Emperor upon me , I departed from his Court at Marocco the 18 . of August 1588 . towards a garden of his , which is called Shersbonare , where he promised me I should stay but one day for his letters : howbeit , upon some occasion I was stayed until the 14 . of September at the kings charges , with 40 . or 50 . shot attending upon me for my guard and safety . From thence at length I was conducted with all things necessary to the port of Santa Cruz , being sixe days journey from Marocco , and the place where our ships do commonly take in their lading , where I arrived the 21 . of the same month . In this port I stayed 43 . days , and at length the second of November I embarked my self , and one Marshok Reiz a Captain and 427 a Gentleman , which the Emperor sent with me upon and Ambassage to her Majesty : and after much torment and foul weather at Sea , yet Newyears day I came on land at S . Ives in Cornwall , from whence passing by land both together up towards London , we were met [ II ii . 118 . J without the city with the chiefest merchants of the Barbary Company , well mounted all on horseback , to the number of 40 . or 50 . horse , and so the Ambassador and my self being both in Coach , entered the city by torchlight , on Sunday at night the 12 . of January 1589 .