The same in English . This is a copy well and truly translated of and edict of Muley Hamet king of Fez and Emperor of Marocco , whose tenor is as follows : to wit , that no Englishmen should be molested or made slaves in any part of his Dominions , obtained by the aforesaid M . Henry Roberts . N the Name of the pitiful and the merciful God , etc . The servant of the supreme God , the conqueror in his cause , the successor advanced by God , the Emperor of the Moors , the son of the Emperor of the Moors , the JarifFe , the Hageny , whose honour God long increase and advance his estate . This our princely commandment is delivered into the hands of the English merchants , which remain in the protection of our stately palaces : to the end that all men which shall see this present writing , may understand that our princely counsel will defend them by the favour of God , from any thing that may impeach or hurt them in what sort soever they shall wronged : and that , which way soever they shall travail , no man shall take them captives in these our kingdoms , ports , and places which belong unto us , which also may protect and defend them by our 429 authority from any molestation whatsoever : and that no man shall hinder them by laying violent hand upon them , and shall not give occasion that they may be grieved in any sort by the favour and assistance of God . And we charge and command our officers of our havens and fortresses , and all such as bear any authority in these our dominions , and likewise all the common people , that in no wise they do molest them , in such sort that they be no way offended or wronged . And this our commandment shall remain inviolable , being registered in the midst of the month of Rabel in the year 996 . The date of this letter agreeth with the 20 . of March 1587 . which I Abdel Rahman el Catan , interpretor for his Majesty , have translated and turned out of the Arabian into Spanish word for word as is contained therein : and in witness thereof have subscribed my name as aforesaid .