And Advertisement sent to Philip the second king of Spaine from Angola by one Baltazar Almeida de Sousa , touching the state of the foresaid country , written the 21 of May , 1591 . He 26 of July I certified your majestic by John Frere de Bendanha your majesties paymaster and commissioner , with the governor Paulo Dias , which is lately deceased , of all things that happened the 28 of December in the year last passed 1590 . Now 1 thought it con - venient to advertise your majesty what hath fallen out since that time , which is as followeth . The governor Luis Serrano encamped himself eight leagues from Cabasa , where the Negro king dwells , with 350 Portugal soldiers : & afterwards being there encamped , it happened that the king of Matamba sent a strong and mighty army , & in warlike manner , with strange inventions for the said purpose . So the king of Angola gave this other king battle , and the governor sent 114 soldiers Portugals to - help thee said king of Angola : in which battle it was the will of God that our army was overthrown and all slain , as well our Portugals as the Moors which took part with them . So with this overthrow it happened that this realm the second time hath rebelled against your majesty . Hereupon the Governor assembling the rest of his Portugall soldiers , to the number of 250 altogether , went to Amasanguano , which is now his place of abided . Moreover , beside the manifold losses which have befallen the Portugals in this realm , your majesty hath sustained other great misfortunes both in your lands and goods . And because I cannot personally come to certify your majesty thereof , I thought it good to write some part of the same whereby your majesty may understand the estate of this country . This realm , for the most 468 part thereof hath twice be won , and twice lost for want of good government . For here have be many governors which have pretended to do justice , but have pitifully neglected the same , and practised the clean contrary . And this I know to be most true . But the only way to recover this realm , and to augment your majesties lands , goods and treasure , must be by sending some noble and mighty man to rule here , which must bring authority from your majesty , and by taking straight order that every captain which doth conquer here may be rewarded according to his deserts . Likewise your majesty must send hither 2000 good soldiers , with munition and sufficient store of provision for them . And by this means your highness shall know what yearly revenue Angola will yield unto your coffers , and what profit will grow thereof . Otherwise your majesty shall reap but little benefit here . If with my presence I may do your majesty any service in giving information of the state of this realm , as one which have had experience thereof , and have seen the order of it , upon the understanding of your majesties pleasure herein , I will do my best endeavour . And the cause wherefore I have not done this heretofore hath be , by reason that the Governors of this realm would suffer none of the captains which have conquered this country to inform your majesty of that which is needful for your service , and the augmenting of this conquest . Our lord preserve your catholic person with increase of many kingdoms , and the augmentation of your crown . Written in the conquest of the realm of Angola the 21 of May 1591 . Your majesties most loyal subject , Baltazar Almeida de Souza . 469 A . D . 1591 . The only way to reduce a rebellious kingdom unto obedience . And usual trick of lewd governors .