The manner of the taking of two Spanish ships laden with quicksilver & the Popes bulls , bound for the West Indies , by M . Thomas White in the Amity of London . 1592 . He 26 of July 1592 , in my returning out of Barbary in the ship called the Amity of London , being in the height of 36 degrees or thereabouts , at foure of the clock in the morning we had sighed of two ships , being distant from us about three or foure leagues : by seven of the clock we fetched them up , and were within gunshot : whose boldness , having the king of Spaines arms displayed , did make us judge them rather ships of war , then laden with merchandise . And as it appeared by their own speeches , they made full account to have taken us : it being a question among them , whither it were best to carry us to S . Lucar , or to Lisbon . We waved each other a main . They having placed themselves in warlike order one a cables length before another , we began the fight . In the which we continued , so fast as we were able to charge and discharge , the space of five hours , being never a cables length distant either of us from other . In which time we received diverse shot both in the hull of our ship , masts , and sails , to the number of 32 great , beside 500 musket shot and harquebusses a crock at the least , which we told after the fight . And because we perceived them to be stout , we thought good to board the Biscaine , which was on head the other : where lying aboard about and hour , and plying our ordinance and small shot ; in the end we stowed all his men . Now the other in the flyboat , thinking we had entered our men in their fellow , bore room with us , meaning to have laid us aboard , and so to have entrapped us betwixt them both : which we perceiving , fitted our ordinance 103 so for him , as we quit our selves of him , and he boarded his fellow : by which means they both fell from us . Then presently we kept our loof , hoist our topsails , and weathered them , and came hard aboard the flyboat with our ordinance prepared , and gave her our whole broad side , with the which we slew diverse of their men ; so as we might see the blood run out at the scupper holes . After that we cast about