white men , but Negroes a great many . They likewise affirmed that they had three noblemen and three ladies in her , but we found them to differ in most of their talk . All this day and all the night she burned , but the next morning her poulder which was lowest being 60 barrels blew her abroad , so that most of the ship did swim in parts above the water . Some of them say , that she was bigger then the Madre de Dios , and some , that she was less : but she was much undermasted , and undersailed , yet she went well for a ship that was so foul . The shot which we made at her in great Ordinance before we laid her aboard might be at seven bouts which we had , and sixe or 7 shot at a bout , one with another , some 49 shot : the time we lay aboard might be two hours . The shot which we discharged aboard the Carrack might be some twentie Sacars . And thus much may suffice concerning our dangerous conflict with that unfortunate Carrack . The last of June after long traversing of the seas we had sighed of another mighty Carrack which diverse of our company at the first took to be the great S . Philip the Admiral of Spaine , but the next day being the first of July fetching her up we perceived her indeed to be a Carrack , which after some few shot bestowed upon her we summoned to yield ; but they standing stoutly to their defence utterly refused the same . Wherefore seeing no good could be done without boarding her I consulted what course we should take in the boarding . But by reason that we which were the chief captains were partly slain and partly wounded in the former conflict , and because of the murmuring of some disordered and cowardly companions , our valiant and resolute determinations were crossed : and to conclude a long discourse in few words , the Carrack escaped our hands . After this attending abput Corvo & Flores for some West Indian purchase , and being disappointed of our expectation , and victuals growing short , we returned for England , where I arrived at Portesmouth the 28 of August .