The most ancient Discovery of the West Indies by Madoc the son of Owen Guyneth Prince of North - wales , in the year 1170 : taken out of the history of Wales , lately published by M . David Powel Doctor of Divinity . B ' ter the death of Owen Guyneth , his sons fell at debate who should inherit after him : for the eldest son born in matrimony , Edward or Jorweth Drwy - dion , was counted unmeet to govern , because of the maim upon his face : and Howell that took upon him all the rule was a base son , begotten upon and Irish woman . Therefore David gathered all the power he could , and came against Howel , and fighting with him , slew him ; and afterwards enjoyed quietly the whole land of Northwales , until his brother Jorwerths son came to age . Madoc another of Owen Guyneth his sons left the land in contention betwixt his brothers , & prepared T33 Madoc the son of Owen Guyneth . certain ships , with men and munition , and sought adventures by Seas , sailing West , and leaving the coast of Ireland so far North , that he came unto a land unknown , where he saw many strange things . Humf . Lloyd . This land must needs be some part of that Country of which the Spanyards affirm themselves to be the first finders since Hannos time . Whereupon it is manifest that that country was by Britaines discovered , long before Columbus led any Spanyards thither . Of the voyage and return of this Madoc there be many fables feigned , as the common people do use in distance of place and length of time rather to augment then to diminish : but sure it is there he was . And after he had returned home , and declared the pleasant and fruitful countries ' that he had seen without inhabitants , and upon the contrary part , for what barren & wild The second ground his brothers and nephews did murder one voyage of Ma - another , he prepared a number of ships , and god with doc the son of , .. r , 1 . ° . Owen him such men and women as were desirous to live in Gu ^ neth . quietness : and taking leave of his friends , took his journey thitherward again . Therefore it is to be supposed that he and his people inhabited part of those Gomara . lib . countries ' : for it appears by Francis Lopez de Gomara , » • cap . 16 . that in Acuzamil and other places the people honoured the cross . Whereby it may be gathered that Christians had be there before the coming of the Spanyards . But because this people were not many , they followed the manners of the land which they came unto , & used the language they found there . M . Powels This Madoc arriving in the Western country , unto addition . the whjch he cameJn the year 1170 , left most of his people there , and returning back for more of his own nation , acquaintance & friends to inhabit that fair & large country , went thither again with ten sails , as Gutyn Owen . I find noted by Gutyn Owen . I am of opinion that the land whereunto he came was some part of the West Indies . 134 OFFER OF CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS a . d . 1488 .