The letters of the Queens most excellent Majestic sent by one Laurence Aldersey unto the Emperor of Aethiopia , 1597 . A . D . 130 To the most invincible and puissant king of the Abassens , the mighty Emperor of Aethiopia the higher and the lower . ELizabeth by the grace of God Queen of England , France and Ireland , defender of the faith , etc . To the most high and mighty Emperor of Aethiopia greeting . Whereas it is a matter requisite and well beseeming all kings and princes of what lands or nations soever , be they never so much dissevered in place or differing in customs and laws , to maintain and preserve the common society of mankind , and , as occasion shall be offered , to perform mutual duties of charity and benevolence : we for that cause conceiving most undoubted hope of your princely fidelity and courtesy , have given unto this our subject Laurence Aldersey intending to travel into your dominions , these our letters to be delivered without fail unto your Highness , to the end they may be a testimony of our good will towards you and of our said subject his departure from England . Who , after his travels in many foreign countries ' , being as yet inflamed with a desire more thoroughly to survey and contemplate the world , and now at length to undertake a long and dangerous journey into your territories and regions : both the said Laurence thought , and our selves also deemed , that it would very much avail him , as well for his own safety as for the attaining of your favour , if , being protected with our broad seal , he might transport unto your Highness a testimony of our loving affection & of his departure from hence . For since almighty God the highest creator and governor of the world hath allotted unto kings and princes his vicegerents over the face of the whole earth , their designed portions and limits to be ruled and administered by them ; and by this his gift hath established among them a certain law of I3I A . D . ’ 597 - brotherly kindness , and and eternal league by them to be observed : it will not ( we hope ) seem unpleasant unto your highness , when you shall have intelligence of our loving letters sent so huge a distance over sea and land , even from the farthest realm of England unto you in Aethiopia . On the other side our selves shall take great solace and delight , when as by the relation of our own subject ' s , the renown of your name shall be brought unto us from the fountains of Nilus , and from those regions which are situate under the Southern Tropike . May it please you therefore of your princely clemency to vouchsafe so much favour on this our subject , that he may , under the safeguard and protection of your name , enter into your highness dominions , and there remain safe and free from danger . Which favour and courtesy we do likewise most earnestly request at the hands of other princes , through whose Signory our said subject is to pass ; and we shall esteem it as done unto our self and for our honours sake . Neither do we require any greater favour in this behalf , then we are upon the like occasion most ready to grant unto the subject ' s of all princes and the people of all Nations , traveling into our dominions . Given at London the fift day of November , in the thirtie and ninth year of our reign : and in the year of our Lord I597 -