, and new charged all our ordinance , and came upon them again , willing them to yield , or else we would sink them : whereupon the one would have yielded , which was shot between wind and water ; but the other called him traitor . Unto whom we made answer , that if he would not yield presently also , we would sink him first . And thereupon he understanding our determination , presently put out a white flag , and yielded , and yet refused to strike their own sails , for that they were sworn never to strike to any Englishman . We then commanded their captains and master ' s to come aboard us ; which they did . And after examination & stowing them , we sent certain of our own men aboard them , and strook their sails , and manned their ships : finding in them both 126 persons living , & 8 dead , beside those which they themselves had cast overboard . So it pleased God to give us the victory being but 42 men and a boy , whereof 2 were killed and 3 wounded : for the which good success we give God the only praise . These two rich prizes laden with 1400 chests of quicksilver with the arms of Castile and Leon fastened upon them , and with a great quantity of bulls or indulgences , and guilded Missals or Service books , with and hundred tons of excellent wines , we brought shortly after into the river of Thames up to Black - wall . By the taking of this quicksilver , about 1400 chests , the king of Spaine loses for every quintali of the same a quintail of silver , that should have been delivered him by the master ' s of the mines there , which amounteth to 600000 pounds . 104 THE TAKING OF THE ‘ MADRE DE DIOS ’ a . d . .... I592 * More by taking of his bulls , to wit , two millions and 72 thousand for living and dead persons for the provinces of Nova Hispania , lucatan , Guatimala , the Honduras , and the Phillipinas , taxed at two reals the piece . And more for eighteene thousand bulls taxed at foure reals , amounteth all to 107700 pounds . Summa totalis 707700 li . More there were taken ten farthels of gilded missals and breviaries sent for the kings account . So the hindrance that the king receives by the loss of his bulls and quicksilver amounteth as is abovesaid : beside the lacking of his wines , about 100 tons , whereby his fleet is disappointed of a great part of their provision .