eo quod in earum pelago tantam reperierit magnorum quorundam piscium , tynnos aemulantium , sic vocatorum ab indigenis , multitudinem , ut etiam illi interdum navigia detardarent . Earum Regionum homines pellibus tantum coopertos reperiebat , rationis haudquaquam expertes . Ursorum inesse regionibus copiam ingentem refert , qui & ipsi piscibus vescantur . Inter densa namque piscium illorum agmina seize immergunt ursi , & singulos singuli complexos , unguibusque inter squammas immissis in terram raptant & comedunt . Propterea minime noxios hominibus visos esse ait . Orichalcum in plerisque locis se vidisse apud incolas praedicat . Familiarem habeo domi Cobotum ipsum , & contubernalem intejdum . Vocatus namque ex Britannia a Rege nostro Catholico , post Henrici Majoris Britanniae Regis mortem , concurialis noster est , expectatque indies , ut navigia sibi parentur , quibus arcanum hoc naturae latens jam tandem detegatur . The same in English . THese North Seas have be searched by one Sebastian Cabot , a Venetian born , whom being yet but in manner and infant , his parents carried with them into England , having occasion to resort thither for trade of mar - The people of Island say the Sea and ice sets also West . Jonas Arngrimus . chandise , as is the manner of the Venetians to leave no part of the world unsearched to obtain riches . He therefore furnished two ships in England at his own charges , and first with 300 men directed his course so far towards the North pole , that even in the month of July he found monstrous heaps of ice swimming on the sea , and in manner continual day light , yet saw he the land in that tract free from ice , which had be melted by the heat of the Sun . Thus seeing such heaps of ice before him , he was inforced to turn his sails and follow the West , so coasting still by the shore , that he was thereby brought so far into the South , by reason of the land bending so much Southwards , that it was there almost equal in latitude , with the sea Fretum Herculeum , having the