The first voyage of M . John Davis , undertaken in June 1585 . for the discovery of thee Northwest passage , Written by M . John Janes Merchant , sometime servant to the worshipful Master William Sanderson . Ertaine Honourable personages and worthy Gentlemen of the Court & Country , with diverse worshipful Merchants of London and of the West Country , moved with desire to advance Gods glory and to seek the good of their native Country , consulting together of the likelihood of the Discovery of thee Northwest passage , which heretofore had be attempted , but unhappily given over by accidents unlooked for , which turned the enterprisers from their principali purpose , resolved after good deliberation , to put down their adventures to provide for necessary shipping , and a fit man to be chief Conductor of this so hard and enterprise . The setting forth of this Actium was committed by the adventurers , especially to the care of M . William Sanderson Merchant of London , who was so forward therein , that beside his travail which was not small , he became the greatest adventurer with his purse , and commended unto the rest of the company one M . John Davis , a man very well grounded in the principles of the Art of Navigation , for Captain and chief Pilot of this exploit . Thus therefore all things being put in a readiness , we departed from Dartmouth the seventh of June , towards the discovery of the aforesaid Northwest passage , with two Barks , the one being of 50 . tons , 381 nam the Sunshine of London , and the other being 35 . tons , nam the Moonshine of Dartmouth . In the Sunshine we had 23 . persons , whose names are these following , M . John Davis Captain , William Eston Master , Richard Pope Master ' s mate , John Jane Merchant , Henry Davie gunner , William Cross boatswain , John Bag , Walter Arthur , Lycia Adams , Robert Coxworthie , John Ellis , John Kelley , Edward Helman , Musicians . William Dicke , Andrew Maddocke , Thomas Hill , Robert Wats Carpenter , William Russell ,