either from the South Northward , or from the North Southward . The first , that is , beginning South , without all con - Consultation troversie was the likeliest , wherein we were assured to ° ur have commodity of the current , which from the cape course ’ of Florida sets Northward , and would have furthered greatly our navigation , discovering from the foresaid cape along towards cape Briton , and all those lands lying to the North . 1583 . Commodities in discovering from South Northward . Cause why we began our discovery from the North . Incommodities in beginning North . Also the year being far spent , and arrived to the month of June , we were not to spend time in Northerly courses , where we should be surprised with timely Winter , but to covet the south , which we had space enough then to have attained ; and there might with less detriment have wintered that season , being more mild and short in the South then in the North where winter is both long and rigorous . These and other like reasons alleged in favour of the Southern course first to be taken , to the contrary was inferred : that forasmuch as both our victuals , and many other needful provisions were diminished and left insufficient for so long a voyage , and for the wintering of so many men , we ought to shape a course most likely to minister supply ; and that was to take the Newfoundland in our way , which was but seven hundred leagues from our English coast . Where being usually at that time of the year , and until the fine of August , a multitude of ships repairing thither for fish , we should be relieved abundantly with many necessaries , which after the fishing ended , they might well spare , and freely impart unto us . Not staying long upon that Newland coast , we might proceed Southward , and follow still the Sun , until we arrived at places more temperate to our content . By which reasons we were the rather induced to follow this Northerly course , obeying unto necessity , which must be supplied . Otherwise , we doubted