The voyage of the two ships , whereof the one [ III . 129 . J was called the Dominus vobiscum , set out the 20 day of May in the 19 year of king Henry the eight , and in the year of our Lord God 1527 . for the discovery of the North parts . Aster Robert Thorn of Bristoll , a notable member and ornament of his country , as well for his learning , as great charity to the poor , in a letter of his to king Henry the 8 and a large discourse to doctor Leigh , his Ambassador to Charles the Emperor , ( which both are to be seen almost in the beginning of the first volume of this my work ) exhorted the aforesaid king with very weighty and substantial reasons , to set forth a discovery even to the North Pole . And that it may be known that this his motion took present effect , I thought it good herewithal to put down the testimonies of two of our Chroniclers . M . Hall , and M . Grafton , who both write in this sort . This same month ( say they ) VIII I A king Henry the 8 sent 2 fair ships well manned & victualed , having in them diverse cunning men to seek strange regions , 8c so they set forth out of the Thames the 20 day of May in the 19 year of his reign , which was the year of our Lord . 1527 . And whereas master Hal , and master Grafton say , that in those ships there were diverse cunning men , I have made great enquiry of such as by their years and delight in Navigation , might give me any light to know who those cunning men should be , which were the directors in the aforesaid voyage . And it hath be told me by sir Martine Frobisher , and M . Richard Allen , a knight of the Sepulchre , that a Canon of Saint Paul in London , which was a great Mathematician , and a man endued with wealth , did much advance the actium , and went therein himself in person , but what his name was I cannot learn of any . And further they . told me that one of the ships was called The Dominus vobiscum , which is a name likely to be given by a religious man of those days : and that sailing very far Northwestward , one of the ships was cast away as it entered into a dangerous gulf , about the great opening , between the North parts of Newfoundland , and the country lately called by her Majesty , Meta Incognita . Whereupon the other ship shaping her course towards Cape Briton , and the coasts of Aram be , and oftentimes putting their men on land to search the state of those unknown regions , returned home about the beginning of October , of the year aforesaid . And thus much ( by reason of the great negligence of the writers of those times , who should have used more care in preserving of the memories of the worthy acts of our nation , ) is all that hitherto I can learn , or find out of this voyage .