A letter written from . M . Thomas Aidworth merchant and Mayor of the City of Bristoll , to the right honourable Sir Francis Walsingham principali Secretary to her Majesty , concerning a Western voyage intended for the discovery of the coast of America , lying to the Southwest of Cape Briton . Right honourable , upon the receipt of your letters directed unto me and delivered by the bearer hereof M . Richard Hakluyt and M . Steventon , bearing date the 11 . of March , I presently conferred with my friends in private , whom I know most affectionate to this godly enterprise , especially with M . William Salterne deputy of our company of merchant ' s : whereupon my self being as then sick , with as convenient speed as he could , he caused and assembly of the merchant ' s to be gathered : where after dutiful mention of your honourable disposition for the benefit of this city , he by my appointment caused your letters being directed unto me privately , to be read in public , and after some good light given by M . Hakluyt unto them that were ignorant of the Country and enterprise , and were desirous to be resolved , the motion grew generally so well to be liked , that there was eftsoons set down by men ' s own hands then present , & apparently known by their own speech , and very willing offer , the sum of 1000 . marks and upward : which sum if it should not suffice , we doubt not but otherwise to furnish out for this Western discovery , a ship of threescore , and a bark of 40 . tun , to be left in the country under the direction and government of your son in law M . Carlile , of whom we have herd much good , if it shall stand with your honours good liking and his acceptation . In one of which barks we are also willing to have M . Steventon your honours 133 messenger , and one well known to us , as captains . And here in humble manner , desiring your honour to vouchsafe us of your further direction by a generail letter to my self , my brothers , and the rest of the merchant ' s of this city , at your honours best and most convenient leisure , because we mean not to defer the final proceeding in this voyage , any further then to the end of April next coming , I cease , beseeching God long to bless and prosper your honourable estate . Bristoll . March 27 . 1583 .