Articles set down by the Committees appointed in the behalf of the Company of Moscovian Merchants , to confer with M . Carlile , upon his intended discovery and attempt into the hithermost parts of America . The names of the Committees . Master Aiderman Hart . Master Aiderman Spencer . Master Hoddesden . Master William Burrough . Master Slany . ' Master Towerson . Master Staper . < Master John Castelin . Master Leake . Irst the Committees are well persuaded , that the Country whereunto this actium is intended , is very fruitful , inhabited with savage people of a mild and tractable disposition . And that of all other places which are unfrequented at this day , it is the only most fit and most commodious for us to intermeddle withal . The convenientest manner of attempting this enterprise is thought to be thus : That there should be one hundreth men conveyed thither to remain there one whole year : who with friendly intreaty of the people , 147 may enter into better knowledge of the particular estate of the Country , and thereby gather what commodity may be hereafter , or presently looked for . The famish - The charge to transport these hundreth men , to victuali them , and to furnish them of munition and other neede - one year will things , will not be less then foure thousand pounds : cost 4000 . U . whereof hath be very readily offered by the City of Bristoll one thousand pounds , the residue being three thousande pounds , remains to be furnished by this City of London , or any others who will adventure their money in this first preparation . The Committees think it convenient that a Privilege should be procured by Master Carlile from her Majesty , by virtue whereof these conditions and Articles following may be effectually provided for . First , that they who shall disburse their money for the first preparation , shall be nam Adventurers , and shall have the one half of all such lands , territories , towns , mines of gold and silver , and other metals whatsoever , as shall be found , got , obtained , as conquered by this discovery : yielding to her Majesty the fift part of all such gold and silver , as shall happen to be had out of any mines that so shall be found . That those parties which do employ themselves personally in the present discovery , shall be nam Enterprisers , and shall have the other half of all the Lands , Territories , Towns , Mines of Gold and Silver , and other metals , yielding to her Majesty the fift part of the Gold and Silver , as the Adventurers do : The same to be distributed by the general , with the consent of the greatest part of twelve discreet persons to be chosen out of the whole number of the