A relation of Richard Clarke of Weymouth , master of the ship called the Delight , going for the discovery of Norembega , with Sir Humfrey Gilbert 1583 . Written in excuse of that fault of casting away the ship and men , imputed to his oversight . Eparting out of Saint Johns Harbour in the Newfound land the 20 . of August unto Cape Raz , from thence we directed our course unto the lie of Sablon or the Isle of Sand , which the general Sir Humfrey Gilbert would willingly have seen . But when we came within twentie leagues of the Isle of Sablon , we fell to contro - 2O - versie of our course . The general came up in his Frigate and demanded of me Richard Clarke master of 7 ’ the Admiral what course was best to keep : I said that Westsouthwest was best : because the wind was at South and night at hand and unknown sands lay off a great way from the land . The general commanded me to go Westnorthwest . I told him again that the Isle of Sablon was Westnorthwest and but 15 . [ ni - i64 - 1 leagues ofF , and that he should be upon the Island before day , if he went that course . The general said , my of Jablon . reckoning was untrue , and charged me in her Majesties HereinClarke name , and as I would show my self in her Country , untruly to follow him that night . I fearing his threatenings , si > because he presented her Majesties person , did follow Gilbert . his commandment , and about seven of the clock in The ship cast the morning the ship stroke on ground , where she ay on was cast away . Then the general went off to Sea , the 2 course that I would have had them gone before , and August ^ saw the ship cast away men and all , and was not able 1583 . to save a man , for there was not water upon the sand for either of them much less for the Admiral , that drew fourteene foot . Now as God would the day Sixteene gate into the ship - boat . Master Hed - lyes ungodly proposition . before it was very calm , and a Soldier of the ship had killed some foul with his piece , and some of the company desired me that they might hoist out the boat