. George we ran Northeast The bay of and by East some 18 or 19 leagues . 5amt GeorSe - In this bay of Saint George , we found the wracks of 2 great Biskaine ships , which had be cast away three years before : where we had some seven or eight hundred Whale fins , and some iron bolts and chains of their main shrouds & before shrouds : all their train was beaten out with the weather but the cask remained still . Some part of the commodities were spoiled by tumbling down of the cliffs of the hills , which covered part of the cask , and the greater part of those Whale fins , which we understood to be there by foure Spaniards which escaped , & were brought to S . John de Luz . Here we 163 They land on the Isle of Natiscotec . found the houses of the Savages , made of fir trees bound together in the top and set round like a Dovehouse , and covered with the barks of fir trees , we found also some part of their victuals , which were Deeres flesh roasted upon wooden spits at the fire , & a dish made of a ryne of a tree , sowed together with the sinews of the Dear , wherein was oil of the Dear . There were also fowls called Cormorants , which they had plucked and made ready to have dressed , and there we found a wooden spoon of their making . And we discerned the tracks of the feet of some fortie or fiftie men , women and children . When we had dispatched our business in this bay of S . George and stayed there ten days , we departed for the Northern point of the said bay , which is nine or ten leagues broad . Then being informed , that the Whale ' s which are deadly wounded in the grand Bay , and yet escape the fisher for a time , are wont usually to shoot themselves on shore on the Isle of Assumption , or Natiscotec , which lies in the very mouth of the great river that runneth up to Canada , we shaped our course over to that long Isle of Natiscotec , and we found the distance of the way to the Estermost end thereof to be about forty foure leagues : and it stands in the latitude of 49 . Here we arrived about the midst of June at the East end , and road in eighteene fathom water in fair white sand and very good ankerage , and for trial heaved a line overboorde and found wonderful fair and great