The voyage of the ship called the Marigold of M . Hill of Redrife unto Cape Briton and beyond to the latitude of 44 degrees and and half , 1593 Written by Richard fisher Master Hills man of Redriffe . He ship called the Marigold of 70 tons in burden furnished with 20 men , whereof 10 were Mariners , the Master ' s name being Richard Strong of Apsham , the Master ' s mate Peter Langworth of Apsham , with 3 coopers , 2 butchers to flay the Morsses or sea Oxen ( whereof diverse have teeth above a cubit long & skins far thicker then any bulls hide ) with other necessary people , departed out of Falmouth the 1 of June 1593 in consort of another ship of M . Drakes of Apsham , which upon some occasion was not ready so soon as she should have be by two months . The place for which these two ships were bound was and Island within the straights of Saint Peter on the back side of Newfoundland to the Southwest in the latitude of fortie seven degrees , called by the Britons of Saint Malo the Isle of Ramea , but by the Savages and naturals of the Continent next adjoining , Menquit : On which Isle are so great abundance of the huge and mighty Sea Oxen with great teeth in the months of April , May and June , that there have be fifteene hundreth killed there by one small bark , in the year 1591 . The two English ships aforesaid , lost company before they came to Newfoundland : and never came after together in all their voyage . The ship of M . George Drake fell first with Newfoundland , and afterwards very directly came to the Isle 157 The voyage of M . Drake of Apsham to Ramea . The Isle of Ramea , or Menquit . Ramea , though too late in the year to make her voyage : where she found a ship of Saint Malo three parts freighted with these fish : the men whereof inquiring whence our ship was and who was the Master thereof , being answered that she was belonging to Master George Drake of Apsham , fearing to be taken as good prize being of a Leaguer town , and at that time out of league with England , fled so hastily that present night that they left three and twentie men and three Shallops behind them , all which our men seized upon and brought away as good prizes home