60 leagues fiftie or sixtie leagues to the Southwest of Cape Briton . to tO e out . we foum ( i ( he current between this Cape Briton and Cape Rey to set out towards the Eastsoutheast . In our West of Cape course to the West of Cape Briton we saw exceeding Briton . great store of seals , and abundance of Porposes , whereof Seals Spor - we killed eleven . We saw Whale ' s also of all sorts poses ' , Whale ' s aswell small as great : and here our men took many and Cods . bearded Cods with one teat underneath , which are like to the Northeast Cods , and better then those of Newfoundland . They continue From our arrival at the haven of Saint Francis in New - on the coast foundland , ( which was as is aforesaid the eleventh of JBriton West we continued beating up and down on the coast wards full of Arambec to the West and Southwest of Cape Briton eleven weeks . until the twentie eight of September , fully by the space of eleven weeks : and then by the persuasion of our Master and certain others we shaped our course homeward by the Isles of the Azores , and came first to Corvo and Flores , where beating up and down , and missing of expected prey , we sailed by Tercera , and from thence to Saint Michael , where we sought to board a Portugall ship , which we found too well appointed for us to bring along with us , and so being forced to leave them behind and having wasted all our victuals , we were constrained against our wills to hasten home unto our narrow Seas : but it was the two and twentieth of December before we could 160 get into the Downs : where for lack of wind we kept our Christmas with dry bread only for dropping of our clothes . One thing very strange happened in this voyage : to wit , that a mighty great Whale followed our ship by the space of many days as we passed by Cape Razo , which by no means we could chase from our ship , until one of our men fell overboard and was drowned , after which time she immediately forsook us , and never afterwards appeared unto us . A . D . * 593 * And huge Whale pursued their ship by the space of many days , till one of their men fell overboard .