the world . Abundance of Vines full of grapes . Fruit like Meddlers . Seed sprung out of the ground within 8 days . A greatplaine of very good arable ground . I would desire , and very well replenished with fair Oaks and other trees of great beauty , no thicker then the Forests of France . Here we set twenty men to work , which in one day had laboured about and acre and and half of the said ground , and sowed it part with Naveaus or small Turnips , which at the end of eight days , as I said before , sprang out of the earth . And upon that high cliff we found a fair fountain very near the said Fort : adjoining whereunto we found good store of Diamonds of stones , which we esteemed to be Diamonds . On the Canada . other side of the said mountain and at the foot thereof , which is towards the great River is all along a goodly And ynn Mine of the best iron in the world , and it reaches even Mtne ' hard unto our Fort , and the sand which we tread on is perfect refined Mine , ready to be put into the furnace . Leaves of fine And on the waters side we found certain leaves of fine asthic e jj as hiekg as a men nail . And Westward of the nail found in said River there are , as hath be said , many fair trees : Canada . and towards the water a goodly Meadow full of as fair and goodly grass as ever I saw in any Meadow in France : and between the said Meadow and the Wood are great store of Vines : and beyond the said Vines the land Excellent and grows full of Hemp which grows of it self , which strong hemp . - s as gOOC [ as pOSSibly may be seen , and as strong . And at the end of the said Meadow within and hundred pases there is a rising ground , which is of a kind of slate stone black and thick , wherein are veins of mynerall matter , which show like gold and silver : and throughout all that stone there are great grains of the said Mine . And in some places we have found stones like Diamonds , the most fair , polished and excellently cut that it is possible for a man to see , when the Sun shines upon them , they glister as it were sparkles of fire .