said mark , if their saying be true , it can be but sixe leagues by land to pass the said Saults . Here after follows the figure of the three Saults . AFter that we had be advertised by the said people , of the things abovementioned , both because the day was far spent , and we had neither drunk nor eaten the same day , we concluded to return unto our boats , and we came thither , where we found great store of people to the number of 400 . persons or thereabouts , which 400 persons seemed to give us very good entertainment and to rejoice of our coming : And therefore our Captain gave ‘ eke of them certain small trifles , as combs , brooches of tin and copper , and other small toys , and unto the chief men every one his little hatchet & hook , Tike ° f whereat they made certain cries and ceremonies of joy . new ^ Ibim . But a man must not trust them for all their fair ceremonies and signs of joy , for if they had thought they had be too strong for us , then would they have done their best to have killed us , as we understood afterwards . The Savages This being done , we returned with our boats , and passed by the dwelling of the Lord of Hochelay , with whom the ’ Captain had left the two youths as he came up the river , thinking to have found him : But he could find no body save one of his sons , who told the Captain that he was gone to Maisouna , as our boys also told us , saying , that it was two days since he departed . But The § avages in truth he was gone to Canada to conclude with Agona , conspire towhat they should do against us . And when we were gether against arrived at our Fort , we understood by our people , that the Trench . 271 A very great number of Savages assembled together . The Saults are in 44 . deg . and worser easy to pass . But 5 . leagues journey to pass the 3 Saults . the Savages of the Country came not any more about our Fort as they were accustomed , to bring us fish , and that they were in a wondered doubt and fear of us . Wherefore our Captain , having be advertised by some of our men which had be at Stadacona to visit them , that there were a wonderful number of the Country people assembled together , caused all things in our fortress to be set in good order : etc . The rest is wanting .