the rest on land perceiving this , hasted to those three sails which were appointed to be left there ; and for fear they should be left behind they left all things confusedly , as if they had be chased from thence by a mighty army : and no doubt so they were ; for the hand of God came upon them for the cruelty and outrages committed by some of them against the native inhabitants of that country . Immediately after the departing of our English Colony out of this paradise of the world , the ship abovementioned sent and set forth at the charges of Sir Walter Ralegh and his direction , arrived at Hatorask ; who after some time spent in seeking our Colony up in the country , and not finding them , returned with all the aforesaid provision into England . About foureteene or fifteene days after the departure of the aforesaid ship , Sir Richard Grinvile general of Virginia , accompanied with three ships well appointed for the same voyage , arrived there ; who not finding the aforesaid ship according to his expectation , nor hearing any news of our English Colony there seated , and left by him anno 1585 , himself traveling up into diverse places of the country , aswell to see if he could hear any news of the Colony left there by him the year before , under the charge of Master Lane his deputy , as also to discover some places of the country : but after some time spent therein , not hearing any news of them , and finding the places which they inhabited desolate , yet unwilling to lose the possession of the country which Englishmen had so long held : after good deliberation , he determined to leave some men behind to retain A . D . 1586 . This ship arrived in Virginia . Sir Richard Grinvils third voyage . 347 Fifteene men possession of the Country : whereupon he landed more left tn fifteene men e of Roanoak , furnished plentifully ‘ with all manner of provision for two years , and so departed for England . Not long after he fell with the Isles of Azores , on some of which Islands he landed , and spoiled the towns of all such things as were worth carriage , where also he took diverse Spanyards . With these and many other exploits done by him in this voyage , aswell outward as homeward , he returned into England .