Commanders , as to the owner of the said ships . Which cross and unkind dealing , although it very much discontented me , notwithstanding the scarcity of time was such , that I could have no opportunity to go unto Sir Walter Ralegh with complaint : for the ships being then all in readiness to go to the Sea , would have be departed before I could have made my return . Thus both Governors , Master ' s , and sailors , regarding very smally the good of their countrymen in Virginia ; determined nothing less then to touch at those places , but wholly disposed themselves to seek after purchase & spoils , spending so much time therein , that summer was spent before we arrived at Virginia . And when we were come thither , the season was so unfit , 8c weather so foul , that we were constrained of force to forsake that coast , having not seen any of our planters , with loss of one of our ship - boats , and 7 of our chiefest men : and also with loss of 3 of our anchors and cables , and most of our casks with fresh water left on shore , not possible to be had aboard . Which evils 8c unfortunate events ( as well to their own loss as to the hindrance of the planters in Virginia ) had not chanced , if the order set down by Sir Walter Ralegh had be observed , or if my daily 8c continual petitions for the performance of the same might have taken any place . Thus may you plainly 405 perceive the success of my fift & last voyage to Virginia , which was no less unfortunately ended then frowardly begun , and as luckless to many , as sinister to my self . But I would to God it had be as prosperous to all , as noisome to the planters ; & as joyful to me , as discomfortable to them . Yet seeing it is not my first crossed voyage , I remain contented . And wanting my wishes , I leave off from prosecuting that whereunto I would to God my wealth were answerable to my will . Thus committing the relief of my discomfortable company the planters in Virginia , to the merciful help of the Almighty , whom I most humbly beseech to help & comfort them , according to his most holy will & their good desire , I take my leave : from my house at Newtowne in Kylmore the 4 of February , 1593 . Your most wellwishing friend , John White .