The Preface of M . Rene Laudonniere . Here are two things , which according to mine opinion have be the principali causes , in consideration whereof aswell they of ancient times , as those of our age have be induced to travel into far and remote regions . The first hath been the natural desire which we have to search out the commodities to live happily , plentifully , and at ease : be it whither one abandon his natural Country altogether to dwell in a better , or be it that men make voyages thither , there to search out and bring from thence such things as are there to be found , and are in greatest estimation and in most request in our Countries ' . The second cause hath be the multitude of people too fruitful in generation , which being no longer able to dwell in their native soils , have entered upon their neighbours limits , and oftentimes passing further have pierced even unto the uttermost regions . After this sort the North climate , a fruitful father of so many nations hath oftentimes sent forth this way and that way his valiant people , and by this mean hath peopled infinite Countries ' : so that most of the nations of Europe draw their originali from these parts . Contrariwise the more Southern regions , because they be too barren by reason of their insupportable heat which reigneth in them , need not any such sending forth of their inhabitants , and have be oftentimes constrained to receive other people more often by force of arms then willingly . All Afrike , Spaine , and Italie can also testify the same , which never so abounded with people that they had need to send them abroad to inhabit elsewhere : as on the contrary Scythia , Norway , Gotland , and France have done . The posterity of which nations remains yet not only in Italy , Spaine & Afrike , but also in fruitful and fair Asia . Nevertheless I find 446 that the Roman proceeding further , or rather adding unto these two chief causes aforesaid , ( as being most curious to plant not only their ensigns and victories , but also their laws , customs , & religion in those provinces which they had conquered by force of arms ) have oftentimes by the decree of their sovereign Senate Planting of sent forth inhabitants , which they called Colonies ( think - Colomesing by this way to make their name immortali ) even to the unfurnishing of their own Country of the forces which should have preserved the same in her perfection : a thing which hindered them much more , then advanced them to the possession of the universal monarchy , whereunto their intention did aspire . For it came to pass that their Colonies here and there being miserably sacked by strange people did utterly ruin and overthrow their Empire . The brinks of the river of Rhene are yet read , those of Danubius are no