less bloody , and our France became fat with their blood which they lost . These are the effects and rewards of all such as being pricked forward with this Roman and tyrannical ambition will go about thus to subdue strange people : effects , I say , contrary to the profit which those shall receive , which only are affectioned to the common benefit , that is to say , to the general policy of all men , and endeavour to unite them one with another as well by traffic and civil conversations , as also by military virtues , and force of When force of arms , when as the Savages will not yield unto their a ™ s is t0 endeavours so much tending unto their profit . ' For this cause princes have sent forth out of their Dominions certain men of good activity to plant themselves in strange Countries ' , their to make their profit to bring the Country to civility , and if it might be , to reduce the inhabitants to the true knowledge of our God : and end so much more commendable , as it is far from all tyrannical ! and cruel government : and so they have always thrived in their enterprises , and by little and little gained the hearts of them which they have conquered or won unto them by any means . Hereof 447 we may gather that sometime it is good , yea very expedient to send forth men to discover the pleasure Twoconditions and ( j commodity of strange Countries ' : But so , that the n ^ uests * ? Country out of which these companies are to pass Countries ' remain not weakened , nor deprived of her forces : And newly dis - again in such sort that the company sent forth be of covered . so just & sufficient number , that it may not be defeated ° ta ‘ by strangers , which every foot endeavour nothing else but to surprise the same upon the sudden . As within these few days passed the French have proved to my great grief , being able by no means possible to withstand the same , considering that the elements , men , and all the favours which might be hoped for of a faithful and Christian alliance fought against us : which thing I purpose to discover in this present historic with so evident truth , that the Kings Majesty my sovereign prince shall in part be satisfied of the diligence which I have used in his service , and mine adversaries shall find themselves so discovered in their false reports , that they shall have no place of refuge . But before I begin , I will briefly set down the situation and description of the land whereunto we have sailed and where we have inhabited from the year 1561 . unto sixty five , to the end that those things may the more easily be born away , which I mean to describe in this discourse .