The relation of Nicholas Burgoignon , alias Holy , whom sir Francis Drake brought from Saint Augustine also in Florida , where he had remained sixe years , in mine and Master Heriots hearing . His Nicholas Burgoignon say , that between S . Augustine and S . Helen there is a Cacique whose name is Casicola , which is lord of ten thousand Indians , and another Cacique whose name is Dicasca , and another called Touppekyn towards the North , and a fourth nam Potanou towards the South , and another called Moscita towards the South likewise . Beside these he acknowledgeth Oristou , Ahoia , Ahoiaue , Isamacon , alleged by the Spaniard . He further affirmeth , that there is a city Northwestward from S . Helenes in the mountains , which the Spaniards call La grand Copal , and is very great and rich , and that in these mountains there is great store of Crystal , gold , and Rubies , and Diamonds : And that a Spaniard brought from thence a Diamond which was worth five thousand crowns , which Pedro Melendes ix i13 H the marks nephew to old Pedro Melendes that slew Ribault , & is now governor of Florida , weareth . He says also , that to make passage unto these mountains , it is needful to have store of Hatchet ' s to give unto the Indians , and store of Pick - axes to break the mountains , which shine so bright in the day in some places , that they cannot behold them , and therefore they travel unto them by night . Also corslets of Cotton , which the Spanyards call Zecopitz , are necessary to be had against the arrows of the Savages . He say farther , that a Tun of the sassafras of Florida is sold in Spaine for sixtie ducats : and that they have there great store of Turkey cocks , of Beans , of Peason , and that there are great store of pearls . The things , as he reporteth , that the Floridians make most account of , are read Cloth , or red Cotton to make baldrics or girdles : copper , and hatchet ' s to cut withal . The Spaniards have all demanded leave at their own costs , to discover these mountains , which the King denyeth , for fear lest the English or French would enter into the same actium , once known . All the Spaniards would pass up by the river of Saint Helena unto the mountains of gold and Crystal . The Spaniards entering 50 . leagues up Saint Helena , found Indians wearing gold rings at their nostrils and ears . They found also Oxen , but less then ours . Sixe leagues from Saint Helena towards the North , there is a point that runneth far into the sea , which is the mark to the Seamen to find Saint Helena and Waterin . Waterin is a river fortie leagues distant Northward from Saint Helena , where any fleet of great ships may ride safely . I take this river to be that which we call Waren in Virginia , whither at Christmasse last 1585 . the Spaniards sent a bark with fortie men to discover where we were seated : in which bark was Nicholas Burgoignon the reporter of all these things . 114 The Spaniards of S . Augustine have slain three hundred of the subject ' s of Potanou . One Potassi is neighbour to Potanou . Oratina is he which the French history calls Olata Outina . Calauai is another Cacique which they know . Sundry Voyages made from Nueva Galicia , and Nueva Viscaia in new Spaine , to the 15 . Provinces of new Mexico , and to Quivira and Cibola , all situate on the backside of Guastecan , Florida , and Virginia , as far as 37 . degrees of Northerly latitude : with a description of the rivers , lake ' s , cities , towns , nations , fertile soil , and temperate air in those parts ; and most certain notice of many exceeding rich silver mines , and other principali commodities .