number , and very valiant . That which here I say , I learned by two other relations of Indians dwelling near unto them . I mean to set forward at the time before mentioned , and I carry with me 150 . horsemen , and twelve spare horses , and 200 . footmen , crossebowmen , and gunners . I take also with me live hogs , sheep , and all such things as I can get for money : assure your Lordship that I mean not to return to Mexico , until I be able to inform your honour more perfectly , what the state of that place is : and if I find ought that we may do good in , I will stay there , until I have advertised your Lordship , that you may command what you will have done : and if it fallen out so unluckily , 119 [ III . 364 . J These may seem to be the Pintados mentioned by Frier Marco de Niza in his 2 . Chap . A . D . J539 - that there be nothing of importance , I will seek to discover too . leagues farther , wherein ( I hope in God ) there will be something found in which your Lordship may employ all these gentlemen , and those which shall come hither hereafter . I think I cannot choose but stay there : and the waters , the seasons , and disposition of the country , and other accidents will direct me what is best to be done . Frier Marco de Ni ^ a entered a good way into the country , accompanied with Stephan Dorantez , the 7 . of February last passed : when I departed from them , I left them with above 100 . Indians of Petatlan , and from the time of their coming thither they greatly honoured the father , showing him all the courtesies they could possibly . I cannot send you , nor describe unto you his entrance among them better then I have done in all my relations which I wrote in my letters from Compostella , and I signified unto you all things to the full from the city of S . Michael : and though there be but the tenth part of those things , it is a great matter . Herewithal I have sent your Lordship a Letter , which I received from the said father : the Indians tell me , that all the people of the country do greatly reverence him : and I believe he may travel many leagues farther in that sort . He says , that if he find any good country , he will write to me thereof : I will not go thither without informing your Lordship of my journey . I hope in God , that by one way or other we shall discover some good thing .