A Letter of Francis Vazquez de Coronado , Governor of Nueva Galicia , to the lord DONE Antonio de Mendosa , Viceroy of Nueva Espanna . Dated in Saint Michael of Culiacan the 8 . of March , 1539 . Of the hard passage from Saint Michael of Culiacan to Topira . The description of that Province , and of another near unto the same , very rich in gold and precious stones . The number of the people which Vazquez carried with him in his journey thither ; and how greatly Friar Marcus of Ni ^ a is honoured by the Indians of Petatlan . Y the help of God I mean to set forward from this City of S . Michael of Culiacan towards Topira the 10 . of April : neither can I any sooner set forward , because the powder and match which your Lordship sends me , cannot be brought thither before that time , and I think it be now in Compostella . Beside this , I am to pass many leagues over mighty high mountains , which reach up to the skies , and over a River , which at this present is so big and swollen , that it can in no place be waded over . 118 And if I depart at the time aforesaid , they say we may wade over it . They told me that from hence to Topira was not above 50 . leagues ; and I have learned since that it is above foure score leagues . I do not remember that I have written to your Lordship the information which I have of Topira : and though I had written thereof unto Topira . you , yet because that since that time I have learned something more , I think it meet to signify the same unto your Lordship in these my letters . It may please your honour therefore to understand , that they tell me , that Topira is a very populous Province , lying between two rivers , and that there are above 50 . inhabited towns therein . And that beyond the same there is another - Another Country greater then it , the name whereof the Indians Sreater could not tell me , wherein there is great store or victuals of Maiz , French peason , Axi or Pepper , Melons , and Gourds , and great store of Hens of the country . The people wear on their bodies gold , Emeralds , and other precious stones , and are served commonly in gold and silver , wherewith they cover their houses : and the chief men wear great chains of gold well wrought , about their necks , and are appareled with painted garments , and have store of wild kine ; and they say they enter not into their country , because themselves have no great store of people : those Indians being many in