the wild Moors of Barbarie called Alarbes do , following the seasons and the pasture after their Oxen . These Oxen are of the bigness and colour of our Bulls , but their homes are not so great . They have a great bunch upon their before shoulders , and more hair on their before part then on their hinder part : and it is like wool . They have as it were and horse - mane upon their back bone , and much hair and very long from the knees downward . They have great tuffes of hair hanging down their foreheads , and it seems that they have beards , because of the great store of hair hanging down at their chins and throats . The males have very long tails , and a great knob or flock at the end : so that in some respect they resemble the Lion , and in some other the Carnell . They push with their homes , they run , they overtake and kill and horse when they are in their rage and anger . Finally , it is a foul and fierce beast of countenance and form of body . The horses fled from them , either because of their deformed shape , or else because they had never seen them . Their master ' s have no other riches nor substance : of them they eat , they drink , they apparel , they shoe themselves : and of their hides they make many things , as houses , shoes , apparel and ropes : of their bones they make bodkins : of their sinews and hair , thread : of their homes , maws , and bladders , vessels : of their dung , fire : and of their calves - skinnes , budgets , wherein they draw and keep water . To be short , they make so many things of them as they have need of , or as many as suffice them in the use of this life . There are also in this country other beasts as big as horses , which because they have homes and fine wool , they call them sheep , and they say that every home of theirs weigheth is fiftie pound weight . There are also great dogs which will fight with a bull , and will carry fiftie pound weight in sacks when they 168 go on hunting , or when they remove from place to place with their flocks and heards .