A voyage made by M . Roger Bodenham to S . John de Ullua in the bay of Mexico , in the year 1564 . Roger Bodenham having a long time lived in the city of Sivil in Spaine , being there married , and by occasion thereof using trade and traffic to the parts of Barbary , grew at length to great loss and hindrance by that new trade begun by me in the city of Fez : whereupon being returned into Spaine , I began to call my wits about me , and to consider with my self by what means I might recover and renew my state ; and in conclusion , by the aid of my friends , I procured a ship called The Bark Fox , pertaining to London , of the burden of eight or nine score tons ; and with the same I made a voyage to the West India , having obtained good favour with the Spanish merchant ' s , by reason of my long abided , and marriage in the country . My voyage was in the company of the general DONE Pedro Melendes for Nova Hispania : who being himself appointed general for Terra Firma and Peru , made his son general for New Spaine , although Pedro Melendes himself was the principali man and directer in both fleets . We all departed from Cadiz together the last day of May in the year 1564 : and I with my ship being under the conduct of the son of DONE Pedro aforesaid , arrived with him in Nova Hispania , where immediately I took order for the discharge of my merchandise at the port of Vera Cruz , otherwise called Villam Rica , to be transported thence to the city of Mexico , which is sixty and odd leagues distant from the said port of Villa Rica . In the way are many good towns , as namely , Pueblo de los Angels , and another called Tlaxcalan . The city of Mexico hath three great causeys to bring men to it , compassed with a lake , so that it needs no walls , A new trade begun in the city of Fez . by Roger Bodenham . The place where Cochinilla grows , and the price thereof . being so defended by the water . It is a city plentiful of all necessary things , having many fair houses , churches , and monasteries . I having continued in the country the space of nine months , returned again for Spaine with the Spanish fleet , and delivered the merchandise and silver which I had in the ship into the Contractation house , and there received my fraught , which amounted outward and homeward to the valve of 13000 ducats and more . I observed many things in the time of my abided in Nova Hispania , aswell touching the commodities of the country as the manners of the people both Spanyards and Indians : but because the Spanish histories are full of those observations , I omit them , and refer the readers to the same : only this I say , that the commodity of Cochinilla grows in greatest abundance about the town of Pueblo de los Angels , and is not there worth above forty pence the pound .