A relation of the Haven of Tecuanapa , a most convenient place for building of ships , situate upon the South sea not far from Nicaragua , which was sent unto the viceroy of Mexico or to the king of Spaine : wherein are described the rivers of Ometepec , Tlacamama , and Tlacolula falling into the said Haven , with the towns , people , and mountains adjoining to the said rivers , and other things fit for the building and victualling of ships . He Port and small harbour of Tecuanapa hath in the driest time of Summer in the channel little less then one fathom at low water , and at full sea one fathom and and half : in the time of rain , with the increasing of the land - water it hath three fathoms and more . It lies towards the West , and there the Bishoprics of Guaxacan and Tlarcali are separated . From hence towards the point called Punta de Intla and Dordaci there is a Bay 2 . leagues distant , which though it be no special harbour , yet upon and extremity ships may come and ride there , as in times passed they have done . This Bay on the right hand towards the North makes a lake somewhat large towards the midst of the channel , and in some parts deep , but specially on the side of Cuahintla , but on either side it is but shallow . As you pass between the sea & certain great and large woods of orange trees , and trees of other nature which grow along the sea coast , which are of no great breadth , all the country appears very open : howbeit on the side of Cuahintla the mountains have many creeks and a small lake called Tulaningo , and the country cannot be traveled , except you take the way between the sea and the end of this lake , which may be about two leagues of sandy way . 466 And on the North side there is another small creek . And going by the sands side one quarter of a league , you come to the way that leads unto Quacapotla a Quacapotla . mansion of Intla . The river of Ometepec being the principal river river of which comes to this haven hath his head in the