And likewise to arrest a Galeon of the Duke of Florence , which is very well armed and furnished with great ordinance , and passed lately from Alicante towards Cadiz , and to make up the number of fortie great ships , Fortie great which are to be had in Biscay and Guipuscoa : and that being rigged , armed and set in good order , they be r ' victualed for eight months , and that forthwith there be levied a thousand mariners of Catalunna and Genoa to be divided among the Fleet , and be conducted , as they were for the Fleet of Ter ^ era : furthermore that sixe G8 ? - Ter - thousande soldiers be levied , giving commandment marks to press a greater number , to the end that these may ofSantaCruz . be able men for service . Moreover it is needful for this army that 20 . pataches be brought from Biscay , and 20 . Azabras from Castro . That the pataches be from 50 . to 60 . tons : and that the Azabras be like those which were in the expedition to Terser a . That sufficient provision be made of artillery , powder , match , and led , and harquebusses , muskets , and chosen pikes for the keeping of the coast . It is also meet to provide another army of two ships Another army of 400 . tons apiece , and other foure of 200 . tons , SM es ‘ and foure pataches and a thousand soldiers , beside mariners . The Indian Having seen and considered that the Englishmen with hened merchant ' s ships only that traverse these seas have with 4 . ships made such havoc in two months , and that it is to be ofwarre . thought that they will do the like against the fleets which go and come from the Indies : it is expedient , that as by order in time of peace the fleet hath and Admiral and Viceadmiral , that now it should have two more at the least in eke Fleet : and nevertheless they are to be wafted home with and army . In mine opinion all these provisions ought to be made only in regard of the English army , and the rest of the ships which have be set out of that kingdom . But in case that DONE Antonio should come with and army , and should seek