to invade this kingdom , these provisions following would be needful . What pro - r ■ 5Hat warning be given to the Cond de Beneventa , to ma ^ lf ^ on the Marks de Soria , to the Cond of Altamira , Antonio should to the Cond of Monterey , to the Marquess of Zerraluo , come with an and to the rest of the Lords and Knights , which are to have order to be in a readiness , against he come unto this kingdom . That the people also be trained of the cities of Toro , Zamora , and Salamanca , to be ready to succour the country between the rivers of Doro and Minno : and the people of Estremadura and Sivilla are likewise to be trained to be ready to succour the city of Lisbon , and the country about the same . Also that the castles of this city , river and territory be victualed and provided of gunpowder , match and led , and all things else belonging to the artillery , as I have And army of recluested in the relations which I sent unto his majesty 14 . galleys to the 7 . of March of this present year 1585 . be provided . That the galleys be furnished for foure months : and that sixe more be brought from Spaine to this river of Lisbon with and hundred and twentie soldiers for each galley , that they may be divided among the eight galleys which remain here . And in case it fallen out that the army of the English go not for the Indies , but occupy themselves upon this kingdom , ( for there may be English ships , which may attend the one and the other ) we shall be inforced to make another army , beside that for the Indies , of twelve ships , foure pataches , and a thousand five hundred soldiers . In mine opinion all this is meet for his majesties service to be foreseen to be made ready with great diligence and care , and to provide money needful for the same , without neglecting the one or the other , but that all these things be done without delay : Referring my self in all things to those of wiser judgement . Written in Lisbon the 26 of October , 1585 . Another army of 12 . great ships , 4 pataches , andi $ oo soldiers .