they could find none of them . And though our men returned all free from peril of the enemy , yet the most part of the said ten persons presently fell sick , and diverse other of our company : so that within 14 days 8 or 9 of our men died of a disease called there the Calentura , which is a hight and vehement fever . And passing between Chagre and Veragua , we took a Frigate , and some Veragua . quantity of gold we found therein . In this Frigate were 23 Spaniards whom we set on shore , and two Flemings , them we brought into England with us : we had therein also foure cast pieces of Ordinance , 3 harquebusses on crock , 16 Spanish calivers , and a book of Navigation : and in this Frigate some of our company came homeward into England . Thus passing forward in our course , we came to Veragua , where captain Barker , & Philip Roche his Master , fought upon the foresaid quarrel , in which combat the captain was hurt a little in the cheek . Here we sank our Admiral the Ragged staff , because of her great leakage , and embarked part of our company in the Spanish Frigate , which immediately before we had surprised . From hence ( by the direction of certain Indians ) we sailed into the gulf of the Honduras : The bay of there we took a bark wherein were rials of plate , to Honduras - the valve of 100 pound , Maiz or Indian wheat , hens , beef and other small things . In this bark also were certain Spaniards , whereof one was the Scrivano or A conspiracy against the Captain . M . Andrew Barker and 8 other slain by the Spaniards . The town of Truxillo sacked by the English . secretary of Carthagena , who ( being a man of some note ) was put to his ransom , which was paid in gold : the rest were dismissed freely . And after passing by diverse Islands , we arrived at and Island called S . Francisco , being in the mouth of the great bay , called the Honduras . And within two days next after our arrival there , William Coxe and diverse others ( which for certain causes shall nameless ) came aboard the ship wherein the captain then was ,