. Hereupon we determined to sail for England , and being in the main sea homeward bound , about 60 leagues from the Isle of S . Francisco , the Frigate wherein was the treasure for the adventurers , and that which pertained to the captain to the valve of 2000 pound , being overset with sail , with a flaw of wind was overthrown , and all the goods therein perished : therein also were 14 persons drowned , and nine saved , whereof William Coxe and William Gillam were two . After this Philip Roche , Master of the The death of Admiral called the Ragged stafFe , died . And thus at p , ufy length , ( by the help of God ) we arrived in the Isle of Silly near Cornwall where we left our Frigate which Their arrival we built new upon the shore of the Honduras , having the Isle of in her at our landing ten botisios of oil , and the foure cast Pieces that were in John Oxnams Frigate ( which the year before was taken in the strait of Dariene ) three harquebusses on crock , certain calivers , and Certame certain treasure : Where William Cox and Andrew j ^ nQxnam Browne divided the treasure among their company , recovered delivering to some five pound , to some sixe pound , to from the some seven pound , to some more , as every man was Spaniards . thought to have deserved . The bark and the rest of the Ordinance was left in the Island , to the use of Andrew Browne . Diverse of our company , upon our arrival at Plimmouth were committed to prison at the suit of M . John Barker of Bristol , brother unto our Captain M . Andrew Barker , as accessaries to our captains death , and betrayers of him unto the enemy . And after straight examination of many of us , by letters of direction from her Majesties privy Counsel , the chief malefactors were only chastised with long imprisonment , where indeed before God they had deserved to die : whereof some , although they escaped the rigor of men law , yet could they not avoid the heavy judgement of God , but shortly after came to miserable ends . Which may be example to others to show themselves faithful and obedient in all honest causes to their captains and governors .