having in her certain pitch and 30 tons of Canary wines whereof we reserved 4 or 5 tons to our selves , dismissing them without any further damage . Thence ( having The Isle of remained there a day ) we set sail to the Island of Curazao . Curazao , where we remained a day & a night , & took in fresh water , at what time by the inhabitants of that Island ( being few of them Spaniards , & the most part Indians ) 14 of our men were treacherously hurt , but none slain . And from thence we departed for the main land Southwards , to a certain bay , and there we abided 3 days , but nothing of any reckoning was Cape de la there achieved . From thence we arrived at Cape de Vela ' la Vela , where grew a contention between our Captain M . Andrew Barker , and his Master Philip Roche , upon comparisons made between them concerning the knowledge of Navigation , and about other quarrels , which quarrels afterwards were and occasion of further mischief . Tulu . Hence we sailed to the bay of Tulu ( which is about 18 leagues Southwestward from Carthagena ) where we took a Frigate and certain treasure therein to the valve of 500 pound , namely bars of gold , and lingots of silver , and some quantity of corriento or coin in rials of plate , and certain green stones called Emeralds , whereof one very great , being set in gold , was found tied secretly about the thigh of a friar . Here having stayed three days , and now being pursued by Spanish men of war , we departed with the said treasure , and left the Frigate behind us , all 84 ANDREW BARKER which treasure at that instant was committed to the keeping of our captain Andrew Barker . From thence we passed to Number de dios , and so forth to the mouth of the river of Chagre 18 leagues distant from Number de dios towards the Northwest . There we landed io of our men , who traveled up into the woods three or foure days to seek the Simerons , ( which are certain valiant Negroes fled from their cruel master ' s the Spaniards , arid are become mortali enemies , ready to join with the English and French against them ) but in their search