ordinance . Then came out the two galleys , having 27 banks on a side , and fought with us another hour ; which for that time left us by reason of the increasing of the wind . Then passing alongst nine leagues to the Westward we found out and excellent harbour , having three fathom water at the flood , able within to receive a thousand sail , where we found hog - houses , which they term coralles , and took away certain hogs and pigs . As we came out of this harbour , the weather being calm , we were encountered by the galleys , which had followed us , and fought with them three hours , oftentimes within caliver shot : but we made such spoil of their men and oars , that they began to be weary , and gave us over , with their great loss . Here within foure days after , as we lay to the Northward sixe leagues ofF this harbour of Cavannas , we met with 192 I592 > master captain Lane , general of master Wats his fleet , and captain Roberts , in the Exchange , a ship of Bristol , of and hundred and forty tons , and master Benjamin Wood with his foure ships which were set out by my lord Thomas Howard with captain Kenel of Limehouse captain of the Cantar of Weymouth . All we being here together espied a ship of some 50 tun , which we chased with their boats ; but my shallope first boarded her , and took her : which had in her sack , Canary - wine , muscadel , tent in jars , and good store of oil in jars . The ship we unladed and burned : the men ran on shore . Hence we came all together , being about 13 sails , before Havana ; but passing by we gave chase to a ship of 60 tun , which entered into and harbour a league to the Northwest of Havana , which with boats was boarded , and found to be of Puerto de Cavallos in the bay of Honduras , laden with tanned hides , salsa perilla , Indico , raw hides , and good store of balsamum : and she had foure chests of gold , which they god on land before we could come to them . We brought this ship into England . Thus spending a sevennight in lying ofF and on for purchase , and finding nothing come , I set sail for England , and arrived at Dover about the tenth of November 1592 . x