A Relation of the second Voyage to Guiana , performed and written in the year 1596 . by Laurence Keymis Gent . To the approved , Right Valorous , and worthy Knight , Sir Walter Ralegh , Lord warden of the Stanneries , Captain of her Majesties Guard , and her Highness Lieutenant generail of the County of Cornewall . Have here briefly set down the effect of this your second Discovery without any enlargement of made words : for in this argument , single speech best beseems a simple truth . Where the affinity of the matter with your person , leads me to write of your self , unto your self , that small liberty which I have therein used , shall , I doubt not , without offence or sinister construction , be given to the cause in hand : which , whither it suffer not detriment , by attributing less then of right belongeth ; the judgement be theirs , that uprightly and indifferently shall weigh the consequents of their evil purpose , who in seeking to detract from the Author of these Discoveries , do so much as in them lies , wound , deface , & tread under foot the thing it self . But this is no novelty , nor proper only to these our days . For long since it hath been said , Laudes eo usque sunt Pericles . tolerabiles , donec ea dicuntur , quse auditores se quoque 441 facere posse existimant : simajora proferantur , invident , non credunt . The fervent zeal & loyalty of your mind in labour with this birth of so honourable expectation , as it hath deserved a recompense far different , so needs it not my poor suffrage to endear the { III . 667 . ] toil , care , and danger that you have willingly undergone for the good and advancement of our weal public . The praiseworthiness thereof doth approve it self , and is better read in your living doings , then in my dead unregarded papers . All that I can wish , is that my life were a sufficient pledge , to justify , how much more easy , and more materiali , the course for Guiana would be then others , which requiring greater charge , yield not so large benefit , and are subject to more doubtful events