Here follow the names of those worthy Spaniards that have sought to discover and conquer Guiana : Extracted out of the writings of Juan de Castellanos clerigo , who compiled the book entitled , Primera part de las Elegias de varones illustres the Indias . THe enterprise of Guiana was undertaken by Diego de Ordas of the kingdom of Leon , in the year 1531 . He was one of the captains of Cortes in the conquest of Mexico . This Ordas made his entrance by the river of Amana , by which we entered , and spent fiftie days before he came to the river of Orenoque , which we passed in fifteene . He nam the river by which he entered , Viapari ; which name it still retaineth in the Spanish descriptions . It lies South from Trinidad some five leagues . He transported out of Spaine a thousand soldiers . He died afterwards at sea in returning for Spaine . 2 Juan Corteso arrived at the river of Amazones or Orellana with three hundred men : He marched up into the country . But neither he nor any of his company did return again . 3 Gaspar de Sylva , with his two brother ' s , departed from Teneriff , accompanied with two hundred men to assist Diego de Ordas . They sought El Dorado by the river of Amazones : but staying there a short time , they fell down to Trinidad , where they all three were buried . 4 Juan Gonsales set sail from Trinidad to discover Guiana . He reposed himself more on the faith of his guides , then on his small number of men . He by trial found the confines of Guiana , so far as he entered , to be populous , plentiful of victuali , and rich in gold . Upon such proofs as he brought with him , to make good his report , many others adventured to follow his steps . 496 5 . 6 Philip de Uren , & after him Pedro de Limpias , who both successively commanded the Almains , were leaders in this actium . Limpias was slain by and Indian Cacique nam Porima . 7 Jeronimo the Ortal undertook it by the way of Maracapana . After great travel and his substance all spent , he died on the sudden at S . Domingo