. 8 . 9 Ximenes , brother of DONE Ximenes de Quesida the Adelantado , and Pedro de Orsua were both at sundry times in the same conquest . 10 Father lala , a Friar , taking with him only one companion , and some Indian guides passed into the provinces of Guiana . He returned with good intelligence , and brought with him Eagles , idols , and other jewels of gold , An . 1560 . He assayed the second time to pass in like manner , but was slain by the Indians . 11 Hernandez de Serpa also undertook it . The Indians of Cumanawgoto killed him , and defeated his army . 12 Afterwards , Diego de Vargas , and his son DONE Juan followed this enterprise , and at their first setting out , were slain by the Indians . 13 Caceres undertook this discovery from Nuevo Reyno de Granada . He came no nearer to it then Matachines , which borders upon the said kingdom of Granada . He rested there and peopled that place . 14 It was also attempted by Alonzo de Herera , at two several times . He endured great misery , but never entered one league into the country . He sought it by Viapari or Amana , and was at last slain by a nation of Indians called Xaguas . 15 It was also undertaken by Antonio Sedenno , with whom Herrera and Augustine Delgado joined in the conquest of Trinidad , against Bawcunar a famous king of that place . He passed by Maracapana in the year 1536 to discover El Dorado with 500 chosen men . In this journey he god much gold , and took many Indian prisoners , whom he manacled in irons ; and many of x 497 21 them died as they were led in the way . The Tigers being fleshed on those dead carkeisses , assaulted the Spaniards , who with much trouble hardly defended themselves from them . Sedenno was buried within the precinct of the empire near the head of the river Tinados . Most of his people perished likewise . 16 Augustine Delgado searched the country to the Southward of Cumanawgoto with 53 . footmen , and three horsemen . The wars that were then between the Indians of the vale , and those of the mountains , served well for his