nor foes . Which manner of dealing , though in some part it satisfied their desire of present profit ; yet hath it otherwise done them much harm , in hardening and driving those nations to desperate resolutions . 3 From the mouth of Orellana to seek entrance with any number of men , & to boar a hold through the mountains is all one . Neither find we , that any seeking it that way , have at any time boasted of their gains or pleasurable journeys . 4 From Trinidad , as the course is shortest , so doth it promise best likelihood of success . Howbeit , impossible it is with any vessel of ordinary burden by that way to recover the river of Raleana . The second , The Spaniards have be so far from helping and furthering one another , or admitting partners or coadjutors in the Guiana - cause , that among so many attempts , from the beginning to the last , I cannot find any one , when they were otherwise likeliest to prevail , 500 free from discords , mutinies , and cruel murders among themselves . Thirdly . The Spaniardes in this place have missed that advantage , which elsewhere hath steeded themselves in all their conquests : namely , the dissensions and mutual wars of the Indians . Which of that force it is , may be gathered by the example Arauco in Chili . For the Indians of that one province containing in circuit not above 20 . leagues , have maintained wars above these 30 . years against all the Spaniards , and in despite of them have kept their own country , oftentimes discomfiting their enemies in many set battles , burning and destroying some of their strongest towns . The chief reason whereof I take to be , because no Indian nation was enemy unto them . And howsoever the Spaniards vaunt of their redoubted exploits in the Indies : yet do their own writings in effect testify , that without the aid of the Indians divided among themselves , Mexico , Peru , and the rest , had never been Spanish . Lastly . I can impute it to no cause so rightly , as immediately to the divine providence : for by him princes reign . And in my belief ( except we will look to be warned by miracle from heaven ) we need no further assurances , then we already have to persuade our selves , that it hath pleased God of his infinite goodness , in his will and purpose to appoint and reserve this empire for us .