And advertisement to the Reader . IN this Breviary , the names only are comprised of such , as being led with the general fame of Guiana , have endeavoured to discover and possess it . The whole histories are long and cannot suddenly be translated or englished at large , as we in these Elegies find them . It may perhaps seem strange and incredible , that so many cavalleros should all fade in this one attempt , since in many parts of the Indies , far smaller numbers in shorter time have performed as great matters , and subdued mighty kingdoms : I have therefore thought it good here to allege those reasons , which by circumstance may be gathered to have been chief impediments to the Spaniard in this intended search and conquest . The first may be the remoteness or distance of their places of Rendezvous , from El Dorado : which appear to be foure , Nuevo reyno , the mouth of Amazones or Orellana , Cubagua or the coast of the Caracas , and Trinidad . 1 From Moiobamba , where Orellana hath his headspring , to his mouth , the Spaniards account it 2000 . leagues . Raleana riseth near the said mountains in Moiobamba , & tributeth his waters to the sea , not far from the other : Guiana is environed with these 2 fresh - 499 A . D . 1596 . water - seas , where their distance is greatest from their risings , and is beside guarded with impassable mountains which enclose and defend it on all parts , excepting Topiawaries country . It is no marvel then , if the vigor , heart , & life of those Spaniards , who sought it from Nuevo Reyno , were allayed & spent , before they came near to it , in those long , desolate & uncomfortable ways . 2 From Cubagua to seek it by sea in vessels of any burden , is a work of far greater labour , then to sail directly from Spaine . And to pass over land is a matter of great difficulty , by reason that the Indian nations inhabiting between the coast of The Caracas and Guiana , being wearied and harried with the daily incursions of the Spaniards , have now turned their abused patience into fury , refusing to suffer any forces of men to be led through their countries ' . For the Spaniards traveling in those parts , when they found not gold answerable to their expectation , overlaid them with cruelties , tyrannic , and thraldom : forbearing neither men , women , friends ,