CERTAIN BRIEF TESTIMONIES Concerning the mighty River of Amazones or Orellana , and of the most wonderful downfall or cataract of waters at the head thereof , nam by the Spaniards El Pongo : together with some mention of the rich and stately empire of Dorado , called by Sir Walter Ralegh and the natural inhabitants Guiana , and of the golden country of Paytity near adjoining , with other memorable matters : taken out of Josephus de Acosta his natural and moral historic of the West Indies . The first Testimony out of Josephus de Acosta , lib . 2 . cap . 6 . Ut when we entreat of Rivers , that which some men call the river of Amazones , others Marannon , others the river of Orellana , doth justly put to silence all the rest , whereunto our Spaniards have gone and sailed . And I stand in doubt , whither I may call it a river or a sea . This river runneth from the mountains of Piru , from which it gathereth infinite store of waters , of rain , and rivers , which runneth along , gathering it self together , and passing through the great fields and plains of Paytiti , of Dorado , and of the Amazones , and falls at length into the Ocean sea , and entereth into it almost over against the Isles of Margarita and Trinidad . But it grows so broad , especially towards the mouth , that it makes in the midst many and great Isles : and that which seems incredible , sailing in the middle channel 16 1590 . of the river , men can see nothing but the sky and the river , although men say that there are hills near the banks thereof , which can not be kenned , through the greatness of the River . we understood by very good means the wonderful breadth and largeness of this River , which justly may be called the Emperor of Rivers , to wit by a brother of our company , which being a boy was there , & sailed it wholly through , being personally present in all the successes of that strange entrance , which Pedro the Orsua made , and in the mutinies and perilous conspiracies of that wicked Diego de Aguirre , out of all which troubles and dangers the Lord delivered him , to make him one of our society . The second Testimony out of Josephus de Acosta , lib . 3 . cap . 20 . A Mong all the rivers not only of the West Indies but also of the whole world , the chief is the River of Marannon or of the Amazones , whereof I have spoken in the second book . The Spaniards have diverse times sailed along this river , with determination to discover countries , which , according to report , are of great riches , especially that which they call Dorado , and Paytiti . The Adelantado or admiral Juan de Salinas made a very notable entrance , although to small profit . It hath a salt or fallen