of water which they call El Pongo , which El Pongo . is one of the most dangerous places in the world : for being restrained between two exceeding high divided mountains , it makes a fallen of terrible depth where the water with the great descent makes such whirlpools that it seems impossible but that it should sink it self there into the ground . For all this the boldness of men hath attempted to pass the said El Pongo for the greediness to come to that so famous renowned Dorado . They suffered themselves to be carried from aloft , being thrown down headlong with the fury of the river , and sitting fast in their Canoas or boats in which they sailed , although they were overturned in the fall , and they and xi 17 b their Canoas sunk down to the bottom , yet they rose up again above the water , and at length with their hands , and force got out of the whirlpools . The whole army in a manner escaped , saving a very few which were drowned : and which I most marvel at , they handled the matter so well , that they lost not their victuals and powder which they carried with them . In their return ( for after great travels and dangers they returned that way again ) they climb up over one of those aforesaid exceeding high mountains , creeping up upon their hands and feet . Captain Pedro de Orsua made another entrance by the self same river , and after he was slain by a mutiny of his people , other captains followed the discovery , by the arm that falls into the North Sea . One of our company told me ( who while he was a secular man was in all that expedition ) that they entered up the River almost and hundred leagues with the tides , and that when the fresh water & the salt meeteth , which is either almost under or very near the Equinoctial line , the river is 70 leagues broad , a thing incredible , and which exceeds the breadth of the Mediterran sea . Howbeit other in their descriptions make it not passed 25 or 30 leagues broad at the mouth . The third Testimony out of Josephus de Acosta , lib . 3 . cap . 25 . IN that part of America , whereof the coasts be thoroughly known , the greater part of the Inland is not known , which is that which falls between Piru and Brasil , and there are diverse opinions of some , which say , that it is all sunken land full of lake ' s and bogs , and of others , which affirm that there are great and flourishing kingdoms there , and there they place the Country of Paytity , and Dorado , and great Emperors , and say , that there are wonderful things there . I herd of one of our company my self , a man of credit , that he had seen great towns , and high ways as 18