A letter written to M . Richard Staper by John Whithal from Santos in Brasil , the 26 . of June 1578 . Orshipfiill sir , and well - beloved friend M . Staper , I have me most heartily commended unto you , wishing your health even as mine own . These few words may be to let you understand , that whereas I wrote unto you not many days passed by the way of Lisbon , how that I determined to be with you very shortly , it is in this country offered me to marry , and to take my choice of three or foure : so that I am about three days ago consorted with and This my friend and father in law Italian gentleman to marry with his daughter within these foure days . This my friend and father in law Signor loffo Door is born in the city of Genua in Italy : his kindred is well known among the Italians in London : also he hath but only this child which is his daughter , which he hath thought better bestowed upon me then on any Portugal in all the country , and doth give with her in marriage to me part of and Ingenio which he hath , that doth make every year a thousand roves of sugar . This my manage will be worth to me two thousand ducats , little more or less . Also Signor loffo Door my father in law doth intend to put into my hands the whole Ingenio with sixtie or seventie slaves , and thereof to make me factor for us both . I give my living Lord thanks for placing me in such honour and plentifulness of all things . Also certain days passed I talked with the Provedor and the Captain , and they have certified me , that they Mines of gold have discovered certain Mines of silver and gold , and look every day for Master ' s to come to open the said " weredatS . Mines : which when they be opened will enrich this Vincent . country very much . This place is called S . Vincent , 26 and is distant from you two thousand leagues , and in 24 . degrees of latitude on the South side of the Equinoctial line , & almost under the Tropike of Capricorne . A country it is very healthful without sickness . Moreover , I have talked with the Captain and Provedor , and my father in law , who rule all this