country , for to have a ship with goods to come from London hither , which have promised me to give me licence , saying that now I am free denizen of this country . To cause a ship to come hither with such commodities as would serve this country , would come to great gains , God sending in safety the profit and gains . In such wares and commodities as you may ship hither 7 % voyage to from London is for every one commodity delivered here 81 f three for one , and then after the proceed may be im - X ' waXn / ployed in white sugar at foure hundred reis the rove . only . I mean also to have a friend in London to send me a ship of 60 . or 70 . tons , little more or less , with such commodities as I shall give advice for . This voyage is as good as any Peru - voyage . If you and Master Osborne will deal here , I will deal with you before any other , because of our old friendly friendship in time past . If you have any stomach thereto , in the Name of God do you espy out a fine bark of seventie or eightie tons , and send her hither with a Portugal Pilot to this port of S . Vincent in Brasil , bordering upon the borders of Peru . Also I herewith write unto you in what form and manner you shall furnish this voyage both in commodities and otherwise . First you must lade in the said ship certain Hamp - Inwhatmaner shire and Devonshire karsies : for the which you must to8 ' let her depart from London in October , and to touch a ship of in the Canaries , and there to make sale of the said or 80 . tons karsies , and with the proceed thereof to lade fifteene u t0 be made - tunnes of wines that be perfect and good , and sixe dozen of Cordovan skins of these colours , to wit , orange , tawny , yellow , read , and very fine black . I think you shall not find such colours there . Therefore you must cause them that shall go upon this voyage , to take saffron with them , to cause the same skins to be put into the said colours . Also I think you shall find oils there . Three hogsheads of sweet oil for this voyage are very necessary