, and had not sent them to Baiha , The wars where there was no need , these wars of Petiguar had of etiguar . bene ended long ago , and had saved your Majesty a great deal of charges which you had spent in following of A new cap - this conquest of Rio Grande . I have chosen one Captain John de Matas Cardoso to be Governor of Cabodelo , who is a very sufficient man . A great con - Furthermore , it may please your Majesty to under -^ cUn6the stand > that the chiefest Friars of this Monastery of S . government of Antonie have complained on me to the lord Governor the Indian general , and have caused great strife and debate between towns . him anj me touching the government and rule of these Indian towns . For the Friars would command and govern both the Indians and their towns as well in Ecclesiastical as Temporali causes , as touching the punishment of the bodies of such as are offenders . But I have resisted them in your Majesties name , and have alleged , that none but your Majesty must rule and govern them and their country , and that the towns appertain 70 to your Majesty , and not unto the Friars . But the Governor hath written a letter unto me , signifying that he hath pronounced a sentence against me in the Friars behalf , which is this . The King our master hath sent a decree and certain statutes touching the good government and order to be executed and kept in those Indian towns : and that upon sighed hereof I shall presently banish all the Mamalukes and white men which dwell in any of those Indian towns with all speed , and that none of them from hence forward shall enter into the said villages , without commandment and consent of the said Friars . So this sentence was presented unto me by the Reverend father Custodio , Prior of Sant Anton of Brasil , with a further postscript of the governor importing these words ; I do likewise charge and command you the Governor of Parajua , that presently upon sighed hereof you shall restore those villages and houses which you have burned and destroyed in