the last wars , and likewise the town of Thetowne of S . Augustine , and that you shall built them again at & Au & ustine - your own proper cost and charges : for the Friars allege that these towns were given them , by a decree sent them from Pope Pius Quintus , that the said Friars should govern and rule them . On the other side I have pronounced another sentence against the said Friars , in your Majesties name , and for your Majesty , alleging that those towns , villages , and subject ' s appertain and belong unto your Majesty , and that in temporali causes I am to punish those offenders , which shall rebel against your Majesty : and as touching ecclesiastical causes that the Vicar of this Cathedral church shall rule , govern and instruct them in the Christian religion . So we both have appealed unto your Majesty herein , and your Majesty may peruse all our writings , and then determine that which shall be best and most profitable for your Majesties service and enlargement of your crown . For through these broils the inhabitants of this Parajua forsake their houses & dwelling places , and so do some of the Friars , because they cannot be suffered to rule & govern . Also the Indians have complained against me , because I have burned their villages in this last rebellion . Wherefore if your Majesty do not send some order for this country and see into these cases , it will breed great dissension and rebellion among us , and we shall be ready to cut one another ' s throat before it be long . Thus I thought good , according to my humble bounden duty , and for the service of your Majesty and quietness of this realm , to certify your Majesty the truth of the whole matter ; hoping in short time that your Majesty will send some good order to qualify these broils : for there is great hatred and malice among us . Jesus Christ preserve and keep the royal person of your Majesty with long health , as it pleases him . From the Captainship of Parajua this present 20 of August . 1597 . Feliciano Cieza de Carvalsho .