Certain notes of the voyage to Brasill with the Minion of London aforesaid , in the year 1580 . written by Thomas Grigs Purser of the said ship . He thirde day of November in the year abovesaid we departed in the Minion of London from Harwich , from which time no great thing worth the knowledge or regard of others happened until the 22 . of December the next month , which day for our own learning & use we ob - served the setting of the Sun ne , which was West southwest , we then being under the line Equinoctial , where we found the air very temperate , and the wind for the most part Southeast and East southeast . The same day we also observed the rising of the moon , being one day after the full , which rose at East northeast . The first land that we fell with upon the coast of The isle ofS . Brasill was the island of S . Sebastian , where we arrived Sebastian . g Jay of JanUary in the year 1581 . The 16 . day Thomas Babington , and others in our pinnace , went a shore to Guaybea , where they met with John Whithall his father and mother in law , who having received letters from thence to be delivered at Santos , came aboard , and then we weighed and set sail , and the TheykofS . 28 . day we arrived at the island of Santa Catelina , Catelina . near the entrance of Santos . Our course from S . Sebastian was Southwest and by West , and betwixt the Southwest and by West , and West southwest . This island of Santa Catelina seems at the first to be a part of the island of Girybia . we anchored at nine fathom black osie ground . Upon the island there grow many Palmito - trees , but no fresh water is there to be found . The third day of February we arrived before the town 34 of Santos , and were there well received and entertained of They arrive the Captain , the kings officers , and all the people . at Santos . The fourth day we took into our ship a beef alive , which served for the victualling of the ship , and the refreshing of our men , and to make us the merrier at Shrovetide . The eight day we delivered to M . John Whithall a bedstead with the