The said river of Plate is so full of sands and dangers , and the fresh so fierce sometime , that not shipping dares to deal with it , small barks to their knowledge may go up it , and not else . The Portugales here cannot be suffered to use their Mines of treasure in these parts , upon pain of death , the contrary being commanded by the king and the Viceroy , who is as their king in place of authority . About twentie leagues from Santos there is a certain kind of wild Savages , lying in the mountains , which are in friendship with the Portugales , and they have continual wars with certain other Savages that dwell towards the borders of Peru , which is distant from Santos about 400 . or 500 . leagues . Those Savages of Peru have store of gold and silver , but they know not the use of it . Look what Savages of their enemies they take , they fell them to the Portugales for knives , combes , axes or hatchet ' s , and other trifles : they will fell one for a penny - knife to a Portugal , and after two years they are worth twentie or thirtie ducats to the Portugal . This people have also continual wars with the Spaniards : and this was told us by one of those Savages , which hath dwelled among the Portugales these seven years , with his master called Sennor Manoel Veloso . And this fellow would willingly have come with us for There are certain rocks that lie off between the isle of Alcatrarzas and S . Sebastian , about two leagues , Theyleof which are to be taken heed of , which a far off in fair Alcatrarzas weather show like the sails of ships . There are other rocks that lie off S . Catelina also five leagues to the East and by South into the sea off the island . At our coming up to Santos we found foure fathom and a half water in the shallowest place , and the like we found within a league after we were departed from S . Catelina , little more or less , but after you have run in the depth of foure fathom and a half , about a mile or less , then you shall have it deeper again more and more . Before the town of Santos we road in eight and tenne fathom water .