never get any direction what course to take in any such extremities , though many times he had entreated for it , as often I have herd him with grief report . In sailing to this port by good chance we met with The Roebuck , wherein master Cocke had endured great extremities , and had lost his boat , and therefore desired our Captain to keep him company , for he was in very desperate case . Our Captain hoist out his boat , and went aboard him to know his estate , and returning told us the hardness thereof , and desired the Master and all the company to be careful in all their watches not to lose The Roebuck , and so we both arrived at Port Desire the sixth They arrive at of March . Port Desire . The 16 . of March The Black pinnace came unto us , but master Gilberts bark came not , but returned home Adrian to England , having their Captain aboard the Roebuck Gilberts bark without any provision more then the apparel that he England wore , who came from thence aboard our ship to remain with our Captain , by reason of the great friendship between them . The 18 . the Galeon came into the road , and master Candish came into the harbour in a boat which he had made at sea ; for his long boat and lighthorseman were lost at sea , as also a pinnace which he had A pinnace built at Santos : and being aboard The Desire he told our built at Santos . Captain of all his extremities , and spoke most hardly of his company , and of diverse gentlemen that were with him , purposing no more to go aboard his own ship , but to stay in The Desire . We all sorrowed to hear such hard speeches of our good friends ; but having spoken with the 391 gentlemen of the Galeon we found them faithful , honest , and resolute in proceeding , although it pleased our general otherwise to conceive of them .. The 20 . of March we departed from Port Desire , master Candish being in The Desire with us . The eighth They fallen with of April 1592 , we fell with the Straights of Magellan , enduring many furious storms between Port Desire and an