, likewise the lack of our boat and a Carpenter , of ropes , of pitch , [ III . 84 . 1 . ] treynailes , bolts , and planks , and the want of a skilful Chirurgeon . And whereas a view being taken of our provision there was found but five months victuals of bred , meal , greets , and peas , and also but three months victuals of beef , penguins and pork , three hogsheads of wine , ten gallons of aquavitae ( whereof the sick men could not get any to relieve them , ) foure hogsheads of syder and 18 . flitches of bacon , etc . the company hath but three flitches . Also the said Captain Hawlse and Street have taken and seized upon 17 . pots of butter , with certain cheese , and and hogshead of bred at a time , and have be thereof possessed to their own private uses : And have not only immoderately spent the companies provision in butter , cheese , aquavitae , etc . but have also consumed those sweet meats , which were laid up in the ship only for the relief of sick persons ( themselves being healthy and found , and withholding the said meats from others in their sickness ) and even at this time also ( by reason of the small store of our provision , we being inforced to come to a shorter allowance ) they thee said Captain Hawlse and your mate Street , do find themselves aggrieved at the very same allowance , wherewith other men are well contented . And although ( beside our ordinary allowance , and more then all the rest of the company ) they only have their breakfasts permitted unto them , yet they complain that the company goes about to famish them , whereas indeed they do what lies in them to famish the company by feeding themselves fat , which do not labour at all . These things being well weighed , you ought likewise to consider the 386 long time that we have lain here in these Straights of Magellan , having be at , and seven or eight times , tenne leagues beyond Cape Froward , we have had but a small gale of wind with us : neither could we come to and anchor , the water being so deep : and ( you know ) the place is so dangerous , that we were once embayed , and could scarce get out again : And likewise , What fogs and