do most humbly beseech you to consider , that ( after the loss of so many men and all the casualties aforesaid , as we were taking in of water by Port Famine , our boatswain , the hooper , and William Magoths being on shore ) Matthew Hawlse did hallow to have them in all the haste come on - bord : saying therewithal ! these words : He that will come in this voyage , must not make any reckoning to leave two or three men on shore behind him , whereas we had so lately lost all the foresaid men , having then but sixe sailors left us on - bord . Also the said Matthew Hawlse did carry a pistol for the space of two days secretly under his gown , intending therewithal ! to have murdered Andrew Stoning , and William Combe , as by confession of Hawlse his man , William Martin , it is manifest : for the said William Martine reported unto two of his friends , viz . Richard Hungate , and Emanuel Dornel , that he kneeled upon his knees one whole hour before Matthew Hawlse in his own cabin , desiring him , for Gods cause , not to kill either of them , especially because the said Stoning and Martin came both out of one town . Also the said Hawlse , at our second time of watering in the place aforesaid , came into the Gunners room to speak with you ( your self with the master Gunner Thomas brown , and his mate William Frier being then present ) demanding of you , if he should send certain men to Port famine being two leagues from the ship by land . Thomas Browne answered him presently , that he should send none , for fear least the wind might arise , and by that means we should lose 388 so many of our men more : to whom Matthew Hawlse replied that it was not material , for that he had made choice of a company for the very same purpose , whose names were Emmanuel Dornel , Richard Hungate , Paul Carry , John Davis , Gabriel Valerosa , a Portugall , and Peter a Britaine , and the Spaniard which we had taken in at the same place , at our first time of watering . And thus we end , desiring God to send us well into our native country . In witness whereof we have subscribed our names . Thomas brown , Gunner , John Morrice , etc .