A letter of M . Thomas Candish to the right honourable the Lord Hunsdon , Lord Chamberlain , one of her Majesties most honourable Privy Council , touching the success of his voyage about the world . Right honourable , as your favour heretofore hath be most greatly extended towards me , so I humbly desire a continuance thereof : and though there be no means in me to deserve the same , yet the uttermost of my services shall not be wanting , whensoever it shall please your honour to dispose thereof . I am humbly to desire your honour to make known unto her Majesty the desire I have had to do her Majesty service in the performance of this voyage . And as it hath pleased God to give her the victory over part of her enemies , so I trust year long to see her overthrow them all . For the places of their wealth , whereby they have maintained and made their wars , are now perfectly discovered : and if it please her Majesty , with a very small power she may take the spoil of them all . It hath pleased the Almighty 376 to suffer me to circompasse the whole globe of the world , entering in at the Straight of Magellan , and returning by the cape de Buena Esperanza . In which voyage I have either discovered or brought certain intelligence of all the rich places of the world that ever were known or discovered by any Christian . I navigated alongst the coast of Chili , Peru , and Nueva Espanna , where I made great spoils : I burned and sunk 19 sails of ships small and great . All the villages and towns that ever I landed at , I burned and spoiled : and had I not be discovered upon the coast , I had taken great quantity of treasure . The matter of most profit unto me was a great ship of the kings which I took at California , which ship came from the Philippinas , being one of the richest of merchandise that ever passed those seas , as the kings register and merchant ' s accounts did show : for it did amount in valve to * in Mexico to be sold . Which goods ( for that my ships were not able to contain the least part of them ) I was enforced to set on fire . From the cape of California , being the uttermost part of all Nueva Espanna , I navigated to the Islands of the Philippinas hard upon the coast of China ; of which country I have brought such intelligence as hath not be herd of in these parts . The stateliness and riches of which country I fear to make report of , lest I should not be credited : for if I had not known sufficiently the incomparable wealth of that country , I should have be as incredulous thereof , as others will be that have not had the like experience . I sailed along the Hands of the Malucos , where among some of the heathen people I was well entreated , where our country men may have trade as freely as the Portugals , if they will themselves . From thence I passed by the cape of Buena Esperanza , and found out by the way homeward the island of S . Helena , where the Portugals use to relieve themselves : and from that island God hath suffered me to return into 377 England . All which services with my self I humbly prostrate at her Majesties feet , desiring the Almighty long to continue her reign among us : for at this day she is the most famous and victorious prince that lives in the world . Thus humbly desiring pardon of your honour for my tediousness , I leave your lordship to the tuition of the Almighty . Plimmouth this ninth of September 1588 . Your honours most humble to command , Thomas Candish .