the offer of the discovery of the west Indies by Christopher Columbus to king Henry the seven in the year 1488 the 13 of February : with the king acceptation of the offer , and the cause whereupon he be deprive of the same : record in the thirteenth chapter of the history of don Fernand Columbus of the life and deed of his father Christopher Columbus . 
 the same in english . 
 / " ^Hristopher Columbus fear lest if the king of v-u Castille in like manner ( as the king of Portugal have do ) shall not condescend unto his enterprise , he shall be enforce to offer the same again to some other prince , 8c so much time shall be spend therein , send into England a certain brother of he which he have with he , who name be Bartholomew Columbus , who , albeit he have not the latin tongue , yet nevertheless be a man of experience and skilful in sea cause , and can very well make sea card and globe , and other instrument belong to that profession , as he be instruct by his brother . wherefore after that Bartholomew Columbus be depart for England , his luck be to fall into the hand of pirate , which spoil he with the rest of they which be in the ship which he go in . upon which occasion , and by reason of his poverty and sickness which cruel assault he in a country so far distant from his friend , he defer his am-bassage for a long while , until such time as he have 
 get somewhat handsome about he with make of sea fir England . card . at length he begin to deal with king Henry the seven the father of Henry the eight , which reign at this present : unto who he present a map of the world , wherein these verse be write , which i find among his paper : and i will here set they down , rather for their antiquity then for their goodness . 
 thou which desire easy the coast of land to know , this comely map right learned the same to thou will show : 
 which Strabo , Pliny , Ptolomew and Isodore maintain : yet for all that they do not all in one accord remain . 
 137 
 . 
 the occasion why the west Indies be not discover 
 king Henry the seven his acceptation of Columbus offer . 
 here also be set down the late discover burn zone 
 by Portugal , unto the world which whilom be unknown , 
 whereof the knowledge now at length through all the world be blow ; 
 and a little under he add : 
 for the author or the drawer . 
 he , who dear native soil hight stately Genua , even he who name be Bartholomew Colon de terra 
 Rubra , 
 the year of grace a thousand and four hundred and fourscore 
 and eight , and on the thirteenth day of February more , 
 in London publish this work . to Christ all laud therefore . 
 and because some peradventure may observe that he call himself Columbus de terra Rubra , i say , that in like manner i have see some subscription of my father Christopher Columbus , before he have the degree of admiral , wherein he sign his name thus , Columbus de terra Rubra . but to return to the king of England , i say , that after he have see the map , and that which my father Christopher Columbus offer unto he , he accept the offer with joyful countenance , and send to call he into England . but because God have reserve the say offer for Castille , Columbus be go in the mean space , and also return with the performance of his enterprise , as hereafter in order shall be rehearse . now will i leave off from make any far mention of that which Bartholomew Colon have negotiate in England , and i will return unto the admiral , etc 
 