the first voyage of m. John Davis , undertake in June 1585. for the discovery of they northwest passage , write by m. John Janes merchant , sometime servant to the worshipful master William Sanderson . 
 ertaine honourable personage and worthy gentleman of the court and country , with diverse worshipful merchant of London and of the west country , move with desire to advance God glory and to seek the good of their native country , consult together of 
 the likelihood of the discovery of they northwest passage , which heretofore have be attempt , but unhappy give over by accident unlooked for , which turn the enterpriser from their principali purpose , resolve after good deliberation , to put down their adventure to provide for necessary ship , and a fit man to be chief conductor of this so hard a enterprise . the set forth of this action be commit by the adventurer , especial to the care of m. William Sanderson merchant of London , who be so forward therein , that beside his travail which be not small , he become the great adventurer with his purse , and commend unto the rest of the company one m. John Davis , a man very well ground in the principle of the art of navigation , for captain and chief pilot of this exploit . 
 thus therefore all thing be put in a readiness , we depart from Dartmouth the seven of June , towards the discovery of the aforesaid northwest passage , with two bark , the one be of 50. ton , 381 
 name the sunshine of London , and the other be 35. ton , name the moonshine of Dartmouth . in the sunshine we have 23. person , who name be these follow , m. John Davis captain , William Eston master , Richard pope master mate , John Jane merchant , Henry Davie gunner , William across boatswain , John bag , Walter Arthur , luke Adam , Robert coxworthie , John Ellis , John Kelley , Edward Helman , musician . William Dick , Andrew Maddock , Thomas hill , Robert wat carpenter , William Russell , Christopher Gorney boy : James coal , Francis Ridley , John Russell , Robert Cornish musician . 
 the moonshine have 19 person , William Bruton captain , John Ellis master , the rest mariner . 
 the 7. of June the captain and the master draw out a proportion for the continuance of our victual . 
 the 8. day the wind be at southwest and west southwest , we put in for Falmouth , where we remain until the 13. 
 the 13. the wind blow at north , and be fair weather we depart . 
 the 14. with contrary wind we be force to put into Silley . 
 the 15. we depart thence , have the wind north and by east moderate and fair weather . 
 the 16. we be drive back again , and be constrain to arrive at new Grymsby in Silley : here the wind remain contrary 12. day , and in that space the captain , the master and i go about all the hand , and the captain do plat out and describe the situation of all the hand , rock and harborough to the exact use of navigation , with line and scale thereunto convenient . 
 they depart the 28. in God name we depart the wind be from Silley . Easterly but calm . 
 July . the first of July we see great store of porpoise ; 
 the master call for a harp iron , and shoot twice or thrice : sometime he miss , and at last shoot one 382 
 and strike he in the side , and wound he into the ship ; when we have he aboard , the master say it be a darlie head . 
 the 2. we have some of the fish sodden , and it do eat as sweet as any mutton . 
 the 3. we have moor in sight , and the master go to shoot at they , but they be so great , that they burst our iron , and we lose both fish , iron , pastime and all : yet nevertheless the master shoot at they with a pike , and have wellnigh get one , but he be so strong that he burst off the bar of the pike and go away : than he take the boathook , and hit one with that , but all will not prevail , so at length we let they alone . 
 the 6. we see a very great whale , and every day we see whale continual . 
 the 16. 17. and 18. we see great store of whale . great store of 
 the 19 of July we fall into a great whirl and us . brustle of a tide , set to the northward : and sail about half a league we come into a very calm sea , which bend to the southsouthwest . here we hear a mighty great roar of the sea , as if it have be the breach of some shore , the air be so foggy and full of thick mist , that we can not see the one ship from the other , be a very small distance asunder : so the captain and the master be in distrust how the tide may set they , cause the moonshine to hoist out her boat and to sound , but they can not find ground in 300. fathom and better . then the captain , master , and i go towards the breach , to see what it shall be , give charge to our gunner that at every glass they shall shoot off a musketshot , to the intent we may keep our self from loose they . then come near to the breach , we meet many hand of ice dote , which have quick compass we about : than we go upon some of they , and do perceive that all the roar which we hear , be cause only by the roll of this ice together : our company see we not to return 383 
 the rout if the ice together make a great roar . 
 accord to our appointment , leave off shoot musket , and begin to shoot falkonet , for they fear some mishap have befall we , but before night we come aboard again with our boat lade with ice , which make very good fresh water . than we bend our course towards the north , hope by that mean to double the land . 
 the 20. as we sail along the coast the fog break up , and we discover the land , which be the most deform rocky and mountainous land that ever we see : the first sight whereof do show as if it have be in form of a sugarloaf , stand to our sight above the cloud , for that it do show over the fog like a white list in the sky , the top altogether cover with snow , and the shore beset with ice a league off into the sea , make such irksome noise as that it seem to be the true pattern of desolation , and after the same our captain name it , the land of desolation . 
 the 21. the wind come northerly and overblew , so that we be constrain to bend our course south again , for we perceive that we be run into a very deep bay , where we be almost compass with ice , for we see very much towards the northnortheast , west , and Southwest : and this day and this night we clear our self of the ice , run southsouthwest along the shore . 
 upon Thursday be the 22. of this month , about three of the clock in the morning , we hoist out our boat , and the captain with six sailor go towards the shore , think to find a land place , for the night before we do perceive the coast to be void of ice to our judgement , and the same night we be all persuaded that we have see a Canoa row along the shore , but afterward we fall in some doubt of it , but we have no great reason so to do . the captain row towards the shore , will the master to bear in with the land after he , and before he come near the shore by the space of a league , or about two mile , he find so much ice , that he can not get to land by any 384 
 mean . here our mariner put to their line to see if they can get any fish , because there be so many seal upon the coast , and the bird do beat upon the water , but all be in vain : the water about this place be very black and thick like to a filthy stand pool , we sound and have ground in 120. fathom . while the captain be row to the shore , our man see wood upon the rock like to the rock of Newfoundland , but i can not discern they , yet it may be so very well : for we have wood float upon the coast every day , and the moonshine take up a tree at sea not far from the coast be sixty foot of length and fourteen handful about , have the root upon it : after this the captain come aboard , the weather be very calm and fair we bend our course towards the south , with intent to double the land . 
 the 23. we coast the land which do lie Eastnortheast and Westsouthwest . 
 the 24. the wind be very fair at east , we coast the land which do lie east and west , not be able to come near the shore by reason of the great quantity of ice . at this place , because the weather be somewhat cold by reason of the ice , and the better to encourage our man , their allowance be increase : the captain and the master , take order that every mess , be five person , shall have half a pound of bread and a can of beer every morning to breakfast . the weather be not very cold , but the air be moderate like to our april-weather in England : when the wind come from the land , or the ice , it be some what cold , but when it come off the sea it be very hot . 
 the 25 of this month we depart from sight of this land at six of the clock in the morning , direct our course to the northwestward , hope in God mercy to find our desire passage , and so continue above four day . 
 the 29 of July we discover land in 64 degree 15 minute of latitude , bear Northeast from we . the vn 385 2 b 
 very black water . 
 float wood . 
 coldebyreason ofyce . 
 they sail northwestward above four day . 
 land in 64 degree 15 min. 
 the sound where our ship do ride be call gilbert sound . 
 musician . 
 the people of the country come and confer with man . 
 wind be contrary to go to the northwestwards , we bear in with this land to take some view of it , be utter void of the pester of ice and very temperate . come near the coast , we find many fair sound and good road for ship , and many great inlet into the land , whereby we judge this land to be a great number of island stand together . here have more our bark in good order , we go on shore upon a small island to seek for water and wood . upon this island we do perceive that there have be people : for we find a small shoe and piece of leather sow with sinew , and a piece of fur , and wool like to Bever . than we go upon another island on the other side of our ship : and the captain , the master , and i , be get up to the top of a high rock , the people of the country have espy we , make a lamentable noise , as we think , with great outcry and skreeching : our hear they , think it have be the howl of wolf . at last i hallow again , and they likewise cry . than we perceive where they stand , some on the shore , and one row in a Canoa about a small island fast by they , we make a great noise , partly to allure they to we , and partly to warn our company of they . whereupon m. Bruton and the master of his ship , with other of their company , make great haste towards we , and bring our musician with they from our ship , purpose either by force to rescue we , if need shall so require , or with courtesy to allure the people . when they come unto we , we cause our musician to play , our self dance , and make many sign of friendship . at length there come ten canoas from the other island , and two of they come so near the shore where we be , that they talk with we , the other be in their boat a pretty way off . their pronunciation be very hollow through the throat , and their speech such as we can not understand : only we allure they by friendly embrace and sign of courtesy . at length one of they point up to the sun with his hand , will present strike his breast so 
 386 
 .. I585 ' hard that we may hear the blow . this he do many time before he will any way trust we . then John Ellis the master of the moonshine be appoint to use his best policy to gain their friendship ; who strike his breast , and point to the sun after their order : which when he have diverse time do , they begin to trust he , and one of they come on shore , to who we throw our cap , stocking and glove , and such other thing as than we have about we , play with our music , and make sign of joy , and dance . So the night come , we bid they farewell , and go aboard our bark . 
 the next morning be the 30 of July there come 37 thirty seven canoas row by our ship , call to we to come on canms-shoare : we not make any great haste unto they , one of they go up to the top of the rock , and leap and dance as they have do the day before , show we a seal skin , and another thing make like a timbrel , which he do beat upon with a stick , make a noise their music . like a small drum . whereupon we man our boat and come to they , they all stay in their canoas : we come to the water side be they be : and after we have swear by the sun after their fashion , they do trust we . so i shake hand with one of they , and he kiss my hand , and we be very familiar with they . 
 we be in so great credit with they upon this single great famill-acquaintance , that we can have any thing they have . with the we buy five canoas of they : we buy their clothes from their back , which be all make of seal skin and bird skin ; their buskin , their hose , their glove , all be common sow and well dress : so that we be full persuade that they have diverse artificer among they . we have a pair of buskin of they full of fine wool like beaver . their apparel for heat be make of bird skin with their feather on they . we see among they leather dress like glover leather , and thick thong like white leather of a good length . we have of their dart and oar , and find in they that 
 387 
 they may •make much train , if they have mean how to use it . 
 Moscovie glass . 
 a fruit like corinth . 
 they will by no mean displease we , but will give we whatsoever we ask of they , and will be satisfy with whatsoever we give they . they take great care one of another : for when we have buy their boat , than two other will come and carry he away between they that have sell we his . they be very tractable people , void of craft or double deal , and easy to be bring to any civility or good order : but we judge they to be idolater and to worship the sun . 
 during the time of our abode among these island we find reasonable quantity of wood , both fir , spruce and juniper ; which whether it come float any great distance to these place where we find it , or whether it grow in some great island near the same place by we not yet discover , we know not ; but we judge that it grow there further into the land than we be , because the people have great store of dart and oar which they make none account of , but give they to we for small trifle , as point and piece of paper . we see about this coast marvelous great abundance of seal skull together like skull of small fish . we find no fresh water among these island , but only snow water , whereof we find great pool . the cliflfe be all of such oar as m. Frobisher bring from Meta incognita . we have diverse show of study or Muscovy glass shine not altogether unlike to crystal . we find a herb grow upon the rock , who fruit be sweet , full of red juice , and the ripe one be like corinth . we find also birch and willow grow like shrub low to the ground . Theise people have great store of fur as we judge . they make show unto we the 30 of this present , which be the second time of our be with they , after they perceive we will have skin and fur , that they will go into the country and come again the next day with such thing as they have : but this night the wind come fair , the captain and the master will by no mean detract the purpose of our discovery . and so the last of this month about four 388 
 of the clock in the morning in God name we set sail , and be all that day becalm upon the coast . 
 the first of August we have a fair wind , and so pro - August . ceed towards the northwest for our discovery . 
 the sixth of August we discover land in 66 degree land in 66 40 minute of latitude , altogether void from the pester of degree +° ice : we anchor in a very fair road under a brave ' mount , the cliflfe whereof be as orient as gold . this mount be name mount Raleigh . the road where our ship lay at anchor be call Totnes ride . the sound which do compass the mount be name Exeter sound . the foreland towards the north be call dyer cape . the foreland towards the south be name cape Walsingham . so soon as we be come to a anchor in Totnes ride under mount Raleigh , we espy four white four white bear at the foot of the mount : we suppose they to eares-be goat or wolf , man our boat and go towards they : but when we come near the shore , we find they to be white bear of a monstrous bigness : we be desirous of fresh victuali and the sport , begin to assault they , and i be on land , one of they come down the hill right against i : my piece be charge with hailshot and a bullet : i discharge my piece and shoot he in the neck ; he roar a little , and take the water straight , make small account of his hurt . than we follow he with our boat , and kill he with boar-spear , and two more that night . we find nothing in their maw ; but we judge by their dung that they feed upon grass , because it appear in all respect like the dung of a horse , wherein we may very plain see the very straw . 
 the 7 we go on shore to another bear which lie all night upon the top of a island under mount Raleigh , and when we come up to he he lie fast asleep . i level at his head , and the stone of my piece give no fire : with that he look up , and lay down his head huge white 
 again : then i shoot be charge with two bullet , and strike he in the head : he be but amaze fall 
 389 
 backward : whereupon we run all upon he with boar-spear , and thrust he in the body : yet for all that he grip away our boar-spear , and go towards the water ; and as he be go down , he come back again . than our master shoot his boar-spear , and strike he in the head , and make he to take the water , and swim into a cove fast by , where we kill he , and bring he aboard . the breadth of his forefoot from one side to the other be fourteen inch over . they be very fat , so as we be constrain to cast the fat away . we see a raven upon mount Raleigh . we find withy also grow like low shrub and flower like primrose in the say place . the coast be very mountainous , altogether without wood , grass , or earth , and be only huge mountain of stone ; but the brave stone that ever we see . the air be very moderate in this country . 
 the 8 we depart from mount Raleigh , coast along the shore , which lie Southsouthwest , and eastnortheast . 
 the 9 our man fall in dislike of their allowance , because it be too small as they think : whereupon we make a new proportion ; every mess be five to a mess shall have four pound of bread a day , twelve wine quart of beer , six Newland fish ; and the flesh day a gill of pease more : so we restrain they from their butter and cheese . 
 the both we come to the most southerly cape of this land , which we name the cape of God mercy , as be the place of our first entrance for the discovery . the weather be very foggy we coast this north land ; at length when it break up , we perceive that we be shoot into a very fair entrance or passage , be in some place twenty league broad , and in some thirty , altogether void of any pester of ice , the weather very tolerable , and the water of the very colour , nature and quality of the main ocean , which give we the great hope of our passage . Having sail northwest sixty league in this entrance 
 39° 
 we discover certain island stand in the midst thereof , have open passage on both side . whereupon our ship divide themselves , the one sail on the north side , the other on the south side of the say isle , where we stay five day , have the wind at southeast , very foggy and foul weather . 
 the 14 we go on shore and find sign of people , for we find stone lay up together like a wall , and see the skull of a man or a woman . 
 the 15 we hear dog howl on the shore , which we think have be wolf , and therefore we go on shore to kill they . when we come on land the dog come present to our boat very gentle , yet we think they come to pray upon we , and therefore we shoot at they , and kill two : and about the neck of one of they we find a leathern collar , whereupon we think they to be tame dog . there be twenty dog like mastiff with prick ear and long bush tail : we find a bone in the pizzle of their dog . than we go far , and find two slead make like we in England : the one be make of fir , spruce and oaken board sawen timber like inch board : the other be make all of whale bone , sawen-& there hang on the top of the slead three head of beast which they have kill . we see here lark , raven , foul . and partridge . 
 the 17 we go on shore , and in a little thing make like a oven with stone i find many small trifle , as a small canoa make of wood , a piece of wood make like a image , a bird make of bone , bead have small hole a image . in one end of they to hang about their neck , and other small thing . the coast be very barren without wood or grass : the rock be very fair like marble , full of vein of diverse colour . we find a seal which be kill not long before , be flean , and hide under stone . 
 our captain and master search still for proba - probability bility of the passage , and first find , two that this place fi^the passage . be all island , with great sound pass between they . 
 391 
 we never come into any bay before or after , but the water colour be alter very blackish . 
 second , the water remain of one colour with the main ocean without alter . 
 third , we see to the west of those isle three or four whale in a skull , which they judge to come from a westerly sea , because to the eastward we see not any whale . 
 also as we be row into a very great sound lie southwest , from whence these whale come , upon the sudden there come a violent countercheck of a tide from the southwest against the flood which we come with , not know from whence it be maintain . 
 five , in sail twenty league within the mouth of this entrance we have sound in 90 fathom , fair grey osie sand , and the further we run into the westwards the deep be the water ; so that hard aboard the shore among these isle we can not have ground in 330 fathom . 
 last , it do ebb and flow six or seven fathom up and down , the flood come from diverse part , so as we can not perceive the chief maintenance thereof . 
 the 18 and 19 our captain and master determine what be best to do , both for the safeguard of their credit , and satisfy of the adventurer , and resolve , if the weather break up , to make further search . 
 the 20 the wind come direct against we : so they alter their purpose , and reason both for proceed and return . 
 the 21 the wind be northwest , we depart from these island ; and as we coast the south shore we see many fair sound , whereby we be persuade that it be no firm land but island . 
 the 23 of this month the wind come southeast , with very stormy and foul weather : so we be constrain to seek harbour upon the south coast of this entrance , where we fall into a very fair sound , and anchor in 25 fathom green osie sand . here we go on shore , where we have manifest sign of people where they have make their fire , and lay stone like a wall . in this place we 
 392 
 letter from John Davis to Walsingham , 3rd October , 1585 
 the material original position here be too large for reproduction in this downioarnmwsy / ^ lwon « sgm^ to 
 1585. see four very fair falcon ; and m. Bruton take Faukens . from one of they his prey , which we judge by the wing and leg to be a snite , for the head be eat off . 
 the 24 in the afternoon , the wind come somewhat fair , we depart from this road , purpose by God grace to return for England . 
 the 26 we depart from sight of the north land of their return . this entrance , direct our course homeward until the ten of the next month . 
 the 10. of September we fall with the land of desola - September . cion , think to go on shore , but we can get never IO3'J a good harbour . that night we put to sea again think to search it the next day : but this night arise a very great storm , and separate our ship , so that we lose the sight of the moonshine . 
 the 13. about noon ( have try all the night before with a goose wing ) we set sail , and within two hour after we have sight of the moonshine again : this day England in we depart from this land . 14. day . 
 the 27. of this month we fall with sight of England . this night we have a marvelous storm and lose the moonshine . 
 the 30. of September we come into Dartmouth , where we find the moonshine be come in not two hour before . 
 