the discovery of the isle of Frisland , Iseland , Engroneland , Estotiland , Drogeo and Icaria : make by two brethren , namely m. Nicholas Zeno , and m. Antonio his brother : gather out of their letter by m. Francisco Marcolino . 
 n the year of our lord 1200 there be in the city of Venice a famous gentleman , name Messer Marino Zeno , who for his great virtue and singular wisdom , be call and elect governor in certain common wealth of Italy : in the administration whereof he bear he - 
 self so discreet , that he be belove of all man , and his name great reverence of those that never know or see his person . and among sundry his worthy work , this be record of he , that he pacify certain grievous civil dissension that arise among the citizen of Verona : whereas otherwise , if by his grave advise and great diligence they have not be prevent , the matter be likely to break out into hot broil of 
 445 
 war . he be the first Podesta , or ruler , that the common wealth of Venice appoint in Constantinople in the year 1205 when our state have rule thereof with the french baron . this gentleman have a son name Messer Pietro , who be the father of the duke Rinieri , which duke die without issue , make his heir m. Andrea , the son of m. Marco his brother . this m. Andrea be captain general and procurator , a man of great reputation for many rare part , that be in he . he have a son m. Rinieri , a worthy senator and prudent counsellor : of who descend m. Pietro captain general of the league of the christian against the Turk , who be call dragon , for that in his shield , in stead of a manfrone which be his arm at the first , he bear a dragon . he be father to m. Carlo two grande the famous procurator and captain generail against the genoese in those cruel war , when as almost all the chief prince of Europe do oppugn and seek to overthrow our empire and liberty , wherein by his great valiancy and prowess , as Furius Camillus deliver Rome , so he deliver his country from the present peril it be in , be ready to become a prey and spoil unto the enemy : wherefore he be afterward surname the lion , and for a eternal remembrance of his fortitude and valiant exploit he give the lion in his arm . m. Carlo have two brethren . m. Nicolo , the knight and m. Antonio , the father of m. dragon , of who issue m. Caterino , the father m. Pietro da i Grocecchieri . this m. Pietro have son m. Caterino , that die the last year , be brother unto m. Francisco , m. Carlo , m. Battista , and m. Vincenzo : which m. Caterino be father to m. Nicolo , that be yet live . 
 now m. Nicolo , the knight , be a man of great courage , after this aforesaid Genouan war of Chioggia that trouble so our predecessor , enter into a great desire and fancy to see the fashion of the world and to travel and acquaint himself with the manner of 446 
 sundry nation and learn their language , whereby afterward upon occasion he may be the better able to do service to his country , and purchase to himself credit and honour . wherefore he cause a ship to be make , and have furnish she at his proper charge ( as he be very wealthy ) he depart out of our sea , and pass the strait of Gibraltar , he sail for certain day upon the ocean , keep his course still to the northward , with intent to see England and Flanders . where be assault in those sea by a terrible tempest , he be so toss for the space of many day with the sea and wind , that he know not where he be , till at length he discover land , and not be able any long to sustain the violence of the tempest the ship be cast away upon the isle of the ship of 
 Friseland . the man be save , and most part of the 
 good that be in the ship . and this be in the year pa^^island 1380. the inhabitant of the island come run in jn anno 
 great multitude with weapon to set upon m. Nicolo 1380. 
 and his man , who be sore weather-beaten and overlabour at sea , and not know in what part of the world they be , be not able to make any resistance at all , much less to defend themselves courageous , as it behoove they in such a dangerous case . and they shall have be doubtless very discourteous entreat and cruel handle , if by good hap there have not be foreign hard by the place a prince with arm people . who understand that there be even at that present a iandwith great ship cast away upon the island , come rune at arm man , the noise and outcry that they make against our when m . Zeno poor mariner , and drive away the inhabitant , sufferetl s , fp-spake in latin and ask they what they be and come unt0 im from whence they come , and perceive that they come and speak from Italy and that they be man of the say country , latin . he be surprise with marvelous great joy . wherefore promise they all , that they shall receive no discourtesy , and that they be come into a place where they shall be well use and very welcome , he take 
 447 
 Ziehmm prince of Porland or duke of Zorani . 
 Frisland the king ofnor-waye . 
 they into his protection upon his faith . this be a great lord , and possess certain island call Porland , lie on the south side of Frisland , be the rich and most populous of all those part , his name be Zichmni : and beside the say little island , he be duke of Sorani , lie over against Scotland . 
 of these north part i think good to draw the copy of a sea card , which among other antiquity i have in my house , which although it be rot through many year , yet it fall out indifferent well : and to those that be delight in these thing , it may serve for some light to the understanding of that , which without it can so easy be conceive . Zichmni be lord of those sygnory ( as be say ) be a very warlike and valiant man and above all thing famous in sea cause . and have the year before give the overthrow to the king of Norway , who be lord of the island , be desirous to win fame by feat of arm , he be come on land with his man to give the attempt for the win of Frisland , which be a island much big than Ireland . wherefore see that m. Nicolo be a man of judgement and discretion , and very expert both in sea matter and martial affair , he give he commission to go aboard his navy with all his man , charge the captain to honour he and in all thing to use his counsel . 
 this navy of Zichmni be of thirteen vessel , whereof two only be row with oar , the rest small bark and one ship , with the which they sail to the westwards and with little pain win ledovo and ilofe and diverse other small island : and turn into a bay call sudero , in the haven of the town name Sanestol , they take certain small bark lade with fish . and here they find zichmni , who come by land with his army conquer all the country as he go : they stay here but a while , and lead on their course to the westwards till they come to the other cape of the gulf or bay , then turn again , 448 
 they find certain island and break land which they reduce all unto the signory and possession of Zichmni . Theise sea , forasmuch as they sail , be in manner nothing but shold and rock , in so much that if m. Nicolo and the venetian mariner have not be their pilot , the whole fleet in judgement of all that be in it , have be cast away , so small be the skill of zichmnis man , in respect of we , who have be train up in the art and practice of navigation all the day of their life . now the fleet have do such thing as be declare , the captain , by the counsel of m. Nicolo , determine to go a land , at a town call Bondendon , to understand what success Zichmni have in his war : where they hear to their great content , that he have fight a great battle and put to flight the army of his enemy : by reason of which victory , they send ambassador from all part of the island to yield the country up into his hand , take down their ensign in every town and castle : they think good to stay in that place for his come , it be report for certain that flee will be there very short . at his come there be great congratulation and many sign of gladness show , as well for the victory by land , as for that by sea : for the which the venetian be honour and extol of all man , in such sort that there be no talk but of they , and of the great valour of m. Nicolo . wherefore the prince , who be a great favourer of valiant man and especial of those that can behave themselves well at sea , cause m. Nicolo to be bring before he , and after have commend he with many honourable speech , and praise his great industry and dexterity of wit , by the which two thing he acknowledge himself to have receive a inestimable benefit , as the save of his fleet and the win of many place without any great trouble , he make he knight , and reward his man N. leno , with many rich and bountiful gift . then depart from make knight thence they go in triumph manner towards Frisland , ^tchmni . 
 un 449 2 f 
 the chief city of that island , situate on the southeast side of the isle , within a gulf , as there be many in that s^fs lade island . in this gulf or bay there be such great abundance risknd “ for ta^en > at many ship be lade therewith to serve 
 Flanders , Flanders , Britain , England , Scotland , Norway , and den-britam , Eng - mark , and by this trade they gather great wealth . land , Scotland , and thus much be take out of a letter , that m. Nicolo Norway and send to m Antonio his brother , request that he will but not to be seek some mean to come to he . wherefore he who prove that have as great desire to travail as his brother , buy a ever any come ship , and direct his course that way : and after he have lettersentb sa^ed a great while and escape many danger , he arrive m. N. Zeno^ at length in safety with m. Nicolo , who receive he very from Frisland joyful , for that he be his brother not only in flesh and to his brother blood , but also in valour and good quality . m. Antonio 
 remain in Frisland and dwell there for the space of the end of year , 4 year with m. Nicolo , and 10 year alone . the first where they come in such grace and favour with the 
 letter . prince , that he make m. Nicolo captain of his navy , 
 and with great preparation of war they be send forth for the enterprise of Estland , which lie upon the coast between Frisland and Norway , where they do many damage : but hear that the king of Norway be come towards they with a great fleet , they depart with such a terrible flaw of wind , that they be drive upon certain shold : be a great part of their ship be cast away , the rest be save upon Grisland , a great island but dishabit . the king of Norway his fleet be take with the same storm , do utter perish in those sea : whereof Zichmni have notice , by a ship of his enemy that be cast by chance upon Grisland , have repair his fleet , and perceive himself northerly near unto the island , determine to set upon island , which together with the rest , be subject to the king of Norway : but he find the country so well fortify and defend , that his fleet be so small , and very ill appoint both of weapon and man , he be glad to retire . and so he leave that enterprise without perform 
 45° 
 Nicholas and Antonio Zeno a.d. c . 1380-90 . 
 any thing at all : and in the same channel he assault the other isle call island , which be seven , Talas , Broas , iscant , Trans , Mimant , dambere , and bre : and have spoil they all , he build a fort in bre , where he leave m. Nicolo , with certain small bark and man and munition . and now think he have do well for this voyage , with those few ship which be leave he return safe into Frisland . m. Nicolo remain now in Bres , determine in the spring to go forth and discover land : wherefore arm out three small bark in the month of July , he sail to the northward , and arrive in Engroneland . where he find a monastery of Engnneland . friar , of the order of the predicator , and a church . 
 dedicate to saint Thomas , hard by a hill that cast a ™ forth fire , like Vesuvius and Aetna . 
 there be a fountain of hot burn water with the which they heat the church of the monastery and the friar chamber , it come also into the kitchen so boil hot , that they use no other fire to dress their meat : and put their bread into brass pot without any water , it do bake as it be in a hot oven . they have also small garden cover over in the winter time , which be water with this water , be defend from the force of the snow and cold , which in those part be situate far under the pole , be very extreme , and by this mean they produce flower and fruit and herb of sundry sort , even as in other temperate country in their season , in such sort that the rude and savage people of those part see these supernatural ! effect , do take those friar for god , and bring they many present , as chicken , flesh , and diverse other thing , and have they all in great reverence as lord . when the frost and snow be great , they heat their house in manner beforesaid , and will by let in the water or open the window , at a instant temper the heat and cold at their pleasure . in the building of the monastery they use no other matter but that which be minister unto they by the fire : for they take the burn - 
 45 * 
 ing stone that be cast out as it be sparkle or cinder at the fiery mouth of the hill , and when they be most inflame , cast water upon they , whereby they be dissolve and become excellent white lime and so tough that be contrive in build it last for ever . and the very sparkle after the fire be out of they do serve in stead of stone to make wall and vault : for be once cold they will never dissolve or break , except they be cut with some iron tool , and the vault that be make of they be so light that they need no sustentaccle or prop to hold they up , and they will endure continual very fair and whole . by reason of these great commodity , the friar have make there so many building and wall that it be a wonder to see . the covert or roof of their house for the most part be make in manner follow : first they raise up the wall up to his full height , than they make it incline or bow in by little and little in form of a vault . but they be not great trouble with rain in those part , because the climate ( as i have say ) be extreme cold : for the first snow be fall , it thaw no more for the space of nine month , for so long dure their winter . they feed of the flesh of wild foul and of fish : for whereas 
 the warm water fall into the sea , there be a large and wide haven , which by reason of the heat of the water , do never freeze all the winter , by mean whereof there be such concourse and flock of sea foul and such abundance of fish , that they take thereof infinite multitude , whereby they maintain a great number of people round about , which they keep in continual work , both in building and take of fowl and fish , and in a thousand other necessary affair and business about the monastery . 
 their house be build about the hill on every side , in form round , and 25 foot broad , and in mount upward they go narrow and narrow , leave at the top a little hole , whereat the air come in to give light to the house , and the floor of the house be so hot , 45 2 
 that be within they feel no cold at all . hither in the summer time come many bark from the island their about , and from the cape above Norway , and from Trondon , and bring to the friar all manner of thing that may be desire , take in change thereof fish , which they dry in the sun or in the cold , and skin of diverse kind of beast . for the which they have wood to burr ne and timber very artificial carve , and corn , and cloth to make they apparel . for in change of the two aforesaid commodity all the nation border round about they covet to traffic with they , and so they without any travel or expense have that which they desire . to this monastery resort friar of Norway , of Suetia and of other country , but the most part be of island . there be continual in that part many bark , which be keep in there by reason of the sea be freeze , wait for the spring of the year to dissolve the ice . the fisher boat be make like unto a weaver shuttle : take the skin of fish , they fashion they with the bone of the same fish , and sow they together in many double they make they so sure and substantial , that it be miraculous to see , how in tempest they will shut themselves close within and let the sea and wind carry 
 trade in summertime from Trondon to saint Thomas friar in Groneland . resort of friar from Norway and Sueden , to the monastery in Engroneland , call S. Tho. 
 m. frobishet bring these kind of boat from these part into England , 
 they they care not whither , without any fear either of break or drown . and if they chance to be drive upon any rock , they remain sound without the least bruise in the world : and they have as it be a sleeve in the bottom , which be tie fast in the middle , and when there come any water into the boat , they put it into the one half of the sleeve , then fasten the end thereof with two piece of wood and loose the band beneath , they convey the water forth of the boat : and this they do as often as they have occasion , without any peril or impediment at all . 
 moreover , the water of the monastery , be of sulphurous or brimstony nature , be convey into the lodging of the principali friar by certain vessel of brass , tin , or stone , so hot that it heat the place 
 453 
 in the monastery of saint Thomas most of they speak the latin tongue . the end of the 2. letter . 
 N. Zeno die in Frisland . 
 as it be a stove , not carry with it any stink or other noisome smell . 
 beside this they have another conveyance to bring hot water with a wall under the ground , to the end it shall not freeze , unto the middle of the court , where it fall into a great vessel of brass that stand in the middle of a boil fountain , and this be to heat their water to drink and to water their garden , and thus they have from the hill the great commodity that may be wish : and so these friar employ all their travail and study for the most part in trim their garden and in make fair and beautiful building , but especial handsome and commodious : neither be they destitute of ingenious and painful artificer for the purpose ; for they give very large payment , and to they that bring they fruit and seed they be very bountiful , and give they care not what . so that there be great resort of workman and master in diverse faculty , by reason of the good gain and large allowance that be there . 
 the most of they speak the latin tongue , and special the superior and principal of the monastery . and this be as much as be know of Engroneland , which be all by the relation of m. Nicolo , who make also particular description of a river that he discover , as be to be see in the card that i draw . and in the end m. Nicolo , not be use and acquaint with these cruel cold , fall sick , and a little while after return into Frisland , where he die . he leave behind he in Venice , two son , m. Giovanni and m. Toma , who have two son , m. Nicolo the father of the famous cardinal Zeno , and m. Pietro of who descend the other Zenos , that be live at this day . 
 now m. Nicolo be dead , m. Antonio succeed he both in his good , and in his dignity and honour : and albeit he attempt diverse way , and make great supplication , he can never obtain licence to return into his country . for Zichmni , be a man of great 454 
 c . 1380-90 . courage and valour , have determine to make himself lord of the sea . wherefore use always the counsel and service of m. Antonio , he determine to send he with certain bark to the westwards , for that towards those part , some of his fisherman have discover certain island very rich and populous : which discovery m. Antonio , in a letter to his brother m. Carlo , recounteth from point to point in this manner , save that we have change some old word , leave the matter entire as it be . 
 six and twenty year ago there depart four fisher boat , the which , a mighty tempest arise , be toss for the space of many day very desperate upon the sea , when at length , the tempest cease , and the wether wax fair , they discover a island call Estotiland , the discovery lie to the westwards above 1000 mile from Frisland , °f Estotiland upon the which one of the boat be cast away , and six man that be in it be take of the inhabitant and man take . bring into a fair and populous city , where the king of the place send for many interpreter , but there be none can be find that understand the language of the fisherman , except one that speak latin , who be also cast by fisherman of chance upon the same island , who in the behalf of the Ensland king ask they what countryman they be : and so s ? ea e Ratine . understand their case , rehearse it unto the king , who will that they shall tarry in the country : wherefore they obey his commandment , for that they can not otherwise do , dwell five year in the island , and learn six be five the language , and one of they be in diverse part of the island , and reporteth that it be a very rich country , qne abound with all the commodity of the world , and fisher of fris-that it be little less than island , but far more fruitful , land , report have in the middle thereof a very high mountain , from the which there spring four river that pass through rich the whole country . ing with all 
 the inhabitant be very witty people , and have all the commodi-arte and faculty , as we have : and it be credible that in time past they have have traffic with our man , for Kor ’ 
 455 
 abundance of glide . trade from Estotiland , to Engoneland : skin , brimstone , and fitch : glde , corn , and beer , or ale . many city and castle . 
 a country call Drogo . 
 the 6 fisherman of Frisland only save , by show the manner to take fish . 
 the chief of the 6fisher , specifiedbefore and his companion . 
 he say , that he see latin book in the king library , which they at this present do not understand : they have a peculiar language , and letter or character to themselves . they have mine of all manner of metal , but especial they abound with gold . they have their trade in Engroneland , from whence they bring fur , brimstone and pitch : and he say , that to the southward , there be a great populous country very rich of gold . they sow corn , and make beer and ale , which be a kind of drink that north people do use as we do wine . they have mighty great wood , they make their building with wall , and there be many city and castle . they build small bark and have sail , but they have not the load stone , nor know not the use of the compass . wherefore these fisher be have in great estimation , insomuch that the king send they with twelve bark to the southward to a country which they call Drogio : but in their voyage they have such contrary weather , that they think to have perish in the sea : but escape that cruel death , they fall into another more cruel : for they be take in the country and the most part of they eat by the savage people , which feed upon man flesh , as the sweet meat in their judgement that be . 
 but that fisher with his fellow show they the manner of take fish with net , save their life : and will go every day a fish to the sea and in fresh river , and take great abundance of fish and give it to the chief man of the country , whereby he gate himself so great favour , that he be very well belove and honour of every one . 
 the fame of this man be spread abroad in the country , there be a lord there by , that be very desirous to have he with he , and to see how he use his miraculous art of catch fish , in so much that he make war with the other lord with who he be before , and in the end prevail , for that he be more mighty and a better warrior , the fisherman be send unto he with the rest of his company . and for the 456 
 space of thirteen year that he dwell in those part , he say , that he be send in this order to more than 25 lord , for they have continual war among themselves , this lord with that lord , and he with another , only to have he to dwell with they : so that wander up and down the country without any certain abode in one place , he know almost all those part . he say , that it be a very great country and as it be a new world : the people be very rude and void of all goodness , they go all naked so that they be miserable vex with cold , neither have they the wit to cover their body with beast skin which they take in hunt , they have no kind of metal , they live by hunt , they carry certain lance of wood make sharp at the point , they have bow , you string whereof be make of beast skin : they be very fierce people , they make cruel war one with another , and eat one another , they have governor and certain law very diverse among themselves . but the far to the southwestwards , the more civility there be , the air be somewhat temperate , so that there they have city and temple to idol , wherein they sacrifice man and afterward eat they , they have there some knowledge and use of gold and silver . 
 now this fisherman have dwell so many year in those country purpose , if it be possible , to return home into his country , but his companion despair ever to see it again , let he go in god name , and they keep themselves where they be . wherefore he bid they farewell , flee through the wood towards Drogio , and be very well receive of the lord that dwell next to that place ; who know he and be a great enemy of the other lord ; and so run from one lord to another , be those by who he have pass before , after long time and many travel he come at length to Drogio , where he dwell three year . when as by good fortune he hear by the inhabitant , that there be certain boat arrive upon the coast : wherefore enter into good hope to accomplish his intent , he go 
 457 
 A.D. 
 c . 1380-90 . 
 in the space of 13 year he serve 15 lord of Drogio . 
 he return from Estotiland to Frisland . 
 zichmni mind to send m. Antonio Zeno with a fleet towards those part of Estotiland . 
 the 4. letter . the fisherman die that shall have be interpreter . 
 certain mariner take in his steed , which come with he from Estotiland . 
 isle llofe . 
 to the sea side , and ask they of what country they be ; they answer of Estotiland , whereat he be exceed glad , , and request that they will take he in to they , which they do very willing , and for that he have the language of the country , and there be none that can speak it , they use he for their interpreter . 
 and afterward he frequent that trade with they in such sort , that he become very rich , and so furnish out a bark of his own , he return into Frislande , where he make report unto this lord of that wealthy country . 
 and he be thorough credit because of the mariner , who approve many strange thing , that he report to be true . wherefore this lord be resolve to send i forth with a fleet towards those part , and there be so many that desire to go in the voyage , for the novelty and strangeness of the thing , that i think we shall be very strong appoint , without any public expense at all . and this be the tenor of the letter before mention , which i have here set down to give intelligence of another voyage that m. Antonio make , be set out with many bark , and man , notwithstanding he be not captain , as he have think at the first he shall : for Zichmni go in his own person : and concern that matter i have a letter in form follow . 
 one great preparation for the voyage of Estotiland be begin in a unlucky hour : for three day before our departure the fisherman die that shall have be our guide : notwithstanding this lord will not give over the enterprise , but instead of the fisherman take certain mariner that return out of the island with he : and so make our navigation to the westwards , we discover certain island subject to Frisland , and have pass certain shelf we stay at Ledovo for the space of 7 day to refresh our self , and to furnish the fleet with necessary provision . depart from thence we arrive the first of July at the isle of llofe : and for that the wind make for we , we stay not there , but pass 458 
 forth , and be upon the main sea , there arise immediate a cruel tempest , wherewith for eight day space we be miserable vex , not know where we be : and a great part of the bark be cast away , afterward the weather wax fair , we gather up the break piece of the bark that be lose , and sail with a prosperous wind we discover land at west . wherefore keep our course direct upon it , we arrive in a good and safe harbour , where we see a infinite company of people ready in arm , come run very furious to the water side , as it be for defence of the island . wherefore Zichmni cause his man to make sign of peace unto they , they send io man unto we that can speak ten language , but we can understand none of they , except one that be of island . he be bring before our prince and ask , what be the name of the island , and what people inhabit it , and who govern it , answer , that the island be call Icaria , and that all the king that reign there , be call Icari , after the name of the first king of that place , which as they say be the son of Dedalus king of Scotland , who conquer that island , leave his son there for king , and leave they those law that they retain to this present , and after this , he desire to sail further , in a great tempest that arise , be drown , wherefore for a memoriali of his 
 c . 1380-90 . 
 tdchrnni his discovery of the island Icaria . 
 a island man in Icari . 
 the king of Icaria call Icari after the name of the first king of that place , who as they report , be son to Deda - 
 death , they call those sea yet , the icarian sea , and the lus king of king of the island Icari , and for that they be content 
 with that state , which God have give they , neither Icartan Sea‘ will they alter one jote of their law and custom , they will not receive any stranger : wherefore they request our prince , that he will not seek to violate their law , which they have receive from that king of worthy memory and observe very due to that present : which if he do attempt , it will redound to his manifest destruction , they be all resolute bend rather to leave their life , than to loose in any respect the use of their law . notwithstanding , that we shall not think they do altogether refuse conversation and traffic with other 
 459 
 the people of i carta desirous of the italian tongue . 
 ten man of ten sundry nation . 
 infinite multitude of arm man in Icaria . 
 zichmni depart from Icaria westwards . 
 man , they tell we for conclusion that they will willing receive one of our man , and prefer he to be one of the chief among they , only to learn my language the italian tongue , and to be inform of our manner and custom , as they have already receive those other ten of ten sundry nation , that come into their island . to these thing our prince answer nothing at all , but cause his man to seek some good harbour , he make sign as though he will depart , and sail round about the island , he espy at length a harbour on the east side of the island , where he put in with all his fleet : the mariner go on land to take in wood and water , which they do with as great speed as they can , doubt lest they shall be assault by the inhabitant , as it fall out in deed , for those that dwell thereabouts , make sign unto the other with fire and smoke , put themselves present in arm and the other come to they , they come all run down to the sea side upon our man , with bow and arrow , and other weapon , so that many be slay and diverse sore wound . and we make sign of peace unto they , but it be to no purpose , for their rage increase more and more , as though they have fight for land and live . wherefore we be force to depart , and to sail along in a great circuit about the island , be always accompany upon the hill top and the sea coast with a infinite number of arm man : and so double the cape of the island towards the north , we find many great sholde , among the which for the space of ten day we be in continual danger of loose our whole fleet , but that it please God all that while to send we fair weather . wherefore proceed on till we come to the east cape , we see the inhabitant still on the hill top and by the sea coast keep with we , and in make great outcry and shoot at we a far off , they utter their old spiteful affection towards we . wherefore we determine to stay in some safe harbour , and see if we may speak once again with the islander , but our 460 
 Nicholas and Antonio Zeno a.d. c . 1380-90 . 
 determination be frustrate : for the people more like unto beast than man , stand continual in arm with intent to beat we back , if we shall come on land . wherefore Zichmni see he can not prevail , and think if he shall have persevere and follow obstinate his purpose , their victual will have fail they , he depart with a fair wind and sail six day to the westwards , but the wind change to the southwest , and the sea wax rough , we sail 4 day with the wind the powp , and at length discover land , be afraid to approach near unto it , the sea be grow , and we not know what land it be : but God so provide for we , that the wind cease there come a great calm . wherefore some of our company row to land with oar , return 8c bring we news to our great comfort , that they have find a very good country and a better harbour : upon which news we tow our ship and small bark to land , and be enter into the harbour , we see a far off a great mountain , that cast forth smoke , which give we good hope that we shall find some inhabitant in the island , neither will Zichmni rest , although it be a great way off , but send 100 soldier to search the country and bring report 100 man send what people they be that inhabit it , 8c in the mean t0 discontent ™ time they take in wood and water for the provision of countrey-the fleet , and catch great store of fish and sea foul and find such abundance of bird egg , that our man that be half famish , be fill therewithal ! . while we be ride here , begin the month of June , at which time the air in the island be so temperate and pleasant as be impossible to express : but when we can see no people at all , we suspect great that this pleasant place loo soui be desolate and dishabit . we give name to the diers retw^eii heaven call it trin , and the point that stretch out which have into the sea , we call Capo de Trin. the 100 soldier be through that be send forth , 8 day after return , and bring the lsland , word that they have be through the island and at they and mountain , and that the smoke be a natural thing pro - find . 
 461 
 m. Antonio ' leno , make chief captain of those ship which go back to Frisland . 
 cede from a great fire that be in the bottom of the hill , and that there be a spring from which issue a certain water like pitch which run into the sea , and that thereabouts dwell great multitude of people half wild , hide themselves in cave of the ground , of small stature , and very fearful ; for as soon as they see they they flee into their hole , and that there be a great river and a very good and safe harbour . Zichmni be thus inform , and see that it have a wholesome and pure air , and a very fruitful soil and fair river , with sundry commodity , fall into such like of the place , that he determine to inhabit it , and build there a city . but his people be weary and faint with long and tedious travel begin to murmur , say that they will return into their country , for that the winter be at hand , and if they enter into the harbour , they shall not be able to come out again before the next summer . wherefore he retain only the bark with oar and such as be willing to stay with he , send all the rest with the ship back again , and will that i , ( though unwilling ) shall be their captain . i therefore depart , because i can not otherwise choose , sail for the space of twenty day to the eastwards without sight of any land ; then turn my course towards the southeast , in 5. day i discover land , and find my self upon the isle of Neome , and know the country , i perceive i be past island : wherefore take in some fresh victual of the inhabitant be subject to Zichmni , i sail with a fair wind in three day to Frisland , where the people , who think they have lose their prince , because of his long absence , in this our voyage receive we very joyful . 
 what follow after this letter i know not but by conjecture , which i gather out of a piece of another letter , which i will set down here underneath : that Zichmni build a town in the port of the island that he discover , and that he search the country very diligent and discover it all , and also the river on 462 
 c . 1380-90 . both side of Engroneland , for that i see it particular describe in the sea card , but the discourse or narration be lose . the beginning of the letter be thus . 
 concern those thing that you desire to know of the 5 letter . i , as of the man and their manner and custom , of the beast , and of the country adjoin , i have make thereof a particular book , which by God help i will bring with i : wherein i have describe the country , the monstrous fish , the custom and law of Frisland , island , Estland , the kingdom of Norway , Estotiland , Drogio , and in the end the life of m. Nicolo , the knight our brother , with the discovery which he make , and the state of Groneland . i have also write the life and act of Zichmni , a prince as worthy of immortali memory , as any that ever live , for his great valiancy and singular humanity , wherein i have describe the discovery of Engroneland on both side , and the city that he build . therefore i will speak no further hereof in this letter , hope to be with you very short , and to satisfy you in sundry other thing by word of mouth . 
 all these letter be write by m. Antonio to Messer Carlo his brother : and it grieve i , that the book and diverse other write concern these purpose , be miserable lose : for be but a child when they come to my hand , and not know what they be , ( as the manner of child be ) i tear they , and rend they in piece , which now i can call to remembrance but to my exceed great grief . notwithstanding , that the memory of so many good thing shall not be lose : whatsoever i can get of this matter , i have dispose and put in order in the former discourse , to the end that this age may be partly satisfy , to the which we be more behold for the great discovery make in those part , then to any other of the time past , be most studious of the new relation and discovery of strange country , make by the great mind , and industry of our ancestor . 
 for the more credit and confirmation of the former 
 463 
 the second discovery thereof . 
 Historic of Messer Nicolas and Messer Antonio Zeni ( which for some few respect may perhaps be call in question ) i have here annex the judgement of that famous cosmographer Abraham Ortelius , or rather the yield and submit of his judgement thereunto : who in his theatrum orbis , folio 6. next before the map of Mar deal Zur , borrow proof and authority out of this relation , to show that the north-east part of America call Estotiland , and in the original always affirm to be a island , be about the year 1390 discover by the aforesaid venetian gendeman Messer Antonio Zeno , above 100 year before ever Christopher Columbus set sail for those western region ; and that the northern sea be even then sail by our european pilot through the help of the loadstone : with diverse other particular concern the custom , religion and wealth of the southern Americans , which be most evidendy confirm by all the late and modern spanish history of Nueva Espanna and Peru. 
 