a report of the voyage and success thereof , attempt in the year of our lord 1583 by sir Humphrey Gilbert knight , with other gentleman assist he in that action , intend to discover and to plant Christian inhabitant in place convenient , upon those large and ample country extend northward from the cape of Florida , lie under very temperate clime , esteem fertile and rich in mineral , yet not in the actuali possession of any christian prince , write by m. Edward Haie gentleman , and principali actor in the same voyage , who alone continue unto the end , and by God speciali assistance return home with his retinue safe and entire . 
 any voyage have be pretend , yet hitherto never any thorough accomplish by our nation of exact discovery into the bowel of those main , ample and vast country , extend infinite into the north from 30 degree , or rather from 25 degree of septentrionali latitude , 
 neither have a right way be take of plant a christian habitation and regiment upon the same , as well may appear both by the little we yet do actual possess therein , and by our ignorance of the riches and secret within those land , which unto this day we know chief by the travel and report of other nation , and most of the french , who albeit they can not challenge such right and interest unto the say country as we , neither these many year have have opportunity nor mean so great to discover and to plant ( be vex with the calamity of intestine war ) as we have have by the inestimable benefit of our long and happy peace : 
 yet have they both way perform more , and have long since attain a sure possession and settle government of many province in those northerly part of America , if their many attempt into those foreign and remote land have not be impeach by their garboil at home . 
 the first discovery of these coast ( never hear of C0^t5 0 before ) be well begin by John Cabot the father , and Sebastian his son , a Englishman bear , who be the first discover first finder out of all that great tract of land stretch by the english from the cape of Florida unto those island which we nation . now call the Newfoundland : all which they bring and annex unto the crown of England . since when , if with like diligence the search of inland country have be follow , as the discovery upon the coast , and outpart thereof be perform by those two man : no doubt her majesty territory and revenue have be mighty enlarge and advance by this day . and which be more ; the seed of christian religion have be sow among those pagan , which by this time may have bring forth a most plentiful harvest and copious congregation of Christians ; which must be the chief intent of such as shall make any attempt that way : or else whatsoever be build upon other foundation shall never obtain happy success nor continuance . 
 and although we can not precise judge ( which only belong to God ) what have be the humour of man stir up to great attempt of discover and plant in those remote country , yet the event do show that either god cause have not be chief prefer by they , or else God have not permit so abundant grace as the light of his word and knowledge of he to be yet reveal unto those infidel before the appoint time . 
 but most assure , the only cause of religion hitherto have keep back , and will also bring forward at the time assign by God , a effectual and complete discovery and possession by Christians both of those ample country and the riches within they hitherto conceal : whereof notwithstanding God in his wisdom have permit to 35 
 probable conjecturesy‘these land north of Florida , be reservedfor the english nation to possess . 
 be reveal from time to time a certain obscure and misty knowledge , by little and little to allure the mind of man that way ( which else will be dull enough in the zeal of his cause ) and thereby to prepare we unto a readiness for the execution of his will against the due time ordain , of call those pagan unto Christianity . 
 in the mean while , it behoove every man of great call , in who be any instinct of inclination unto this attempt , to examine his own motion : which if the same proceed of ambition or avarice , he may assure himself it come not of God , and therefore can not have confidence of God protection and assistance against the violence ( else irresistible ) both of sea , and infinite peril upon the land ; who God yet may use a instrument to further his cause and glory some way , but not to build upon so bad a foundation . 
 otherwise , if his motive be derive from a virtuous and heroical mind , prefer chief the honour of God , compassion of poor infidel captive by the devil , tyrannize in most wonder and dreadful manner over their body and soul ; advancement of his honest and well dispose countryman , will to accompany he in such honourable action ; relief of sundry people within this realm distress : all these be honourable purpose , imitate the nature of the munificent God , wherewith he be well please , who will assist such a actor beyond expectation of man . and the same , who feel this inclination in himself , by all likelihood may hope , or rather confident repose in the preordinance of God , that in this last age of the world ( or likely never ) the time be complete of receive also these gentile into his mercy , and that God will raise he a instrument to effect the same : it seem probable by event of precedent attempt make by the Spaniard and french sundry time , that the country lie north of Florida , God have reserve the same to be reduce unto christian civility by the english nation . for not long after that Christopher Columbus have discover the island and continent of 
 the Spaniard prosperous in the southern discovery , yet unhappy in these northern . 
 sir Humphrey Gilbert 
 the west Indies for Spain , John and Sebastian Cabot make discovery also of the rest from Florida northwards to the behoof of England . 
 and whensoever afterward the Spaniard ( very prosperous in all their southern discovery ) do attempt any thing into Florida and those region incline towards the north , they prove most unhappy , and be at length discourage utter by the hard and lamentable success of many both religious and valiant in arm , endeavour to bring those northerly region also under the spanish jurisdiction ; as if God have prescribe limit unto the spanish nation which they may not exceed : as by their own gest record may be apt gather . 
 the french , as they can pretend less title unto these northern part then the Spaniard , by how much the Spaniard make the first discovery of the same continent usurper upon so far northward as unto Florida , and the french do but our right . review that before discover by the english nation , usurp upon our right , and impose name upon country , river , bay , cape , or headland , as if they have be the first finder of those coast ; which injury we offer not unto the Spaniard , but leave off to discover when we approach the spanish limit : even so God have the french not hitherto permit they to establish a possession als° i ” firtu-r , . , • , 1 . j • . 1 • nate tn those 
 permanent upon another right , notwithstanding their orth part of manifold attempt , in which the issue have be no America . less tragical than that of the Spaniard , as by their own report be extant . 
 then see the english nation only have right unto a good in-these country of America from the cape of Florida couraggnunt northward by the privilege of first discovery , unto which p^ . Cabot be authorise by regal authority , and set forth ceeg in the by the expense of our late famous king Henry the conquest of seven : which right also seem strong defend on north our behalf by the powerful hand of almighty God , withstand the enterprise of other nation : it may great encourage we upon so just ground , as be our right , and upon so sacred a intent , as to plant religion ( our right 
 and intent be meet foundation for the same ) to prosecute effectual the full possession of those so ample and pleasant country appertain unto the crown of England : the same ( as be to be conjecture by infallible argument of the world end approach ) be now arrive unto the time by God prescribe of their vocation , the due time if ever their call unto the knowledge of God may be expect . which also be very probable by the revolution “ of ulrngthese and course of God word and religion , which from the heathen unto beginning have move from the east , towards , and at last Christianity , unto the west , where it be like to end , unless the same d^moveth begin again where it do in the east , which be to circular . expect a like world again . but we be assure of the contrary by the prophesy of Christ , whereby we gather , that after his word preach throughout the world shall|be the end . and as the gospel when it descend westward begin in the south , and afterward spread into the north of Europe : even so , as the same have begin in the south country of America , no less hope may be gather that it will also spread into the north . 
 these consideration may help to suppress all dread rise of hard event in attempt make this way by other nation , as also of the heavy success and issue in the late enterprise make by a worthy gentleman our countryman sir Humphrey Gilbert knight , who be the first of our nation that carry people to erect a habitation and government in those northerly country of America . about which , albeit he have consume much substance , and lose his life at last , his people also perish for the most part : yet the mystery thereof we must leave unto God , and judge charitable both of the cause ( which be just in all pretence ) and of the person , who be very zealous in prosecute the same , deserve honourable remembrance for his good mind , and expense of life in so virtuous a enterprise . whereby nevertheless , lest any man shall be dismay by example of other folk calamity , and misdeem that God do resist all attempt intend that way : i think good , so far as my self 38 
 be a eye witness , to deliver the circumstance and manner of our proceed in that action : in which the gentleman be so infortunate encumber with want , and worse match with many ill dispose people , that his rare judgement and regiment premeditate for those affair , be subject to tolerate abuse , and in sundry extremity to hold on a course , more to uphold credit , then likely in his own conceit happy to succeed . 
 the issue of such action , be always miserable , not guide by God , who abhor confusion and disorder , have leave this for admonition ( be the first attempt by our nation to plant ) unto such as shall take the same cause in hand hereafter not to be discourage from it : but to make man well advise how they handle his so the plant high and excellent matter , as the carriage be of his word into those very mighty and vast country . a action doubtless not to be intermeddle with base purpose ; as reverence . many have make the same but a colour to shadow action ill action otherwise scarce justifiable : which do excite God heavy colour by judgement in the end , to the terrify of weak mind Prete ” ce °f from the cause , without ponder his just proceed : and do also incense foreign prince against our attempt how just soever , who can not but deem the sequel very dangerous unto their state ( if in those part we shall grow to strength ) see the very beginning be enter with spoil . 
 and with this admonition denounce upon zeal towards God cause , also towards those in who appears disposition honourable unto this action of plant Christian people and religion in those remote and barbarous nation of America ( unto who i wish all happiness ) i will now proceed to make relation brief , yet particular , of our voyage undertake with sir Humphrey Gilbert , begin , continue , and end adverse . 
 when first sir Humphrey Gilbert undertake they the first and western discovery of America , and have procure from eat^epara-her majesty a very large commission to inhabit and possess Humphrey gil-at his choice all remote and heathen land not in the actuali bert . 
 a constant resolution of sir Humphrey Gilbert . 
 possession of any christian prince , the same commission exemplify with many privilege , such as in his discretion he may demand , very many gentleman of good estimation draw unto he , to associate he in so commendable a enterprise , so that the preparation be expect to grow unto a puissant fleet , able to encounter a king power by sea : nevertheless , among a multitude of voluntary man , their disposition be diverse , which breed a jar , and make a division in the end , to the confusion of that attempt even before the same be begin . and when the ship be in a manner prepare , and man ready upon the coast to go aboard : at that time some break consort , and follow course degenerate from the voyage before pretend : other fail of their promise contract , and the great number be disperse , leave the general with few of his assure friend , with who he adventure to sea : where have taste of no less misfortune , he be short drive to retire home with the loss of a tall ship , and ( more to his grief ) of a valiant gentleman Miles Morgan . 
 have bury only in a preparation a great mass of substance , whereby his estate be impair , his mind yet not dismay , he continue his former designment and purpose to revive this enterprise , good occasion serve . upon which determination stand long , without mean to satisfy his desire ; at last he grant certain assignment out of his commission to sundry person of mean ability , desire the privilege of his grant , to plant and fortify in the north part of America about the river of Canada , to who if God give good success in the north part ( where then no matter of moment be expect ) the same ( he think ) will great advance the hope of the south , and be a furtherance unto his determination that way . and the worst that may happen in that course may be excuse without prejudice unto he by the former supposition , that those north region be of no regard : but chief a possession take in any parcel of those heathen country , by virtue of his grant , do 
 ..... I^8^ ' invest he of territory extend every way two hundred league : which induce sir Humphrey Gilbert to make those assignment , desire great their expedition , because his commission do expire after six year , if in that space he have not get actuali possession . 
 time go away without any thing do by his mond pre - 
 assign : insomuch that at last he must resolve he - Pf ™ * ™ 1 if ™ self to take a voyage in person , for more assurance to keep his patent in force , which then almost be expire , or within two year . 
 in furtherance of his determination , among other , sir George Peckam knight show himself very zealous to the action , great aid he both by his advice and in the charge . other gentleman to their ability join unto he , resolve to adventure their substance and life in the same cause . who begin their preparation from that time , both of ship , munition , victual , man , and thing requisite , some of they continue the charge two year complete without intermission . such be the difficulty and cross accident oppose these proceed , which take not end in less than two year : many of which circumstance i will omit . 
 the last place of our assembly , before we leave the coast of England , be in causet bay near unto plymouth : then resolve to put unto the sea with ship and provision , such as we have , before our store yet remain , but chief the time and season of the year , be too far spend . nevertheless it seem first very doubtful by what way to shape our course , and to begin our intend discovery , either from the south northward , or from the north southward . 
 the first , that be , begin south , without all con - consultation troversie be the likely , wherein we be assure to °ur have commodity of the current , which from the cape course ’ of Florida set northward , and will have further great our navigation , discover from the foresay cape along towards cape Briton , and all those land lie to the north . 
 1583. commodity inn discover from south northward . 
 cause why we begin our discovery from the north . 
 incommodity in begin north . 
 also the year be far spend , and arrive to the month of June , we be not to spend time in northerly course , where we shall be surprise with timely winter , but to covet the south , which we have space enough then to have attain ; and there may with less detriment have winter that season , be more mild and short in the south then in the north where winter be both long and rigorous . 
 these and other like reason allege in favour of the southern course first to be take , to the contrary be infer : that forasmuch as both our victual , and many other needful provision be diminish and leave insufficient for so long a voyage , and for the winter of so many man , we ought to shape a course most likely to minister supply ; and that be to take the Newfoundland in our way , which be but seven hundred league from our english coast . where be usual at that time of the year , and until the fine of August , a multitude of ship repair thither for fish , we shall be relieve abundant with many necessary , which after the fish end , they may well spare , and free impart unto we . 
 not stay long upon that Newland coast , we may proceed southward , and follow still the sun , until we arrive at place more temperate to our content . 
 by which reason we be the rather induce to follow this northerly course , obey unto necessity , which must be supply . otherwise , we doubt that sudden approach of winter , bring with it continual fog , and thick . mist , tempest and rage of weather ; also contrariety of current descend from the cape of Florida unto cape Briton and cape raze , will fall out to be great and irresistible impediment unto our further proceed for that year , and compel we to winter in those north and cold region . 
 wherefore suppress all objection to the contrary , we resolve to begin our course northward , and to follow direct as we may , the trade way unto Newfoundland : 42 
 from whence after our refresh and reparation of want , we intend without delay ( by God permission ) to proceed into the south , not omit any river or bay which in all that large tract of land appear to our view worthy of search . immediate we agree upon the manner of our course and order to be observe in our voyage ; which be deliver in write unto the captain and master of every ship a copy in manner follow . 
 every ship have deliver two bullet or scroll , the one seal up in wax , the other leave open : in both which be include several watchword . that open , serve upon our own coast or the coast of Ireland : the other seal , be promise on all hand not to be break up until we shall be clear of the irish coast ; which from thenceforth do serve until we arrive and meet altogether in such harbour of the Newfoundland as be agree for our Rendez vouz . the say watchword be requisite to know our consort whensoever by night , either by fortune of weather , our fleet disperse shall come together again ; or one shall hale another ; or if by ill watch and steerage one ship shall chance to fall aboard of another in the dark . 
 the reason of the bullet seal be to keep secret that watchword while we be upon our own coast , lest any of the company steal from the fleet may bewray the same : which know to a enemy , he may board we by night without mistrust , have our own watchword . 
 