the first relation of Jaques Carthier of S. Malo , of the new land call new France , new discover in the year of our lord 1534. 
 how m. Jaques carthy depart from the port of saint Malo , with two ship , and come to Newfoundland , and how he enter into the port of Buona vista . 
 ft that sir Charles of Mouy knight lord of Meylleraye , and vice-admiral of France have cause the captain , master , and mariner of the ship to be swear to behave themselves true and faithful in the service of the most christian king of France , under the charge of the say 
 carthy , upon the twenty day of April 1534 , we depart from the port of saint Malo with two ship of threescore tun apiece burden , and 61 well appoint man in each one : and with such prosperous weather we sail onward , that upon the ten day of may we come to Newfoundland , where we enter into the cape of Buona vista , which be in latitude 48 degree and a half , and in longitude * . but because of the great store of the ice that be alongst the say land , we be constrain to enter into a haven call S. katherins haven , distant from the other port about five league towards southsoutheast : there do we stay ten day look for fair weather ; and in the mean while we mend and dress our boat . 
 183 
 a great white bear . 
 how we come to the island of bird , and of the great quantity of bird that there be . 
 upon the 2i of may the wind be in the west , we hoist sail , and sail towards north and by east from the cape of Buona vista until we come to the island of bird , which be environ about with a bank of ice , but break and crack : notwithstanding the say bank , our two boat go thither to take in some bird , whereof there be such plenty , that unless a man do see they , he will think it a incredible thing : for albeit the island ( which contain about a league in circuit ) be so full of they , that they seem to have be bring thither , and sow for the nonce , yet be there a hundred fold as many hover about it as within ; some of the which be as big as jay , black and white , with beak like unto crow : they lie always upon the sea ; they can fly very high , because their wing be so little , and no big than half one hand , yet do they fly as swift as any bird of the air level to the water ; they be also exceed fat ; we name they Aporath . in less than half a hour we fill two boat full of they , as if they have be with stone : so that beside they which we do eat fresh , every ship do powder and salt five or six barrel full of they . 
 of two sort of bird , the one call Godetz , the other Margaulx ; and how we come to Carpunt . 
 beside these , there be another kind of bird which hover in the air , and over the sea , lesser than the other ; and these do all gather themselves together in the island , and put themselves under the wing of other bird that be great : these we name Godetz . there be also of another sort , but big , and white , which bite even as dog : those we name Margaulx . and albeit the say island be 14 league from the main land , notwithstanding bear come swim thither to eat of the say bird : and our man find one there as great 184 
 as any cow , and as white as any swan , who in their presence leap into the sea ; and upon Whitsunmunday ( follow our voyage towards the land ) we meet she by the way , swim towards land as swift as we can sail . so soon as we see she , we pursue she with our boat , and by main strength take she , who flesh be as good to be eat as the flesh of a calf of two year old . the le Chas-Wednesday follow , be the 27 of the month , we ieaux ' come to the entrance of the bay of the castle ; but because the weather be ill , and the great store of ice we find , we be constrain to enter into a harbour about the say entrance call Carpunt , where , because we can not come out of it , we stay till the nine of June , what time we depart , hope with the help of God to sail further than the say Carpunt , which be in Carpunt . latitude 51 degree . 
 the description of Newfoundland , from cape Razo to cape degrade . 
 the land from cape Razo to cape degrade , which be the point of the entrance of the bay that trend from head to head towards Northnortheast , and southsouthwest . all this part of land be part into island one so near the other , that there be but small river between they ; through the which you may pass with little boat , and therefore there be certain good har-borows , among which be those of Carpunt and degrade . in one of these island that be the high of they all , be the top of it you may plain see the two low island that be near to cape Razo , from whence to the port of Carpunt they count it five and twenty league ; and there be two entrance thereat , one on the east , the other on the south side of the island . but you must take heed of the side and point of the east , because that every where there be nothing else but shelf , and the water be very shallow : you must go about the island towards the west the length of half a cable or thereabouts , and then to go towards the south to the say Carpunt . 
 185 
 also you be to take heed of three shelf that be in the channel under the water : and towards the island on the east side in the channel , the water be of three or four fathom deep , and clear ground . the other trend towards Eastnortheast , and on the west you may go on shore . 
 of the island which now be call S. katherins island . 
 go from the point degrade , and enter into the say bay towards the west and by north : there be some doubt of two island that be on the right side , one of the which be distant from the say point three league , and the other seven , either more or less than the first , be a low and plain land , and it seem to be part of the main land . i name it saint Katherine island ; in which , towards the north-east there be very dry soil ; but about a quarter of a league from it , very ill ground , so that you must go a little about . the say island 8c the port of castle trend towards north north-east , and 
 south southwest , and they be about 15. league asunder . from the say port of castle to the port of gut , which be in the northern part of the say bay , that trend towards east north-east , and west southwest , there be 12. league and a half : and about two league from the port of balance , that be to say , the three part athwart the say bay the depth be sound it be about 38. fathom : and from the say port of balance to the Blanc 8ablon , white sand towards west southwest there be 15. league , arwhite8and . you must ( - take heed of a shelf that lie about 3. 
 league outward from the say white sand on the southwest side above water like a boat . 
 of the place call Blanc Sablon , or the white sand : of the hand of breast , and of the hand of bird , of the sort and quantity of bird that there be find : and of the port call the islette . 
 white sand be a road in the which there be no place guard from the south , nor southeast . but towards south southwest from the say road there be two 186 
 hand , one of the which be call breast hand , and the other the hand of bird , in which there be great store of Godetz , and crow with red beak and red foot : they make their nest in hole under the ground even as cony . a point of land be pass about a league from white sand , there be a port and passage find call the islette , a better place than white sand : and there be great fish . from the say port of the islette unto another call breast , the circuit be about ten league . breast a place this port be in latitude 51. degree and 55. minute , and * north . in longitude * . from the islette to that place there be i ” and . m many other hand : and the say port of breast be also among those hand . Moreover the hand do compass more than 3. league from the say breast , be low , and over they be then other land above mention see . 
 how we with our ship enter into the port of breast , and sail onward towards the west we pass amid the islette , which be so many in number , that it be not possible to tell they : and how we name they the islette . 
 upon the 10. of June we with our ship enter into the port of breast , to furnish our self with water and wood , and to make we ready to pass the say bay upon saint Barnabas day service be hear , we with our boat go beyond the say port towards the west , to see what harboroughe be there : we pass through the midst of the islette , which be so many in number that it be not possible they may be tell , for they continue about 10. league beyond the say port. we to rest our self stay in one of they a night , and there we find great store of duck egg , and other bird that there do make their nest , we name they all the islette . 
 187 
 [ of the 
 of the port call saint Antony port , saint Servans port , James Cartiers port : of the river call S. James : of the custom and apparel of the inhabitant in the hand of white Sand. 
 the next day we pass the say hand , and beyond they all we find a good haven , which we name saint Antony haven , and one or two league beyond we find a little river toward the southwest coast , that be between two other hand , and be a good harbour . there we set up a cross , and name it saint Servans port : and on the southwest side of the say port and river , about one league there be a small hand as round as a oven , environ about with many other little hand that give notice to the say port . further about two league there be another great river , in which we take good store of salmon , that we name saint James his river . be in the say river , we see a ship of rochel that the night before have pass the port of breast , where they think to have go a fish : but the mariner know not where they be . we with our boat approach near unto it , and do direct it to another port one league more towards the west then the say river of saint James , which i take to be one of the best in all the world , and therefore we name it James carthiers sound . if the soil be as good as the harboroughe be , it be a great commodity : but it be not to be call the new land , but rather stone and wild crag , and a place fit for wild beast , for in all the north hand i do not see a cartload of good earth : yet go i on shore in many place , and in the hand of white sand , there be nothing else but moss and small thorn scatter here and there , wither and dry . to be short , i believe that this be the land that God allot to Cain . there be man of a indifferent good stature and bigness , but wild and unruly : they wear their hair tie on the top like a wreath of hay , and put a wooden pin within it , or any other such thing in stead of a nail , and with they 
 188 
 they bind certain bird feather . they be clothe with beast skin as well the man as woman , but that the woman go somewhat strait and close in their garment then the man do , with their waste gird : they paint themselves with certain roan colour : their boat be make of the bark of birch tree , with the which they fish and take great store of seal , and as far as we can understand since our come thither , that be not their habitation , but they come from the main land out of hot country , to catch the say seal and other necessary for their live . 
 of certain cape , that be to say , the double cape , the point cape , cape royal , and the cape of milk : of the mountain of grange : of the hand of dove house : and of the great fish of cod . 
 upon the 13. of that month we come to our ship again with our boat on purpose to sail forward because the weather be fair , and upon Sunday we cause service to be say : then on Monday be the 15. of the month we depart from breast , and sail towards the south to take a view of the land that there we have see , that seem unto we to be two hand : but when we be amid the bay , we know it to be firm land , where be a great double cape one above the other , and therefore we name it the double cape . in the entrance of the bay we sound , and find it to be a hundred fathom round about we . from breast to the double cape there be about 20. league , and about five or six league beyond we sound again and find 40 fathom water . the say land lie north-east and Southwest . the next day be the 16 of the month we sail along the say coast towards the southwest , and by south about 35 league from the double cape , where we find very steep and wild hill , among the which be see certain small cabban , which we in the country call grange , and therefore we name they the hill of the grange . 
 189 
 A.D. 
 1534 - 
 boat make of the bark of birch tree . 
 the other land and mountain be all craggy , cleave and cut , and betwixt they and the sea , there be other hand , but low . the day before through the dark mist and fog of the weather , we can not have sight of any land , but in the evening we spy a entrance into the land , by a river among the say hill of grange , and a cape lie towards the southwest about 3 league from we . the say cape be on the top of it blunt-pointed , and also towards the sea it end in a point , wherefore we name it the point cape , on the north side of which there be a plain hand . and because we will have notice of the say entrance , to see if there be any good haven , we strike sail for that night . the next day be the 17 of the month we have stormy weather from Northeast , wherefore we take our way towards the southwest until Thursday morning , and we go about 37 league , till we come athwart a bay full of round hand like dove house , and therefore we name they the dove house . and from the bay of S. Julian , from the which to . a cape that lie south and by west , which we call cape royal , there be 7. league , and towards the west southwest side of the say cape , there be another that beneath be all craggy , and above round . on the north side of which about half a league there lie a low hand : that cape we name the cape of milk . between these two cape there be certain low hand , above which there be also certain other that show that there be some river . about two league from cape royal we sound and find 20 fathom water , and there be the great fish of cod that possible may be : for stay for our company , in less than a hour we take above a hundred of they . 
 190 
 of certain hand that lie between cape royal , and the cape of milk . 
 the next day be the 18 of the month , the wind with such rage turn against we , that we be constrain to go back towards cape royal , think there to find some harbour , and with our boat go to discover between the cape royal , and the cape of milk , and find that above the low hand there be a great and very deep gulf , within which be certain hand . the say gulf on the southside be shut up . the foresay low ground be on one of the side of the entrance , and cape royal be on the other . the say low ground do stretch themselves more than half a league within the sea it be a plain country , but a ill soil : and in the midst of the entrance thereof , there be a hand . the say gulf in latitude be fourty eight degree and a half , and in longitude * . that night we find no harbour , and therefore we launch out into the sea , leave the cape towards the west . 
 of the hand call S. John. 
 from the say day until the 24 of the month be saint John day we have both stormy weather and wind against we , with such darkness and mist , that until saint Johns day , we can have no sight of any land , and then have we sigh of a cape of land , that from cape royal lie Southwest about 35 league , but that day be so foggy and misty , that we can not come near land , and because it be S. Johns day , we name it cape S. John. 
 of certain hand call the hand of Margaulx , and of the kind of beast and bird that there be find . of the hand of Brion , and cape dolphin . 
 the next day be the 25. of the month , the weather be also stormy , dark , and windy , but yet we sail a part of the day towards west north west , 
 191 
 and in the evening we put our self athwart until the second quarter ; when as we depart , then do we by our compass know that we be northwest and by west about seven league and a half from the cape of S. John , and as we be about to hoist sail , the wind turn into the northwest , wherefore we go three hand , southeast , about 15. league , and come to three hand , two of which be as steep and upright as any wall , so that it be not possible to climb they : and between they there be a little rock . Theise hand be as full of bird , as any field or meadow be of grass , which there do make their nest : and in the great of they , there be a great and infinite number of those that we call Margaulx , that be white , and big than any goose , which be sever in one part . in the other be only Godetz , but towards the shore there be of those Godetz , and great Apponatz , like to those of that hand that we above have mention : we go down to the low part of the least hand , where we kill above a thousand of those Godetz , and Apponatz . we put into our boat so many of they as we please , for in less than one hour we may have fill thirty such boat of the island they : we name they the hand of Margaulx . about of Margaulx . gve ] eague from the say hand on the west , there be another hand that be about two league in length , and so much in breadth : there do we stay all night to take in water and wood . that island be environ round about with sand , and have a very good road about it three or four fathom deep . those hand have the best soil that ever we see , for that one of their field be more worth than all the new land . we find it all full of goodly tree , meadow , field full of wild corn and peason bloom , as thick , as rank , and as fair as any can be see in Britain , so that they seem to have be plow and sow . there be also a great store of gooseberry , strawberry , damask rose , parsley , morse or sea other very sweet and pleasant herb . about the ox . say island be very great beast as great as ox , which 
 192 
 have two great tooth in their mouth like unto elephant tooth , and live also in the sea we see one of they sleep upon the bank of the water : we think to take it , go to it with our boat , but so soon as he hear we , he cast himself into the sea we also see bear 8c wolf : we name it brion hand . about brion hand . it towards southeast , and northwest , there be great lake . as far as i can gather and comprehend , i think that there be some passage between new find land , and brion land . if so it be , it will be a great shorten , aswell of the time as of the way , if any perfection can be find in it . about four league from that hand towards west-southwest be the firm land , which seem to be as a hand compass about with little hand of sand . there be a goodly cape which we name cape dolphin , for there be the beginning of good ground . on the 27. of June we compass the say land about that lie west Southwest : and a far off they seem to be little hill of sand , for they be but low land : we can neither go to they , nor land on they , because the wind be against we . that day we go 15 league . 
 of the hand call Alezai , and of the cape of saint Peter . 
 the next day we go along the say land about 10. league , till we come to a cape of red land , that be all craggy , within the which there be a brack look towards the north . it be a very low country . there be also between the sea and a certain pool , a plain field : and from that cape of land and the pool unto another cape , there be about 14 league . the land be fashion as it be half a circle , all compass about with sand like a ditch , over which as far as one eye can stretch , there be nothing but marsh ground and stand pool . and before you come to the first cape , very near the main land there be two little hand . about five league from the second cape towards the southwest , viii 193 n 
 there be another island very high and point , which we name Alezai . the first cape we name saint Peter cape , because upon that day we come thither . 
 of the cape call cape Orleans : of the river of boat : of wild man cape : and of the quality and temperature of the country . 
 from brion island to this place there be good anchorage of sand , and have sound towards Southwest even to the shore about five league , we find twenty and five fathom water , and within one league twelve fathom , and very near the shore six fathom , rather more then less , and also good anchorage . but because we will be the better acquaint with this stony and rochie ground , we stroohe our sail low and athwart . the next day be the last of the month save one , the wind blow south and by east . we sail westward until Tuesday morning at sun rise , be the last of the month , without any sight or knowledge of any land except in the evening towards sun set , that we discover a land which seem to be two hand , that be beyond we west southwest , about nine or ten league . all the next day till the next morning at sun rise we sail westward about fourty league , and by the way we perceive that the land we have see like hand , be firm land , lie south southeast , and north northwest , to a very good cape of land call cape Orleans . a exceed all the say land be low and plain , ’ and the fair goodly land . may possible be see , full of goodly meadow 
 and tree . true it be that we can find no harbour there , because it be all full of shelf and sand . we with our boat go on shore in many place , and among the rest we enter into a goodly river , but very shallow , which we name the river of boat , because that there we see boat full of wild man that be cross the river . we have no other notice of the say wild man : for the wind come from 
 194 
 the sea , and so beat we against the shore , that we be constrain to retire our self with our boat towards our ship . till the next day morning at sun rise , be the first of July , we sail Northeast , in which time there rise great mist and storm , and therefore we strike our sail till two of the clock in the afternoon , that the weather become clear , and there we have sight of cape Orleans , and of another about seven league from we , lie north and by east , and that we call wild man cape . on the northside of this cape about half a league , there be a very dangerous shelf , and bank of stone . while we be at this cape , we see a man run after our boat that be go along the coast , who make sign unto we that we shall return towards the say cape again . we see such sign , begin to turn towards he , but he see we come , begin to flee : so soon as we be come on shore , we set a knife before he and a woollen girdle on a little staff , and then come to our ship again . that day we trend the say land about 9 or 10. league , hope to find some good harbour , but it be not possible : for as i have say already , it be a very low land , and environ round about with great shelf . nevertheless we go that day on shore in four place to see the goodly and sweet smell tree that be there : we varie^ of find they to be cedar , ewetree , pine , white elm , trees‘ ash , willow , with many other sort of tree to we unknown , but without any fruit . the ground where no wood be , be very fair , and all full of peason , white and red gooseberry , strawberry , blackebery , and wild corn , even like unto rye , which seem to have be sow and plow . this country be of better temperature than any other that can be see , and very hot . there be many thrush , stockdove , and other bird : to be short , there want nothing but good harborough . 
 [ of the 
 195 
 of the bay call saint Lunario , and other notable bay and cape of land , and of the quality , and goodness of those ground . 
 the next day be the second of July we discover and have sight of land on the northern side towards we , that do join unto the land abovesaid , all compass about , and we know that it have about * inn depth , and as much athwart , we name it saint lunarios bay , and with our boat we go to the cape towards the north , and find the shore so shallow , that for the space of a league from land there be but a fathom water . on the north-east side from the say cape about 7. or 8. league there be another cape of land , in the midst whereof there be a bay fashion trianglewise , very deep , and as far off as we can ken from it the same lie Northeast . the say bay be compass about with sand and shelf about 10. league from land , and there be but two fathom water : from the say cape to the bank of the other , there be about 15. league . we be a cross the say cape , discover another land and cape , and as far as we can ken , it lie north and by east . all that night the weather be very ill , and great wind , so that we be constrain to bear a small sail until the next morning , be the third of July when the wind come from the west : and we sail northward to have a sight of the land that we have leave on the north-east side , above the low land , among which high and low land there be a gulf or breach in some place about 55. fathom deep , and 15. league in breadth . by reason of the great depth and breadth of the gulf , and change of the land , we conceive hope that we shall find a passage , like unto the passage of the castle . the say gulf lie east Northeast , and west southwest . the ground that lie on the southside of the say gulf , be as good and easy to be manure , and full of as goodly field and meadow , as any that ever we have see , as 196 
 plain and smooth as any die : and that which lie on the north be a country altogether hilly , full of wood , and very high and great tree of sundry sort : among the rest there be as goodly ceder , and fir tree , as possible can be see , able to make mast for ship of three hundred tun : neither do we see any place that be not full of the say tree , except two only that be full of goodly meadow , with two very fair lake . the midst of the say bay be 47. degree and half in latitude . 
 tree able to mast ship of 300. ton . 
 of the cape d’esperance , or the cape of hope , and of saint Martins creek , and how 7. boat full of wild man come to our boat , will not retire themselves , but be terrify with our culverin which we shoot at they , and our lance , they flee with great haste . 
 the cape of the say south land be call the cape of hope , through the hope that there we have to find some passage . the four of July we go along the coast of the say land on the northerly side to find some harbour , where we enter into a creek altogether open towards the south , where there be no succour against the wind : we think good to name it saint Martin creek . there we stay from the four of July until the twelve : while we be there , on Monday be the six of the month , service be do , we with one of our boat go to discoyer a cape and point of land that on the western side be about seven or eight league from we , to see which way it do bend , and be within half a league of it , we see two company of boat of wild man forty or 5° go from one land to the other : their boat be in a number about fourty or fifty . one part of the which come to the say point , and a great number of the man go on shore make a great noise , beckon unto we that we shall come on land , show we certain skin upon piece of wood , but because we 
 197 
 have but one only boat , we will not go to they , but go to the other side lie in the sea : they see we flee , prepare two of their boat to follow we , with which come also five more of they that be come from the sea side , all which approach near unto our boat , dance , and make many sign of joy and mirth , as it be desire our friendship , say in their tongue napeu tondamen assurtah , with many other word that we understand not . but because ( as we have say ) we have but one boat , we will not stand to their courtesy , but make sign unto they that they shall turn back , which they will not do , but with great fury come towards we : and sudden with their boat compass we about : and because they will not away from we by any sign that we can make , we shoot off two piece among they , which do so terrify they , that they put themselves to flight towards the say point , make a great noise : and have stay a while , they begin anew , even as at the first to come to we again , and be come near our boat we strike at they with two lance , which thing be so great a terror unto they , that with great haste they begin to flee , and will no more follow we . 
 how the say wild man come to our ship , and our man go towards they , both party go on land , and how the say wild man with great joy begin to traffic with our man . 
 the next day part of the say wild man with nine of their boat come to the point and entrance of the creek , where we with our ship be at road . we be advertise of their come , go to the point where they be with our boat : but so soon as they see we , they begin to flee , make sign that they come to traffic with we , show we , such skin as they cloth themselves withal , which be of small value . we likewise make sign unto they , that we wish they no evil : and in sign thereof two of our man 198 
 venture to go on land to they , and carry they knife with other iron ware , and a red hat to give unto their captain . which when they see , they also come on land , and bring some of their skin , and so begin to deal with we , seem to be very glad to have our iron ware and other thing , still dance with many other ceremony , as with their hand to cast sea water on their head . they give we whatsoever they have , not keep any thing , so that they be constrain to go back again naked , and make we sign that the next day they will come again , and bring more skin with they . 
 how that we have send two of our man on land with ware , there come about 300. wild man with great gladness . of the quality of the country , what it bring forth , and of the bay call bay du chaleur , or the bay of heat . 
 upon Thursday be the eight of the month , because the wind be not good to go out with our ship , we set our boat in a readiness to go to discover the say bay , and that day we go 25. league within it . the next day the wind and weather be fair , we sail until noon , in which time we have notice of a great part of the say bay , and how that over the low land , there be other land with high mountain : but see that there be no passage at all , we begin to turn back again , take our way along the coast : 8c sailing , we see certain wild man that stand upon the shore of a lake , that be among the low ground , who be make fire and smoke : we go thither , 8c find that there be a chanel of the sea that do enter into the lake , and set our boat at one of the bank of the channel , the wild man with one of their boat come unto we , and bring up piece of seal ready sodden , put they upon piece of wood : then retire themselves , they will make sign unto we , that they do give they we . we send two man unto they with 
 199 
 hatchet , knife , bead , and other such like ware , whereat they be very glad , and by and by in cluster they come to the shore where we be , with their boat , bring with they skin and other such thing as they have , to have of our ware . they be more than 300. man , woman and child : some of the woman which come not over , we may see stand up to the knee in water , sing and dance : the other that have pass the river where we be , come very friendly to we , rub our arm with their own hand , then will they lift they up towards heaven , show many sign of gladness : and in such wise be we assure one of another , that 
 we very familiar begin to traffic for whatsoever they have , till they have nothing but their naked body ; for they give we all whatsoever they have , and that be but of small value . we perceive that this people may very easy be convert to our religion . they go from place to place . they live only with fish . they have a ordinary time to fish for . their provision . the country be hot than the country of Spain , and the fair that can possible be find , altogether smooth , and level . there be no place be it never so little , but it have some tree ( yea albeit it be sandy ) or else be full of wild corn , that have a ear like unto rye : the corn be like oat , and small peason as thick as if they have be sow and plow , white and red gooseberry , strawberry , blackbery , white and red rose , with many other flower of very sweet and pleasant smell . there be also many goodly meadow full of grass , and lake wherein great plenty of salmon be . they call a hatchet in their tongue Cochi , and a knife bacon : we name it ray du cha - the bay of heat . 
 leur , or the 
 bay of heat . of another nation of wild man : of their 
 manner , live and clothe . 
 be certify that there be no passage through the say bay , we hoist sail , and go from saint Martin creek upon Sunday be the 12. of July , to go and dis-200 
 cover further beyond the say bay , and go along the sea coast eastward about eighteen league , till we come to the cape of Prato , where we find the tide very great , but shallow ground , and the sea stormy , so that we be constrain to draw towards shore , between the say cape and a hand lie eastward , about a league from the say cape , where we cast anchor for that night . the next morning we hoist sail to trend the say coast about , which lie north Northeast . but there rise such a stormy and rage wind against we , that we be constrain to come to the place again , from whence we be come : there do we stay all that day till the next that we hoist up sail , and come to the midst of a river five or six league from the cape of Prato northward , and be overthwart the say river , there arise again a contrary wind , with great fog and storm . so that we be constrain upon Tuesday be the fourteenth of the month to enter into the river , and there do we stay till the sixteenth of the month look for fair weather to come out of it : on which day be Thursday , the wind become so rage that one of our ship lose a anchor , and we be constrain to go up high into the river seven or eight league , into a good harbour and ground that we with our boat find out , and through the evil weather , tempest , and darkness that be , we stay in the say harbour till the five and twenty of the month , not be able to put out : in the mean time we see a great multitude of wild man that be fish for mackerel , whereof there be great store . their boat be about 40 , and the person what with man , woman and child two hundred , which after they have haunt our company a while , they come very familiar with their boat to the side of our ship . we give they knife , comb , bead of glass , and other trifle of small value , for which they make many sign of gladness , lift their hand up to heaven dance and sing in their boat . Theise man may very well and true be call wild , because there be no poor people 
 201 
 in the world . for i think all that they have together , beside their boat and net be not’worth five souse . they go altogether naked save their privity , which be cover with a little skin , and certain old skin that they cast upon they . neither in nature nor in language , do they any whit agree with they which we find first : their head be altogether shave , except one bush of hair which they suffer to grow upon the top of their crown as long as a horse tail , and then with certain leather string bind it in a knot upon their head . they have no other dwelling but their boat , which they turn upside down , and under they they lie themselves all along upon the bare ground . they eat their flesh almost raw , save only that they heat it a little upon embers of coal , so do they their fish . upon Magdalen day we with our boat go to the bank of the river , and free go on shore among they , whereat they make many sign , and all their man in two or three company begin to sing and dance , seem to be very glad of our come . they have cause all the young woman to flee into the wood , two or three except , that stay with they , to each of which we give a comb , and a little bell make of tin , for which they be very glad , thank our captain , rub his arm and breast with their hand . when the man see we give something unto those that have stay , it cause all the rest to come out of the wood , to the end they shall have as much as the other : these woman be about twenty , who altogether in a knot fall upon our captain , touch and rub he with their hand , accord to their manner of cherish and make much of one , who give to each of they a little tin bell : then sudden they begin to dance , and sing many song . there we find great store of mackrel , that they have take upon the shore , with certain net that they make to fish , of a kind of hemfe . hemp that grow in that place where ordinary they abide , for they never come to the sea , but only in fish time . as far as i understand , there grow likewise a 
 202 
 kind of millet as big as peason , like unto that which Maiz. grow in Bresil , which they eat in stead of bread . they have great store of it . they call it in their tongue Kapaige . they have also prune ( that be to say dam - tamsin , fig , sin ) which they dry for winter as we do , they call they a^es-honesta . they have also fig , nut , apple , and other fruit , and bean , that they call Sahu , their nut Cahehya . if we show they any thing that they have not , nor know not what it be , shake their head , they will say Nohda , which be as much to say , they have it not , nor they know it not . of those thing they have , they will with sign show we how to dress they , and how they grow . they eat nothing that have any taste of salt . they be very great thief , for they will filch and steal whatsoever they can lay hold of , and all be fish that come to net . 
 fl how our man set up a great cross upon the point of the say porte , and the captain of those wild man , after a long oration , be by our captain appease , and content that two of his child shall go with he . 
 upon the 24 of the month , we cause a fair high cross to be make of the height of thirty foot , which be make in the presence of many of they , upon the point of the entrance of the say haven , in the midst whereof we hang up a shield with three flower de Luce inn it , and in the top be carve in the wood with antic letter this posy , vive le kaven 
 roy de France . then before they all we set it upon t0 be the say point . they with great heed behold both they ? y ’ make and set of it up . so soon as it be up , we altogether kneel down before they , with our hand towards heaven , yield God thank : and we make sign unto they , show they the heaven , and that all our salvation depend only on he which in they dwell : whereat they show a great admiration , look first one at another , and then upon 
 203 
 the cross . and after we be return to our ship , their captain clad with a old bear skin , with three of his son , and a brother of he with he , come unto we in one of their boat , but they come not so near we as they be wont to do : there he make a long oration unto we , show we the cross we have set up , and make a cross with two finger , then do he show we all the country about we , as if he will say that all be he , and that we shall not set up any cross without his leave . his talk be end , we show he a axe , feign that we will give it he for his skin , to which he listen , for by little and little he come near our ship . one of our fellow that be in our boat , take hold on they , and sudden leap into it , with two or three more , who enforce they to enter into our ship , whereat they be great astonish . but our captain do straightway assure they , that they shall have no harm , nor any injury offer they at all , and entertain they very friendly , make they eat and drink . then do we show they with sign , that the cross be but only set up to be as a light and leader which way to enter into the port , and that we will short come again , and bring good store of iron ware and other thing , but that we will take two of his child with we , and afterward bring they to the say port again : and so we clothe two of they in shirt , and colour coat , with red cap , and put about every one neck a copper chain , whereat they be great content : then give they their old clothes to their fellow that go back again , and we give to each one of those three that go back , a hatchet , and some knife , which make they very glad . after these be go , and have tell the news unto their fellow , in the after noon there come to our ship six boat of they , with five or six man in every one , to take their farewell of those two we have detain to take with we , and bring they some fish , utter many word which we do not understand , 
 204 
 i53+-making sign that they will not remove the cross we have set up . 
 ^ [ how after we be depart from the say port , follow our voyage along the say coast , we go to discover the land lie southeast , and northwest . 
 the next day , be the 25 of the month , we have fair weather , and go from the say port : and be out of the river , we sail Eastnortheast , for after the entrance into the say river , the land be environ about , and make a bay in manner of half a circle , where be in our ship , we may see all the coast sail behind , which we come to seek , the land lie southeast and northwest , the course of which be distant from the river about twenty league . 
 of the cape S. alvise , and cape Memorancie , and certain other land , and how one of our boat touch a rock and sudden go over it . 
 on Monday be the 27 of the month , about sunset we go along the say land , as we have say , lie southeast and northwest , till Wednesday that we see another cape where the land begin to bend towards the east : we go along about 15 league , then do the land begin to turn northward . about three league from the say cape we sound , and find 24 fathom water . the say land be plain , and the fair and most without wood that we have see , with goodly green field and meadow : we name the say cape S. alvise cape , because that be his day : it be 49 degree and a half in latitude , and in longitude* . on Wednesday morning we be on the east side of the cape , and be almost night we go northwestward for to approach near to the say land , which trend north and south . from saint alvise cape to another call cape Memorancie , about fifteen league , the land begin to bend northwest . about three league from the say cape we will needs sound , 
 205 
 but we can find no ground at 150 fathom , yet go we along the say land , about ten league , to the latitude of 50 degree . the Saturday follow , degree be the first of August , by sun rise , we have of latitude , certain other land , lie north and Northeast , that be very high and craggy , and seem to be mountains : between which be other low land with wood and river : we go about the say land , as well on the one side as on the other , still bend northwest , to see if it be either a gulf , or a passage , until the five of the month . the distance from one land to the other be about fifteen league . the middle between they both be 50 degree and a terce in latitude . we have much ado to go five mile far , the wind be so great , and the tide against we . and at five mile end , we may plain see and perceive land on both side , which there begin to spread it self , but because we rather fall , then get way against the wind , we go towards land , purpose to go to another cape of land , lie southward , which be the farthermost out into the sea that we can see , about five league from we , but so soon as we come thither , we find it to be nought else but rock , stone , 8c craggy cliff , such as we have not find any where since we have sail southward from s Johns cape : and then be the tide with we , which carry we against the wind westward , so that as we be sail along the say coast , one of our boat touch a rock , and sudden go over , but we be constrain to leap out for to direct it on accord to the tide . 
 how after we have agree and consult what be best to be do , we purpose to return : and of saint Peter strait , and of cape tiennot . 
 after we have sail along the say coast , for the space of two hour , behold , the tide begin to turn against we , with so swift and rage a course , that it be not possible for we with 13 oar to row 206 
 or get one stone cast far , so that we be constrain to leave our boat with some of our man to guard they , and io or 12 man go ashore to the say cape , where we find that the land begin to bend Southwest , which have see , we come to our boat again , and so to our ship , which be still ready under sail , hope to go forward : but for all that , they be fall more than four league to leeward from the place where we have leave they , where so soon as we come , we assemble together all our captain , master , and mariner , to have their advice and opinion what be best to be do : and after that every one have say , consider that the easterly wind begin to bear sway , and blow , and that the flood be so great , that we do but fall , and that there be nothing to be get , and that storm and tempest begin to reign in newfound land , and that we be so far from home , not know the peril and danger that be behind , for either we must agree to return home again , or else to stay there all the year . Moreover , we do consider , that if the northern wind do take we , it be not possible for we to depart thence . all which opinion be hear and consider , we altogether determine to address our self homeward . now because upon saint Peter day we enter into the say streite , we name it saint Peter streite . the strait of we sound it in many place , in some we find s-peter-150 fathom water , in some 100 , and near the shore sixty , and clear ground . from that day till Wednesday follow , we have a good and prosperous gale of wind , so that we trended the say north shore east , southeast , west northwest : for such be the situation of it , except one cape of low land that bend more towards the southeast , about twenty five league from the strait . in this place we see certain smoke , that the people of the country make upon the say cape : but because the wind blow we towards the coast , we go not to they , which when they see , they come 
 207 
 with two boat and twelve man unto we , and as free come unto our ship , as if they have be French man , and give we to understand , that they come from the great gulf , and that Tiennot be their captain , who then be upon that cape , make sign unto we , that they be go home to their country whence we be come with our ship , and that they be lade with fish . we cape Tiennot . name the say cape , cape tiennot . from the say cape all the land trend eastsoutheast , and westnorthwest . all these land lie low , very pleasant , environ with sand , where the sea be intermingle with marsh and shallows , the space of twenty league : then do the land begin to trend from west to Eastnortheast altogether environ with island two or three league from land , in which as far as we can see , be many dangerous shelf more than four or five league from land . 
 how that upon the nine of August we enter within white sand , and upon the five of September we come to the port of s. malo . 
 from the say Wednesday until Saturday follow , we have a great wind from the southwest , which cause we to run Eastnortheast , on which day we come to the easterly part of Newfoundland , between the grange and the double cape . there begin great stormy wind come from the east with great rage : wherefore we coast the cape northnorthwest , to search the northern part , which be ( as we have say ) all environ with island , and be near the say island and land , the wind turn into the south , which bring we within the say gulf , so that the next day be the 9 of August , we by the grace of God enter within the white sand . and this be so much as we have discover . after that , upon the 15 of August , be the feast of the assumption of our lady , after that we have hear service , we altogether depart from the port of white sand , and with a happy and prosperous weather we come into 208 
 the middle of the sea , that be between Newfoundland and Britain , in which place we be toss and turmoil three day long with great storm and windy tempest come from the east , which with the aid and assistance of God we suffer : then have we fair weather , and upon the five of September , in the say year , we come to the port of saint Malo whence we depart . 
 A.D. 
 1534 - 
 