certain voyage to Florida , and the late and more perfect discovery thereof , to wit , of all the seacoast , river , bay , haven , isle , and main land far up into the country , and a report of some colony and fort there plant and displant , with a description of the government , disposition and quality of the natural inhabitant , and a declaration of the temperature of the climate , and of the manifold good commodity find in those region . 
 to the most christian king of France , Francis the first . 
 the relation of John de Verrazzano a florentine , of the land by he discover in the name of his majesty . write in diepe the eight of July , 1524. 
 write not to your majesty , most christian king , since the time we suffer the tempest in the north part , of the success of the four ship , which your majesty send forth to discover new land by the ocean , think your majesty have be already due 
 inform thereof . now by these present i will give your majesty to understand , how by the violence of the wind we be force with the two ship , the norman and the dolphin ( in such evil case as they be ) to land in Britain . where after we have repaired they in all point as be needful , and arm they very well , we take our course along by the coast of Spain , which your majesty shall understand by the profit that we receive thereby . afterwards with the dolphin alone we determine to make dis-423 
 coverie of new country , to prosecute the navigation we have already begin , which i purpose at this present to recount unto your majesty to make manifest the whole proceed of the matter . 
 the 17. of January the year 1524. by the grace of God we depart from the dishabit rock by the isle of Madera , appertain to the king of Portugal , with 50. man , with victual , weapon , and other shipmunition very well provide and furnish for 8. month : and sail westwards with a fair easterly wind , in 25. day we run 500 league , and the 20. of February we be overtake with as sharp and terrible a tempest as ever any sailor suffer : whereof with the divine help and merciful assistance of almighty God , and the goodness of our ship , accompany with the good hap of her fortunate name , we be deliver , and with a prosperous wind follow our course west and by north . and in other 25. day we make above 400. league more , where we discover a new land , never before see of any man either ancient or modern , and at the first sight it seem somewhat low , but be within a quarter of a league of it , we perceive by the great fire that we see by the sea coast , that it be inhabit : and see that the land stretch to the southward . in seek some convenient Harboro ugh wherein to anchor and to have knowledge of the place , we sail fifty league in vain , and see the land to run ne still to the southward , we resolve to return back again towards the north , where we find our self trouble with the like difficulty . at length be in despair to find any port , we cast anchor upon the coast , and send our boat to shore , where we see great store of people which come to the sea side ; and see we approach , they flee away , and sometime will stand still and look back , behold we with great admiration : but afterward be animate and assure with sign that we make they , some of they come hard to the sea 
 424 
 side , seem to rejoice very much at the sight of we , and marvel great at our apparel , shape and whiteness , show we by sundry sign where we may most command odious come aland with our boat , offer we also of their victual to eat . now i will brief declare to your majesty their life and manner , as far as we can have notice thereof : these people go altogether naked , except only that they cover their privy part with certain skin of beast like unto martern , which they fasten unto a narrow girdle make of grass very artificial wrought , hang about with tail of diverse other beast , which round about their body hang dangle down to their knee . some of they wear garland of bird feather . the people be of colour russet , and not much unlike the Saracen : their hair black , thick and not very long , which they tie together in a knot behind and wear it like a little tail . they be well feature in their limb , of mean stature , and common somewhat big than we : broad breast , strong arm , their leg and other part of their body well fashion , and they be disfigure in nothing , save that they have somewhat broad visage , and yet not all of they : for we see many of they well favour , have black and great eye , with a cheerful and steady look , not strong of body , yet sharp witted , nimble and exceed great runner , as far as we can learn by experience , and in those two last quality they be like to the people of the east part of the world , and especial to they of the uttermost part of China . we can not learn of this people their manner of live , nor their particular custom , by reason of the short abode we make on the shore , our company be but small , and our ship ride far off in the sea and not far from these we find another people , who live we think to be like unto they ; ( as hereafter i will declare unto your majesty ) show at this present the situation and nature of the foresay land . the shore 
 425 
 A.D. 
 i524 - 
 be all cover with small sand , and so ascend upward for the space of 15. foot , rise in form of little hill about 50. pace broad . And sail forward , we find certain small river and arm of the sea , that fall down by certain creek , wash the shore on both side as the coast lie . and beyond this we see the open country rise in height above the sandy shore with many fair field and plain , full of mighty great wood , some very thick , and some thin , replenish with diverse sort of tree , as pleasant and delectable to behold , as be possible to imagine . and your majesty may not think that these be like the wood of Hercynia or the wild desert of Tartary , and the northern coast full of ffuitlesse tree : but they be full of palm tree , bay tree , and high cypress tree , and many other sort of tree unknown in Europe , which yield most sweet savour far from the shore , the property whereof we can not learn for the cause aforesaid , and not for any difficulty to pass through the wood , see they be not so thick but that a man may pass through they . neither do we think that they partake of the east world round about they , be altogether void of drug or spicery , and other riches of gold , see the colour of the land do so much argue it . and the land be full of many beast , as stag , deer and hare , and likewise of lake and pool of fresh water , with great plenty of fowl , convenient for all kind of pleasant game . this land be in latitude 34. degree , with good and wholesome air , temperate , between hot and cold , no vehement wind do blow in those region , and those that do common reign in those coast , be then northwest and west wind in tlje summer season , ( in the beginning whereof we be there ) the sky clear and filire with very little rain : and if at any time the air be cloudy and misty with the southern wind , immediate it be dissolve and wax clear and fair again . the sea be calm , not 426 
 boisterous , the wave gentle : and although all the shore be somewhat shall and without harbour , yet be it not dangerous to the sailor , be free from rock and deep , so that within 4 or 5. foot of the shore , there be 20. foot deep of water without ebb or flood , the depth still increase in such uniform proportion . there be very good ride at sea : for any ship be shake in a tempest , can never perish there by break of her cable , which we have prove by experience . for in the begin of march ( as it be usual in all region ) be in the sea oppress with northern wind , and ride there , we find our anchor break before the earth fail or move at all . we depart from this place , still run along the the coast coast , which we find to trend towards the east , and we t0 the see every where very great fire , by reason of the j^-eesof multitude of the inhabitant . while we ride on that latitude . coast , partly because it have no harbour , and for that we want water , we send our boat ashore with 25. man : where by reason of great and continual wave that beat against the shore , be a open coast , without succour , none of our man can possible go ashore without loose our boat . we see there 
 many people which come unto the shore , make diverse courteous and sign of friendship , and show that they be content we shall come aland , and by trial we find they to be very courteous and gentle , as your majesty shall understand by the success . to the intent we may send 
 they of our thing , which the Indians common desire and esteem , as sheet of paper , glass , bell , and such like trifle ; we send a young man one of our mariner ashore , who swim towards they , and be within 3. or 4. yard of the shore , not trust they , cast the thing upon the shore : but seek afterward to return , he be with such violence of the wave beat upon the shore , that he be so bruise that he lie there almost dead : which the Indians perceive , run to catch he , and draw he out , they 
 427 
 carry he a iide way off from the sea . the young man perceive they carry he , be at the first dismayed , begin then great to fear , and cry out piteous : likewise do the indian which do accompany he , go about to cheer he and to give he courage , and then set he on the ground at the foot of a little hill against the sun , they begin to behold he with great admiration , marvel at the whiteness of his flesh : and put off his clothes , they make he warm at a great fire , not without our great fear which remain in the boat , that they will have roast he at that fire , and have eat he . the young man have recover his strength , and have stay a while with they , show they by sign that he be desirous to return to the ship : and they with great love clap he fast about with many embrace , accompany he unto the sea , and to put he in more assurance , leave he alone , go unto a high ground and stand there , behold he until he be enter into the boat . this young man observe , as we do also , that these be of colour incline to black as the other be , with their flesh very shine , of mean stature , handsome visage , and delicate limb , and of very little strength , but of prompt wit : far we observe not .. 
 depart from hence , follow the shore which trend somewhat towards the north , in 50. league space we come to another land which show much more fair and full of wood , be very great , where we ride at anchor : and that we may have some knowledge thereof , we . send 20. man aland , which enter into the country about 2. league , and they find that the people be flee to the wood for fear . they see only one old woman with a young maid of 18. or 20. year old , which see our company , hide themselves in the grass for fear : the old woman carry two infant on her shoulder , and behind her neck a child of 8. year old . the young woman be lade 428 
 likewise with as many : but when our man come unto they , the woman cry out : the old woman make sign that the man be flee unto the wood . assoon as they see we to quiet they and to win their favour , our man give they such victual as they have with they , to eat , which the old woman receive thankful : but the young woman disdain they all , and throw they disdainful on the ground . they take a child from the old woman to bring into France , and go about to take the young woman which be very beautiful and of tall stature , they can not possible , for the great outcry that she make , bring she to the sea : and especial have great wood to pass through , and be far from the ship , we purpose to leave she behind , bear away the child only . we find those folk to be more white than those that we find before , be clad with certain leaf that hang on bough of tree , which they few together with thread of wild hemp : their head be truss up wild after the same manner as the former be : their ordinary food be of pulse , whereof they have great store , differ in colour and taste from we ; of good and pleasant taste . Moreover they live by fish and fowl , which they take with begin , and bow make of hard wood , the arrow of cane , be head with the bone of fish , and other beast . the beast in these part be much wild than in our Europe , by reason they be continual chase and hunt . we see many of their boat make of one tree 20. foot long , and 4. foot broad , which be not make with iron or stone , or any other kind of metal ( because that in all this country for the space of 200. league which we run , tty run we never see one stone of any sort : ) they help alon& coast themselves with fire , burn so much of the tree as be make sufficient for the hollowness of the boat , ; then like hollow their they do in make the stern and the forepart , until it canoas with be fit to sail upon the sea . the land be in situation re‘ goodness and fairness like the other : it have wood 
 429 
 100 league sayrng . 
 a mighty river . 
 like the other , thin and full of diverse sort of tree : but not so sweet , because the country be more northerly and cold . 
 we see in this country many vine grow natural , which grow up , take hold of the tree as they do in Lombardie , which if by husbandman they be dress in good order , without all doubt they will yield excellent wine : for have oftentimes see the fruit thereof dry , which be sweet and pleasant , and not differ from we , we think that they do esteem the same , because that in every place where they grow , they take away the under branch grow round about , that the fruit thereof may ripen the better . 
 we find also rose , violet , lily , and many sort of herb , and sweet and odoriferous flower different from we . we know not their dwelling , because they be far up in the land , and we judge by many sign that we see , that they be of wood and of tree frame together . 
 we do believe also by many conjecture and sign , that many of they sleep in the field , have no other covert than the open sky . further knowledge have we not of they : we think that all the rest who country we pass , live all after one manner . have make our abode three day in this country , and riding on the coast for want of harborough , we conclude to depart from thence , trending along the shore between the north and the east , sail dne in the daytime , and ride at anchor by night . in the space of 100 league sail we find a very pleasant place situate among certain little steep hill : from amid the which hill there run down into the sea a exceed great stream of water , which wlin the mouth be very deep , and from the sea to the mouth of the same with you tide which we find to rise 8. foot , any great ship lade may pass up . 
 but because we ride at anchor in a place well fence 43° 
 from the wind , we will not venture our self without knowledge of the place : and we pass up with our boat only into the say river , and see the country very well people . the people be almost like unto the other , and be clad with the feather of fowl of diverse colour : they come towards we very cheerful , make great shout of admiration ; show we where we may come to land most safe with our boat . we enter up the say river into the land about half a league , where it make a most pleasant lake about 3. league in compass : on the which they row from the one side to the other to the number of 30. of their small boat , wherein be many people which pass from one shore to the other to come and see we . and behold upon the sudden ( as it be wont to fall out in sail ) a contrary flaw of wind come from the sea , we be enforce to return to our ship , leave this land to our great discontentment , for the great commodity and pleasantness thereof , which we suppose be not without some riches , all the hill show minerali matter in they . we weigh anchor , and sail towards the east , for so the coast trend , and so always for 50. league be in the sight thereof , we discover a hand in form of a triangle , distant from the main land 10. league , about the bigness of the hand of the Rhodes : it be full of hill cover with tree , well people , for we see fire all along the coast : we give it the name of your majesty mother , not stay there by reason of the weather be contrary . 
 and we come to another land be 15. league distant from the hand , where we find a pass good haven , wherein be enter , we find about 20. small boat of the people , which with diverse cry and wondering come about our ship , come no near than 50. pace towards we : they stay and behold the artificialness of our ship , our shape and apparel : than they all make a loud shout together , 
 431 
 people clad with feather of diverse colour . 
 the pleasantness and riches of the land . the coast trend to the east . 
 the descrip-tionofclaudia hand , ten league from the may ne . Claudia be mother of king Francis . 
 a pass good haven . 
 declare that they rejoice . when we have something animate they , use their gesture , they come so near we , that we cast they certain bell and glass , and many toy , which when they have receive , they look on they with laugh , and come without fear aboard our ship . there be among these people 2. king of so goodly stature and shape as be possible to declare : the elder be about 40. year of age , the second be a young man of 20. year old . their apparel be on this manner : the elder have upon his naked body a heart skin wrought artificial with diverse branch like damask : his head be bare with the hair tie up behind with diverse knot : about his neck he have a large chain , garnish with diverse stone of sundry colour : the young man be almost apparel after you same manner . this be the goodly people , and of the fair condition that we have find in this our voyage . they exceed we in bigness : they be of the colour of brass , some of they incline more to whiteness : other be of yellow colour , of comely visage , with long and black hair , which they be very careful to trim and deck up : they be black and quick eye , and of sweet and pleasant countenance , imitate much the old fashion . i write not to your majesty of the other part of their body , have all such proportion as appertain to any handsome man . the woman be of the like conformity and beauty : very handsome and well favour , of pleasant countenance , and comely to behold : they be as well manner and continent as any woman , and of good education : they be all naked save their privy part , which they cover with a dear skin branch or embroider as the man use : there be also of they which be on their arm very rich skin of Luzernes : they adorn their head with diverse ornament make of their own hair , which hang down before on both side their breast : other use other kind of dress themselves like unto 
 432 
 the woman of Egypt and Syria , these be of the elder sort : and when they be marry , they be diverse toy , accord to the usage of the people of the east , aswell man as woman . 
 among who we see many plate of wrought copper , which they esteem more than gold , which for the colour they make no account of , for that among all other it be count the base : they make most account of azure and Red. the thing that they esteem most of all those which we give they , be bell , crystal of azure colour , and other toy to hang at their ear or about their neck . they do not desire cloth of silk or of gold , much less of any other sort , neither care they for thing make of steel and iron , which we often show they in our armour which they make no wonder at , and in behold they they only ask the art of make they : the like they do at our glass , which when they behold , they sudden laugh and give they we again . they be very liberali , for they give that which they have : we become great friend with these , and one day we enter into the haven with our ship , whereas before we ride a league off at sea by reason of the contrary weather . they come in great company of their small boat unto the ship with their face all bepaint with diverse colour , show we that it be a sign of joy , bring we of their victual , they make sign unto we where we may safe ride in the haven for the safeguard of our ship keep still our company : and after we be come to a anchor , we bestow 15 day in provide our self many necessary thing , whither every day the people repair to see our ship bring their wife with they , whereof they be very jealous : and they themselves enter aboard the ship and stay there a good space , cause their wife to stay in their boat , and for all the intreaty we can make , offer to give they diverse thing , we can never obtain that 
 Viii 
 1524. 
 copper more esteem than guide . 
 433 
 2 e 
 they will suffer they to come aboard our ship . and oftentimes one of the two king come with his queen , and many gentleman for their pleasure to see we , they all stay on the shore 200 pace from we , send a small boat to give we intelligence of their come , say they will come to see our ship : this they do in token of safety , and assoon as they have answer from we , they come immediate , and have stay a while to behold it , they wonder at hear the cry and noise of the mariner . the queen and her maid stay in a very light boat , at a hand a quarter of a league off , while the king abide a long space in our ship utter diverse conceit with gesture , view with great admiration all the furniture of the ship , demand the property of every thing particular . he take likewise great pleasure in behold our apparel , and in taste our meat , and so courteous take his leave depart . and sometime our man stay 2 or 3 day on a little hand near the ship for diverse necessary ( as it be the use of seaman ) he return with 7 or 8 of his gentleman to see what we do , and ask of we oftentimes if we mean to make any long abode there , offer we of their provision : then the king draw his bow and run up and down with his gentleman , make much sport to gratify our man : we be oftentimes within the land 5 or 6 league , which we find as pleasant as be possible to declare , very apt for any kind of husbandry of corn , wine and oil : for that there be plain 25 or 30 league broad , open and without any impediment , of tree of such fruitfulness , that any seed be sow therein , will bring forth most excellent fruit . we enter afterward into the wood , which we find so great and thick , that any army be it never so great may have hide it self therein , the tree whereof be oak , cypress tree , and other sort unknown in Europe . we find Pomi appii , damson tree , and nut tree , and 
 434 
 many other sort of fruit differ from we : there be beast in great abundance , as heart , dear , luzern , and other kind which they take with their net and bow which be their chief weapon : the arrow which they use be make with great cunning , and in stead of iron , they head they with flint , with jasper stone and hard marble and other sharp stone which they use in stead of iron to cut tree , and to make their boat of one whole piece of wood , make it hollow with great and wonderful art , wherein io . or 12. man may sit commodious : their oar be short and broad at the end , and they use they in the sea without any danger , and by main force of arm , with as great speediness as they listen themselves . we see their house make in circular or round form io the fashion of or 12 pace in compass , make with half circle of their houses-timber , separate one from another without any order of building , cover with mat of straw wrought cunning together , which save they from the wind and rain : and if they have the order of building and perfect skill of workmanship as we have , there be no doubt but that they will also make eftsoons great and stately building . for all the sea coast be full of clear and glister stone , and alabaster , and therefore it be full of good haven and the coast full harborough for ship . they move the foresay house from one place to another accord to the commodity of the place and season wherein they will make their abode , and only take off the mat , they have other house bud incontinent . the father and the whole family dwell together in one house in great number : in some of they we see 25 or 30 person . they feed as the other doe aforesaid of pulse which grow in that country with better order of husbandry then in the other . they observe in their sow the course of the moon and the rise of certain star , and diverse other custom speak of by antiquity . Moreover they live by 
 435 
 their cure with tobacco and perfume . 
 ^ . degree and 2. tierce . 
 the description of a notable haven in 41. deg . and 2. tierce . 
 150 league . 
 a show of minerail . 
 hunt and fish . they live long , and be seidome sick , and if they chance to fall sick at any time , they heal themselves with fire without any physician , and they say that they die for very age . they be very pitiful and charitable towards their neighbour , they make great lamentation in their adversity : and in their misery , the kindred reckon up all their felicity . at their departure out of life , they use mourning mix with sing , which continue for a long space . this be as as we can learn of they . this land be situate in the Paralele of Rome , in 41. degree and 2 terce : but somewhat more cold by accidentali cause and not of nature , ( as i will declare unto your highness elsewhere ) describe at this present the situation of the foresay country , which lie east and west , i say that the mouth of the haven lie open to the south half a league broad , and be enter within it between the east and the north , it stretch twelve league : where it wax broad and broad , and make a gulf about 20. league in compass , wherein be five small island very fruitful and pleasant , full of hie and broad tree , among the which island any great navy may ride safe without any fear of tempest or other danger . afterwards turn towards the south in the enter into the haven on both side there be most pleasant hill , with many river of most clear water fall into the sea 
 in the midst of this entrance there be a rock of free stone grow by nature apt to build any castle or fortress there , for the keep of the haven . the five of May be furnish with all thing necessary , we depart from the say coast keep along in the sight thereof , and we sail 150. league find it always after one manner : but the land somewhat high with certain mountain , all which bear a show of minerail matter , we seek not to land there in any place , because the weather serve our turn for sail : but we suppose that it be like the former , the coast 436 
 the coast runningeastward 50. league . 
 here the people be^n to be more savage . 
 run eastward for the space of fifty league . and trending afterward to the north , we find another land high full of thick wood , the tree whereof be firre , cipress and such like as be wont to grow in cold country . the people differ much from the other , and look how much the former seem to be courteous and gentle : so much be these full of rudeness and ill manner , and so barbarous that by no sign that ever we can make , we can have any kind of traffic with they . they cloth themselves with bear skin and luzerne and seal and other beast skin . their food , as far as we can perceive , repair often unto their dwelling , we suppose to be by hunt and fish , and of certain fruit , which be a kind of root which the earth yield of her own accord . they have no grain , neither saw we any kind or sign of tillage , neither be the land , for the barrenness thereof , apt to bear fruit or seed . if at any time we desire by exchange to have any of their commodity , they use to come to the sea shore upon certain craggy rock , and we stand in our boat , they let down with a rope what it please they to give we , cry continual that we shall not approach to the land , demand immediate the exchange , take nothing but knife , fishooke , and tool to cut withal , neither do they make any account of our courtesy . and when we have nothing leave to exchange with they , when we depart from they , the people show all sign of discourtesy and disdain , as be possible for any creature to invent . we be in despite of they 2 or 3 league within the land , be in number 25 arm man of we : and when we go on shore they shoot at we with their bow make great outcry , and afterward flee into the wood . we find not in this land any thing notable , or of importance , save very great wood and certain hill , they may have some minerali matter in they , because we see many of they bead of have beadstone of copper hang at their ear . we copper . 
 437 
 depart from thence keep our course Northeast along the coast , which we find more pleasant champion and without wood , with high mountain within the land continue direct along the coast for the space of fifty league , we discover 32 island lie all near the land , be small and pleasant to the view , high and have many turn and wind between they , make many fair harborough and channel as they do in the gulf of Venice in Sclavonia , and Dalmatia , we have no knowledge or acquaintance with the people : we suppose they be of the same manner and nature as the other be . sail Northeast for the space of 150. league we approach to the land that in time past be discover by the briton , which be in fifty degree . have now spend all our provision and victual , and have discover about 700 league and more of new country , and be furnish with water and wood , we conclude to return into France . 
 touch the religion of this people , which we have find , for want of their language we can not understand neither by sign nor gesture that they have any religion or law at all , or that they do acknowledge any first cause or mover , neither that they worship the heaven or star the sun or moon or other planet , and much less whither they be idolater , neither can we learn whither that they use any kind of sacrifice or other adoration , neither in their village have they any temple or house of prayer . we suppose that they have no religion at all , and that they live at their own liberty . and that all this proceed of ignorance , for that they be very easy to be persuade : and all that they see we christian do in our divine service , they do the same with the like imitation as they see we to do it . 
 