a discourse write by one mile fillip Englishman , one of the company put on shore northward of Panuco , in the west Indies 
 by m. John Hawkins 1568. contain many special thing of that country and of the spanish government , but special of ' ’ 
 cruelty use to our Englishman , among the rest to he self for the of 15. or 16. year together , until by and happy mean he be deliver 
 1. the Jesus . 
 2. the minion . 
 ^ . TheWilliam and John. 
 4. TheJudith . 
 5. the angel . 
 6. the swallow . 
 their and 
 space good from 
 this fleet consist of 6. ship . 
 their bloody hand , and return into his own country . An. 1582. 
 Chap. 1. 
 wherein be show the day and time of our departure from the coast of England , with the number and name of the ship , their captain and master , and of our traffic and deal upon the coast of Africa . 
 Pon Monday the second of October 1567. the weather be reasonable fair , our general m. John Hawkins , have command all his captain and master to be in a readiness to make sail with he , he himself be embark in the Jesus , whereof be appoint for master Robert Barret , hoist sail , and depart from plymouth upon his intend voyage for the part of Africa , and America , be accompany with five other sail of ship , as namely the minion , wherein go for captain m. John Hampton , and John Garret master . the William and John , wherein be captain Thomas Bolton , and James Raunce master . the Judith , in who be captain m. Francis Drake afterward knight , and the angel , who master , as also the captain and master of the swallow i now remember not . and so 398 
 sail in company together upon our voyage until the ten of the same month , a extreme storm then take we near unto cape Finister , which dure for the space of four day , and so separate our ship , that we have lose one another , and our general find the Jesus to be but in ill case , be in mind to give over the voyage , and to return home . howbeit the eleven of the same month the sea wax calm , and the wind come fair he alter his purpose , and hold on the former intend voyage : and so come to the island of Gomera be one of the island of the canary , where accord to a order before appoint , we meet with all our ship which be before disperse , we then take in fresh water and depart from thence the four of November , and hold on our course , upon the eighteenth day of the same month we come to a anchor upon the coast of Africa , at cape Verde in twelve fathom water ; and here our general land certain of our man , to the number of 160. or thereabouts , seek to take some 
 ros . and they go up into the country for the space of six mile , be encounter with a great number of the negro : who with their envenome arrow do hurt a great number of our man , so that they be enforce to retire to the ship , in which conflict they recover but a few negro , and of these our man which be hurt with their envenom arrow , there die to the number of seven or eight in very strange manner , with their mouth shut , so that we be force to put stick and other thing into their mouth to keep they open , and so afterward pass the time upon the coast of Guinea , until the twelve of January , we obtain by that time the number of 150. Negros . And be ready to depart from the sea coast , there be a negro send as a ambassador to our general , from a king of the negro , which be oppress with other king his border neighbour , desire our general to grant he succour and 
 399 
 the William and John separate and never after meet with the fleet . 
 aid against those his enemy , which our general grant unto , and go himself in person a land , with the number of two hundred of our man or thereabouts , and the say king which have request our aid , do join his force with we , so that thereby our general assault , and set fire upon a town of the say king his enemy , in which there be at the least the number of eight or ten thousand negro , and they perceive that they be not able to make any resistance seek by flight to save themselves , in which their flight there be take prisoner to the number of eight or nine hundred , which our general ought to have have for his share : howbeit the negro king which request our aid , falsify his word and promise , secret in the night convey himself away with as many prisoner as he have in his custody : but our general notwithstanding find himself to have now very near the number of 500 Negros think it best without long abode to depart with they , and such merchandise as he have from the coast of Africa , towards the west Indies , and therefore command with all diligence to take in fresh water and fuel , and so with speed to prepare to depart . howbeit before we depart from thence , in a storm that we have , we lose one of our ship , namely the William and John , of which ship and of her people , we hear no tiding during the time of our voyage . 
 Chap. 2. 
 wherein be show the day and time of our departure from the coast of Africa , with the day and time of our arrival in the west Indies , also of our trade , and traffic there , and also of the great cruelty that the Spaniard use towards we , by the viceroy his direction , and appointment , falsify his faith and promise give , and seek to have entrap we . 
 a li thing be make in a readiness , at our general his appointment , upon the third day of February 1568. we depart from the coast of Africa , have the 400 
 weather somewhat tempestuous , which make our passage the more hard ; and sail so for the space of 52. day , upon the 27. of march 1568. we come in sight of a island call Dominica , upon the coast of America in the west Indies , situate in 14. degree of latitude , and 322. of longitude : from thence our general coast from place to place , ever make traffic with the Spaniard and Indians as he may , which be somewhat hardly obtain , for that the king have straight charge all his governor in those part not to trade with any : yet notwithstanding , during the month of April and may , our general have reasonable trade and traffic , and courteous entertainment in sundry place , as at Margarita , Coragao , and else where , till we come to cape de la vela , and Rio de Hacha , ( a place from whence all the pearl do come : ) the governor there will not by any mean permit we to have any trade or traffic , nor yet suffer we to take in fresh water : by mean whereof our general for the avoid of famine and thirst about the begin of June , be enforce to land two hundred of our man , and so by main force and strength to obtain that which by no fair mean he can procure : and so recover the town with the loss of two of our man , there be a secret and peaceable trade admit , and the Spaniard come in by night , and buy of our negro to the number of 200. and upward , and of our other merchandise also . from thence we depart for Carthagena , where the governor be so straight , that we can not obtain any traffic there , and so for that our trade be near finish , our general think it best to depart from thence the rather for the avoid of certain dangerous storm call the huri-canos , which accustom to begin there about that time of the year , and so the 24. of July 1568. we depart from thence direct our course north : and leave the island of Cuba upon our right hand , to the eastward of we , and so sail towards Florida upon the 12. of August a extreme tempest arise , which dure for the space of 
 ix 401 2c 
 Mexico 60. league from 8. Juan de ullua . 
 8 day , in which our ship be most dangerous toss and beat hither , and thither , so that we be in continual fear to be drown by reason of the shallowness of the coast , and in the end we be constrain to flee for succour to the port of saint John de ullua , or Vera Cruz , situate in 19 degree of latitude , and in 279. degree of longitude , which be the port that serve for the city of Mexico : in our seek to recover this port our general meet by the way three small ship that carry passenger , which he take with he , and so the sixteenth of September 1568. we enter the say port of saint John de ullua . the Spaniard there suppose we to have be the king of Spain fleet , the chief officer of the country thereabouts come present aboard our general , where perceive themselves to have make a unwise adventure , they be in great fear to have be take and stay : howbeit our general do use they all very courteous . in the say port there be twelve ship which by report have in they in treasure to the value of two hundred thousand pound all which be in our general his power and at his devotion , he do free set at liberty , as also the passenger which he have before stay , not take from any of they all the value of one groat : only he stay two man of credit and account , the one name don Laurenzo de Alva , and the other don Pedro de Rivera , and present our general send to the viceroy to Mexico which be threescore league off , certify he of our arrival there by force of weather , desire that forasmuch as our queen his sovereign , be the king of Spain his love sister and friend , that therefore he will , consider our necessity and want , furnish we with victual for our navy , and quiet suffer we to repair and amend our ship . and furthermore that at the arrival of the spanish fleet which be there daily expect and look for , to the end that there may not quarrel arise between they , and our general and his company for the breach of amity , he humble request of his excellency , that there 
 402 
 may in this behalf some special order be take . this message be send away the 16. of September 1568. it be the very day of our arrival there . 
 the next morning be the sevententh of the same month , we descry 13. sail of great ship : and after that our general understand , that it be the king of Spain fleet then look for , he present send to advertise the general hereof , of our be in the say port , and give he further to understand , that before he shall enter there into that harbour , it be requisite that there shall pass between the two general some order and condition to be observe on either part , for the better contrive of peace between they and they , accord to our general request make unto the viceroy . and at this instant our general be in a great perplexity of mind , consider with himself that if he shall keep out that fleet from enter into the port , a thing which he be very well able to do with the help of God , then shall that fleet be in danger of present shipwreck and loss of all their substance , which amount unto the value of one million and eight itisputdowne hundred thousand pound . again he see that if he suffer they to enter , he be assure that they ns^t it will practise by all manner of mean to betray he relation . and his , and on the other side the haven be so little , that the other fleet enter , the ship be to ride one hard aboard of another . also he see that if their fleet shall perish by his keep of they out , as of necessity they must if he shall have do so , then stand he in great fear of the queen our sovereign displeasure in so weighty a cause : therefore do he choose the least evil , which be to suffer they to enter under assurance , and so to stand upon his guard , and to defend himself and he from their treason which we be well assure they will practise , and so the messenger be return from don Martin de Henriques , the new viceroy , who come in the same fleet , and have sufficient authority to command in all case both 
 403 
 4. article conclude upon , betwixt the english y the Spaniard ; although the treacherous Spaniards keep none of they . 
 by sea and by land in this province of Mexico or new Spain , do certify our general , that for the better maintenance of amity between the king of Spain and our sovereign , all our request shall be both favourable grant , and faithful perform : signify further that he hear and understand of the honest and friendly deal of our general , towards the king of Spain subject in all place where he have be , as also in the say port : so that to be brief our request be article , and set down in writing . viz 
 1 the first be that we may have victual for our money , and license to sell as much ware , as may suffice to furnish our want . 
 2 the second , that we may be suffer peaceable to repair our ship . 
 3 the third that the island may be in our possession during the time of our abode there , in which island our general for the better safety of he and he , have already plant and place certain ordinance which be eleven piece of brass , therefore he require that the same may so continue , and that no Spaniard shall come to land in they . say island , have or wear any kind of weapon about he . 
 4 the four and the last , that for the better and more sure performance and maintenance of peace , and of all the condition , there may twelve gentleman of credit be deliver of either part as hostage . 
 these condition be conclude and agree upon in write by the viceroy and sign with his hand , and seal with his seal , and 10. hostage upon either part be receive . and further it be conclude that the two general shall meet , and give faith each to other for the performance of the premise . all which be do , the same be proclaim by the sound of a trumpet , and commandment be give that none of either part shall violate or break the peace upon pain of death : thus at the end of three day all be conclude , and the fleet enter the port , the ship 
 404 
 salute one another as the manner of the sea do require : the morrow after be Friday we labour on all side in place the english ship by themselves , and the spanish ship by themselves , the captain and inferior person of either part , offer , and show great courtesy one to another , and promise great amity upon all side . howbeit as the sequel show , the Spaniard mean nothing less upon their part . for the viceroy and governor thereabouts have secret at land assemble to the number of 1000 choose man , and well appoint , mean the next Thursday be the 24. of September at dinner time to assault we , and set upon we on all side . but before i go any further , i think it not amiss brief to describe the manner of the island as it then be , and the force and strength , that it be now of . for the Spaniard since the time of our general be there , for the better fortify of the same place , have upon the same island build a fair castle , fain cutie and bulwark very well fortify : this port be then at our being there , a little island of stone , not past three faylaiuiqf foot above water in the high place , and not past a san Juan de bowshot over any way at the most , and it stand Ullua . from the main land , two bowshoote or moor : and there be not in all this coast any other place for ship safe to arrive at : also the north wind in this coast be of great violence and force , and unless the ship be safe more in , with their anchor fasten in this island , there be no remedy , but present destruction and shipwreck . all this our general wise foresee , do provide that he will have the say island in his custody , or else the Spaniard may at their pleasure , have but cut our cable , and so with the first northwind that blow we have have our passport , for our ship have go a shore . but to return to the matter . 
 the time approach that their treason must be put in practice , the same Thursday morning , some appearance thereof begin to show it self , as shift of weapon from ship to ship , and plant , and bend thpir 405 
 the value of a spanishvice-roy his faith . 
 the villainous treachery of the Spaniard and their cruelty . 
 ordinance against our man that ward upon the land , with great repair of people : which apparent show of breach of the viceroy faith cause our general to send one to the viceroy , to inquire of he what be mean thereby , which present send and give order , that the ordinance aforesaid , and other thing of suspicion shall be remove , return answer to our general in the faith of a viceroy , that he will be our defence , and safety from all villainous treachery : this be upon Thursday in the morning . our general not be therewith satisfy , see they have secret convey a great number of man aboard a great hulk or ship of they of six hundred ton , which ship ride hard by the minion , he send again to the viceroy Robert Barret the master of the Jesus , a man that can speak the spanish tongue very well , and require that those man may be unshipt again , which be in that great hulk . the viceroy then perceive that their treason be thorough espy , stay our master , and sound the trumpet , and give order that his people shall upon all side charge upon our man , which ward on shore , and else where , which strike such a maze , and sudden fear among we , that many give place , and seek to recover our ship for the safety of themselves . the Spaniard which secret be hide in ambush at land be quick convey over to the island in their long boat , and so come to the island , they slay all our man that they can meet with , without mercy . the minion which have somewhat before prepare her self to avoid the danger , hale away and abide the first brunt of the 300 man that be in the great hulk : than they seek to fall aboard the Jesus , where be a cruel fight , and many of our man slay : but yet our man defend themselves , and keep they out : so the Jesus also get loose , and join with the minion , the fight wax hot upon all side : but they have win and get our ordinance on shore , do great annoy we . in this fight there be two great ship of the 
 406 
 Spaniard sink , and one burn , so that with their ship they be not able to harm we , but from the shore they beat we cruel with our own ordinance , in such sort that the Jesus be very sore spoil : and sudden the Spaniard have fire two great ship of their own , they come direct against we , which breed among our man a marvellous fear . howbeit the minion which have make her sail ready , shift for her self , without consent of the general , captain or master , so that very hardly our general can be receive into the minion : the most of our man that be in the Jesus shift for themselves , and follow the minion in the boat , and those which that small boat be not able to receive , be most cruel slay by the Spaniard . of our ship none escape save the minion and the Judith : and all such of our man as be not in they be enforce to abide the tyrannous cruelty of the Spaniard . for it be a certain truth , that whereas they have take certain of our man ashore , they take and hang they up by the arm upon high post until the blood burst out of their finger end : of which man so use , there be one Copstow , and certain other yet alive , who by the merciful providence of the almighty , be long since 
 copstoweoneof m. Hawkins man return 
 arrive here at home in England , carry still about with from ^ueva they ( and shall to their grave ) the mark and token of Espanna . 
 those inhumane and more than barbarous cruel deal . 
 Chap. 3. 
 wherein be show , how that after we be escape from the Spaniard , we be like to perish with famine at the sea , and how our general , for the avoid thereof be constrain to put half of his man on land , and what misery we after that sustain among the savage people , and how again we fall into the hand of the Spaniard . 
 after that the viceroy , don Martin Henriques , have thus contrary to his faith and promise , most cruel deal with our general master Hawkins , at saint John de 
 407 
 ullua , where most of his man be by the Spaniard slay and drown , and all his ship sink and burn , save the minion , and the Judith , which be a small bark of fifty ton , wherein be then captain master Francis Drake aforesaid : the same night the say bark lose we , we be in great necessity , and inforce to remove with the minion two bow-shoote from the spanish fleet , where we anchor all that night : and the next morning we weigh anchor , and recover a island a mile from the Spaniard , where a storm take we with a north wind , in which we be great distress , have but two cable and two anchor leave : for in the conflict before we have lose three cable and two anchor . the morrow after , the storm be cease and the weather fair , we weigh , and set sail , be many man in number , and but small store of victual to suffice we for any long time : by mean whereof we be in despair and fear that we shall perish through famine , so that some be in mind to yield themselves to the mercy of the Spaniard , other some to the savage or infidel , and wander thus certain day in these unknown sea , hunger constrain we to eat hide , cat and dog , mouse , rat , parrot and monkey : to be short , our hunger be so great , that we think it savoury and sweet whatsoever we can get to eat . 
 and on the eight of October we come to land again , in the bottom of the bay of Mexico , where we hope to have find some inhabitant , that we may have have some relief of victual , and a place where to repair our ship , which be so great bruise , that we be scarce able with our weary arm to keep forth the water : be thus oppress with famine on the one side and danger of drown on the other , not know where to find relief , we begin to be in wonderful despair , and we be of many mind , among who there be a great many that do desire our general to set they on land , make their choice rather to submit themselves to the mercy of the savage or infidel , then long to 408 
 hazard themselves at sea , where they very well see , that if they shall remain together , if they perish not by drown , yet hunger will enforce they in the end to eat one another : to which request our general do very willing agree , consider with himself that it be necessary for he to lessen his number , both for the safety of himself and they rest : and thereupon be resolve to set half his people ashore that he have then leave alive , it be a world to see how sudden man mind be alter : for they which a little before desire to be set on land , be now of another mind , and request rather to stay : by mean where - [ three . 474 - . ] of our general be enforce for the more contentation of all man mind , and to take away all occasion of offence , to take this order : first he make choice of such person of service and account , as be needful to stay , and that be do , of those which be willing to go he appoint such as he think may be best spare , and present appoint that by the boat they shall be set on shore , our general promise we that the next year he will either come himself , or else send to fetch we home . here again it will have cause any stony heart to have relent to hear the pitiful moan that many do make , and how loath they be to depart : the weather be then somewhat stormy and tempestuous , and therefore we be to pass with great danger , yet notwithstanding there be no remedy , but we that be appoint to go away , must of necessity do so . howbeit those that go they be put in the first boat be safe set on shore , but of they » » 2 5 
 which go in the second boat , of which number i ' ' ™ rth-my self be one , the sea wrought so high , that we panucj0 t } ie 8 can not attain to the shore , and therefore we be of October constrain through the cruel deal of John Hampton 1568. captain of the minion , and John Sanders boatswain of the Jesus , and Thomas Pollard his mate , to leap out of the boat into the main sea , have moor then a mile to shore , and so to shift for our self , and either 
 409 
 Chichimici a ■ warlike and truel people . 
 to sink or swim . and of those that so be ( as it be ) throw out , and compel to leap into the sea , there be two drown , which be of captain blands man . 
 in the evening of the same day , it be Monday the eight of October , 1568 , when we be all come to shore , we find fresh water , whereof some of our man drink so much , that they have almost cast themselves away , for we can scarce get life of they for the space of two or three hour after : other sum be so cruel swell , what with the drink in of the salt water , and what with the eat of the fruit which we find on land , have a stone in it much like a almond ( which fruit be call capule ) that they be all in very ill case , so that we be in a manner all of we both feeble , faint and weak . 
 the next morning be Tewsday , the nine of October , we think it best to travel along by the sea coast , to seek out some place of habitation : ( whether they be Christians or Savages , we be indifferent , so that we may have wherewithal ! to sustain our hungry body ) and so depart from a hill where we have rest all night , not have any dry thread about we , ( for those that be not wet being not throw into the sea , be thorough wet with rain , for all the night it rain cruel : ) as we go from the hill , and be come into the plain , we be great trouble to pass for the grass and weed that grow there high than any man . on the left hand we have the sea , and upon the right hand great wood , so that of necessity we must needs pass on our way westward , through those marsh ; and go thus , sudden we be assault by the Indians , a warlike kind of people , which be in a manner as cannibal , although they do not feed upon man flesh as cannibal do . 
 these people be call Chichimici , and they use to wear their hair long , even down to their knee , they do also colour their face green , yellow , red and blue , 410 
 which make they to seem very ugly and terrible to behold . Theise people do keep war against the Spaniard , of who they have be oftentimes very cruel handle : for with the Spaniard there be no mercy . they perceive we at our first come on land , suppose we to have be their enemy , the border Spaniards , and have by their forerunner descry what number we be , and how feeble and weak without armour or weapon , they sudden accord to their accustom manner , when they encounter with any people in warlike sort , raise a terrible and huge cry , man as and so come run fierce upon we , shoot off their arrow as thick as hail , unto who mercy we be ’ 
 constrain to yield , not have among we any kind of armour , nor yet weapon , save one caliver , and two old rusty sword , whereby to make any resistance , or to save our self : which when they perceive , that we seek not any other than favour and mercy at their hand , and that we be not their enemy the Spaniard , they have compassion on we , and come and cause we all to sit down : and when they have a while survey , and take a perfect view of we , they come to all such as have any colour clothes among we , and those they do strip stark naked , and take their clothes away with they , but those that be apparel in black they do not meddle withal , and so go their way , and leave we without do we any further hurt , only in the first brunt they kill eight of our man . eight of our And at our departure , they perceive in what weak slalne . case we be , point we with their hand which way we shall go to come to a town of the Spaniard , which as we afterward perceive , be not pass ten league from thence , use these word : tampice , tampice , Christiano , tampice Christiano , which be as much ( we think ) as to say in english , at tampice you shall find the Christians . the weapon that they 
 use be no other but bow and arrow , and their arm be so good , that they very seidome miss to hit 
 411 
 any thing that they shoot at . Shortly after they have leave we strip ( as aforesaid ) we think it best to divide our self into two company , and so be separ-Anthony at , half of we go under the lead of one Anthony Godard . Godard , who be yet a man alive , and dwell at this instant in the town of Plymouth , who before we choose to be captain over we all , and those which go under his lead , of which number i mile Philips be one , travail westward that way which the Indians with their hand have before point we to go . the other half go under the lead of one John Hooper , who they do choose for their captain , and with the David company that go with he , David Ingram be one , Ingram . an ( j gy take their way and travel northward , and short after , within the space of two day , they be again encounter with the savage people , and their captain Hooper and two more of his company be slay : then again they divide themselves , and some hold on their way still northward , and other some , know that we be go westward , seek to meet with we again , as in truth there be about the number of 25 or 26 of they that meet with we in the space of four day again , and then we begin to reckon among our self , how many we be that be set on shore , and we find the number to be a hundred and fourteen , whereof two be drown in the sea , and eight be slay at the first encounter , so that there remain a hundred and four , of which 25 went westward with we , and 52 to the north with Hooper and Ingram : and as Ingram since have often tell i , there be not pass three of their company slay , and there be but six and twenty of they that come again to we , so that of the company that go northward , there be yet lack , and not certain hear of , the number of three and twenty man . and very i do think that there be of they yet alive , and marry in the say country , at Cibola , as hereafter i purpose ( God will ) to discourse of more particular , with the reason 
 412 
 and cause that make i so to think of they that be lack , which be David Ingram , twide , brown , and sundry other , who name we can not remember . And be thus meet again together , we travel on still westward , sometime through such thick wood , that we be enforce with cudgel to break away the bramble and bush from tear our naked body : other sometime we shall travel through the plain , in such high grass that we can scarce see one another , and as we pass in some place , we shall have of our man slay , and fall down sudden , be strike by the Indians , which stand behind tree and bush , in secret place , and so kill our man as they go by , for we go scatter in seek of fruit to relieve our self . we be also oftentimes great annoy with a kind of fly , which in the indian tongue be call Tequani , and the Spaniard call they muskitos . there be also in the say country a number of other kind of fly , but none so noisome as these tequany be : you shall hardly see they they be so small , for they be scarce so big as a gnat ; they will suck one blood marvelous , and if you kill they while they be suck , they be so venomous that the place will swell extreme , even as one that be sting with a wasp or bee : but if you let they suck their fill , and to go away of themselves , than they do you no other hurt , but leave behind they a red spot somewhat big than a flea-bite . at the first we be terrible trouble with these kind of fly , not know their quality , and resistance we can make none against they , be naked : as for cold we fear not any , the country there be always so warm . and as we travel thus for the space of ten or twelve day , our captain do oftentimes cause certain to go up into the top of high tree , to see if they can descry any town or place of inhabitant , but they can not perceive any , and use often the same order to climb up into high tree , at the length they descry a 
 413 
 great river that fall from the northwest into the main sea , and present after , we hear a harquebus shoot off , which do great encourage we , for thereby we know that we be near to some Christians , and do therefore hope short to find some succour and comfort , and within the space of one hour after , as we travel , we hear a cock crow , which be also no small joy unto we , and so we come to the north side of the river of Panuco , where the Spaniard have certain Salines , at which place it be that the harquebus be shoot off , which before we hear : to which place we go not direct , but miss thereof , we leave it about a bowshot upon our left hand : of this river we drink very greedy , for we have not meet with any water in six day before , and as we be here by the river side rest our self , and long to come to the place where the cock do crow , and where the harquebus be shoot off , we perceive many Spaniards upon the other side of the river , ride up and down on horseback , and they perceive we , do suppose that we have be of the Indians their border enemy , the Chichimeci : the river be not past half a bow shoot over : and present one of the Spaniard take a indian boat call a Canoa , and so come over , be row by two Indians , and have take the view of we , do present row over back again to the Spaniard , who without any delay make out about the number of twenty horseman , and embark themselves in the canoas , they lead their horse by the reins swim over after they , and be come over to that side of the river where we be , they saddle their horse , and be mount upon they with their lance charge , they come very fierce run at we . our captain Anthony Godard see they come in that order , do persuade we to submit and yield our self unto they , for be naked , as we at this time be , and without weapon , we can not make any resistance , who bid we obey , and upon the yield of our self , they perceive we to be Christians , and do call for moor canoas , and carry we over by four 414 
 1568. and four in a boat , and be come on the other side , they understand by our captain how long we have be without meat , impart between two and two a loaf of bread make of that country wheat , which the Spaniard call maiz , of the bigness of our halfpenny loaf , which bread be name in the indian tongue clashacal . this bread be very sweet and pleasant unto we , for we have not eat any in a long time before : and what be it that hunger do not make to have a savoury and a delicate taste ? and have thus part the bread among we , those which be man they send afore to the town , have also many Indians inhabitant of that place to guard they : they which be young , as boy , and some such also as be feeble , they take up upon their horse , behind they , and so carry we to the town where they dwell , which be very near distant a mile from the place where we come over . 
 this town be well situate , and well replenish with all kind of fruit , as orange , lemon , pomegranate , apricok , and peach , and sundry other , and be inhabit with a great number of tame Indians , or Mexicans , and have in it also at that time about the number of two hundred Spaniard , man , woman , and child , beside negro . of their Salines , which lie the Salines upon the west side of the river , more than a mile distant °fpan^o-from thence , they make a great profit , for it be a excellent good merchandise there : the Indians do buy much thereof , and carry it up into the country , and there sell it to their own country people , in double the price . 
 also much of the salt make in this place , be transport from thence by sea to sundry other place , as to Cuba , saint John de ullua , and the other port of Tamiago , and Tamachos , which be two bar haven west and by south above threescore league from saint John de ullua . when we be all come to the town , the governor there show himself very severe unto we , and threaten to hang we all : and then he demand what money we have , which in truth be very little , for the Indians which 415 
 we first meet withal , have in a manner take all from we , and of that which they leave , the Spaniard which bring we over , take away a good part also : howbeit , from Anthony Godard the governor here have a chain of gold , which be give unto he at Carthagena , by the governor there , and from other he have some small store of money : so that we account that among we all he have the number of five hundred pezo , beside the chain of gold . 
 and have thus satisfy himself , when he have take all that we have , he cause we to be put into a little house much like a hogsty , where we be almost smother : and before we be thus shut up into that little coat , they give we some of the country wheat , call Mayz , sodden , which they feed their hog withal . but many of our man which have be hurt by the indian at our first come on land , who wound be very sore and grievous , desire to have the help of their surgeon to cure their wound . the governor , and most of they all answer , that we shall have none other surgeon but the hangman , which shall sufficient heal we of all our grief : and thus revile we , and call we English dog , and Lutheran heretic , we remain the space of three day in this miserable state , not know what shall become of we , wait every hour to be bereave of our life . 
 Chap. 4. 
 wherein be show how we be use in Panuco , and in what fear of death we be there , and how we be carry to Mexico to the viceroy , and of our imprisonment there and at Tescuco , with the courtesy and cruelty we receive during that time , and how in the end we be by proclamation give to serve as slave to sundry gentleman Spaniards . 
 upon the four day after our come thither , and there remain in a perplexity , look every hour when we shall suffer death , there come a great number 416 
 of Indians and Spaniards weapon to fetch we out of the house , and among they we espy one that bring a great many of new halter , at the sight whereof we be great amaze , and make no other account but that we shall present have suffer death , and so cry and call to God for mercy and forgiveness of our sin , we prepare our self , make we ready to die : yet in the end , as the sequel show , their meaning be not so : for when we be come out of the house , with those halter they bind our arm behind we , and so couple we two and two together , they command we to march on through the town , and so along the country from place to place towards the city of Mexico , which be distant from Panuco west and by south the space of ninety league , have only but two Spaniard to conduct we , they be accompany with a great number of Indians ward on either side with bow and arrow , lest we shall escape from they . And travel in this order , upon the second day at night we come unto a town which the Indians call Nohele , and the Spaniard call it Santa maria : in which town there be a house of white friar , which do very courteous use we , and give we hot meat , as mutton and broth , and garment also to cover our self withal , make of white bay : we feed very greedy of the meat , and of the indian fruit , call noc-hole , which fruit be long and small , much like in fashion to a little cucumber . our greedy feed cause we to fall sick of hot burn ague . and here at this place one Thomas Baker one of our man die of a hurt : for he have be before shoot with a arrow into the throat at the first encounter . 
 the next morrow about ten of the clock , we depart from thence , bind two 8c two together , and guard as before , and so travail on our way towards Mexico , till we come to a town within forty league of Mexico , name Mestitlan , where be a house of black friar : and in this town there be about the number of three hundred Spaniard , both man , woman , and child . 
 ix 417 2d 
 [ he . 477-1 
 the friar send we meat from the house ready dress , and the friar , and the man and woman use we very courteous , and give we some shirt and other such thing as we lack . here our man be very sick of their ague , and with eat of another fruit call in the indian tongue , guiaccos , which fruit do bind we so sore , that for the space of ten or twelve day we can not ease our self . the next morning we depart from thence with our two Spaniard and indian guard , as aforesaid . of these two Spaniards the one be a age man , who all the way do very courteous entreat we , and will careful go before to provide for we both meat and thing necessary to the uttermost of his power : the other be a young man who all the way travel with we , and never depart from we , who be a very cruel caitiff , and he carry a javelin in his hand , and sometime when as our man with very feebleness and faintness be not able to go so fast as he require they , he will take his javelin in both his hand , and strike they with the same between the neck and the shoulder so violent , that he will strike they down ; then will he cry , and say , Marchad , marchad ingleses perro , Luterianos , enemigos de dios : which be as much to say in english , as march , march on you english dog , lutheran , enemy to God . and the next day we come to a town call Pachuca , and there be two place of that name : as this town of Pachuca , and the mine of Pachuca , which be mine of silver , and be about six league distant from this town of Pachuca towards the northwest . 
 here at this town the good old man our governor suffer we to stay two day and two night , have compassion of our sick and weak man , full sore against the mind of the young man his companion . from thence we take our journey , and travel four or five day by little village , and Stantias , which be farm or dairy house of the Spaniard , and ever as we have need , the good old man will still provide we sufficient of meat , fruit , and water to sustain we . at the end of which 418 
 five day we come to a town within five league of Mexico , which be call Quoghliclan , where we also stay one whole day and two night , where be a fair house of grey friar , howbeit we see none of they . here we be tell by the Spaniard in the town , that we have not pass fifteen english mile from thence to Mexico , whereof we be all very joyful and glad , hope that when we come thither , we shall either be relieve , and set free out of bond , or else be quick dispatch out of our life : for see our self thus carry bind from place to place , although some use we courteous , yet can we never joy , nor be merry till we may perceive our self set free from that bondage , either by death or otherwise . 
 the next morning we depart from thence on our journey towards Mexico , and so travel till we come within two league of it , where there be build by the Spaniard a very fair church , call our lady church , in which there be a image of our lady of silver and gilt , be as high , and as large as a tall woman , in which church , and before this image , there be as many lamp of silver as there be day in the year , which upon high day be all light . whensoever any Spaniards pass by this church , although they be on horse back , they will alight , and come into the church , and kneel before the image , and pray to our lady to defend they from all evil ; so that whether he be horseman or footman he will not pass by , but first go into the church , and pray as aforesaid , which if they do not , they think and believe that they shall never prosper : which image they call in the spanish tongue , Nuestra sennora de Guadalupe . at nuestr a this place there be certain cold bath , which arise , spring - sennora-ing up as though the water do see : the water whereof be somewhat brackish in taste , but very good for any that have any sore or wound , to wash themselves therewith , for as they say , it heal many : and every year once upon our lady day the people use to repair thither to offer , and to pray in that church before the image , and 
 419 
 certain Englishman take prisoner at the fight at Sant Juan de ullua . 
 they say that our lady of Guadalupe do work a number of miracle . about this church there be not any town of Spaniards that be inhabit , but certain Indians do dwell there in house of their own country building . 
 here we be meet with a great number of Spaniards on horseback , which come from Mexico to see we , both gentleman , and man of occupation , and they come as people to see a wonder : we be still call upon to march on ; and so about four of the clock in the afternoon of the say day we enter into the city of Mexico , by the way or street call la call Santa Catherina : and we stay not in any place till we come to the house or palace of the vice Roy , don Martin Henriques , which stand in the midst of the city , hard by the market place , call la plaga deal Marquese . we have not stay any long time at this place , but there be bring we by the Spaniard from the market place great store of meat , sufficient to have satisfy five time so many as we be : some also give we hat , and some give we money : in which place we stay for the space of two hour , and from thence we be convey by water in two large canoas to a hospital where as certain of our man be lodge , which be take before the fight at saint John de ullua : we shall have go to our lady hospitali , but that there be also so many of our man take before at that fight that there be no room for we . after our come thither , many of the company that come with i from Panuco die within the space of fourteen day : soon after which time we be take forth from that place , and put altogether into our lady hospitali , in which place we be courteous use , and visit oftentimes by virtuous gentleman and gentlewoman of the city , who bring we diverse thing to comfort we withal , as succat and marmilad , and such other thing , and will also many time give we many thing , and that very liberal . in which hospitali we remain for the 420 
 space of six month , until we be all whole and sound of body , and then we be appoint by the vice Roy to be carry unto the town of Tescuco , which be from Mexico Southwest distant eight league : in which town there be certain house of correction and punishment for ill people call obrache , like to Bridewell here in London : into which place diverse Indians be sell for slave , some for ten year , and some for twelve . it be no small grief unto we when we understand that we shall be carry thither , and to be use as slave , we have rather be put to death : howbeit there be no remedy , but we be carry to the prison of Tescuco , where we be not put to any labour , but be very strait keep , and almost famish , yet by the good providence of our merciful God , we happen there to meet with one Robert sweet - Robert ing , who be the son of a Englishman bear of a fete a spanish woman : this man can speak very good Eng - * lish , and by his mean we be help very much with victual from the Indians , as mutton , hen , and bread . 
 and if we have not be so relieve , we have sure perish : and yet all the provision that we have get that way be but slender . And continue thus straight keep in prison there for the space of two month , at the length we agree among our self to break forth of prison , come of it what will , for we be mind rather to suffer death then long to live in that miserable state . and so have escape out of prison , we know not what way to fly for the safety of our self , the night be dark , and it rain terrible , and not have any guide , we go we know not whither , and in the morning , at the appear of the day , we perceive our self to be come hard to the city of Mexico , which be 24 English mile from Tescuco . the day be come we be espy by the Spaniard , and pursue , and take , and bring before the vice Roy and head justice , who threaten to hang english we for break of the king prison . yet in the end they e^emen send we into a garden belong to the vice Roy , and 6 ’ 
 come thither , we find there our english gentleman 
 421 
 which be deliver as hostage when as our general be betray at saint John de ullua , as be aforesaid , and with they we also find Robert Barret , the master of the Jesus , in which place we remain labour and do such thing as we be command , for the space of 4 month , have but two sheep a day allow to almost a suffice we all , be very near a hundred man , and for bread we have every man two loaf a day , of the quantity prhonenTn one halfpenny loaf . at the end of which four Mexico , month , they have remove our gentleman hostage , and the master of the Jesus to a prison in the vice Roy his own house , do cause it to be proclaim , that what gentleman Spaniard soever be willing , or will have any english man to serve he , and be bind to keep he forth come , to appear before the justice within one month after notice give , that they shall repair to the say garden , and there take their choice : which proclamation be no soon make , but the gentleman come and repair to the garden amain , so that happy be he that can soon get one of we . 
 Chap. 5. 
 wherein be show in what good sort , and how wealthy we live with our master until the come of the inquisition , when as again our sorrow begin a fresh : of our imprisonment in the holy house , and of the severe judgement and sentence give against we , and with what rigour and cruelty the same be execute . 
 the gentleman that thus take we for their servant or slave do new apparel we through out , with who we abide , do such service as they appoint we unto , which be for the most part to attend upon they at the table , and to be as their chamberlain , and to wait upon they when they go abroad , which they great account of ; for in that country not Spaniard will serve one another , but they be all of they attend and serve by Indians weekly , and by negro which 422 
 be their slave during their life . in this sort we remain and serve in the say city of Mexico , and thereabouts for the space of a year and somewhat long . afterwards many of we be by our master appoint to go to sundry of their mine where they have to do , and to be as overseer of the negro and Indians that labour there . in which mine many of we do profit and gain great : for first we be allow three hundred pezo a man for a year , which be threescore pound sterling , and beside that the Indians and negro which wrought under our charge , upon our well use and entreat of they , will at time as upon Saturdayes when they have leave work , labour for we , and blow as much silver as shall be worth unto we 3 mark or thereabouts , every mark be worth 6 pezo , and a half of their money , which 19 pezo and a half , be worth 4il 10 . of our money . sundry week we do gain so much by this mean beside our wage , that many of we become very rich , and be worth three thousand or four thousand pezo , for we live and gain thus in those mine some three or four year . as concern those gentleman which be deliver as hostage , and that be keep in prison , in the viceroy his house , after that we be go from out the garden to serve sundry gentleman as aforesaid , they remain prisoner in the say house for the space of 4 month after their come thither , at the end whereof the fleet be ready to depart from saint John de ullua , to go for Spain , the say gentleman be send away into Spain with the fleet , where as i have hear it credible report , many of they die with the cruel handle of the Spaniard in the inquisition house , as those which have be deliver home after they have suffer the persecution of that house can more perfect declare . Robert Barret also master of the Jesus , be send away with the fleet into Spain the next year follow , where afterward he suffer persecution in the inquisition , and at the last be con - 
 423 
 demean to be burn , and with he one more of our man who name be John Gilbert . 
 now after that six year be full expire since our first come into the Indies , in which time we have be imprison and serve in the say country as be before true declare , in the year of our lord one thousand five hundred seventie four , the inquisition begin to be establish in the Indies , very much against the mind of many of the Spaniard themselves : for never until this time since their first conquer and plant in the Indies , be they subject to that bloody and cruel inquisition . the chief inquisitor be name don Pedro Moya de Contreres , and John de Bovilla his companion , and John Sanches the fischall , and Pedro de los Rios , the secretary : they be come and settle , and place in a very fair house near unto the white friar , consider with themselves that they must make a entrance and beginning of that their most detestable inquisition here in Mexico , to the terror of the whole country , think it best to call we that be Englishman first in question , and so much the rather , for that they have perfect knowledge and intelligence that many of we be become very rich , as have be already declare , and therefore we be a very good booty and pray to the inquisitor : so that now again begin our sorrow a fresh , for we be send for , and seek out in all place of the country , and proclamation make upon pain of loose of good and excommunication , that no man shall hide or keep secret any Englishmen or any part of their good . by mean whereof we be all soon apprehend in all place , and all our good seize and take for the inquisitor use , and so from all part of the country we be convey and send as prisoner to the city of Mexico , and there commit to prison in sundry dark dungeon , where we can not see but by candle light , and be never past two together in one place , so 
 424 
 that we see not one another , neither can one of we tell what be become of another . thus we remain close imprison for the space of a year and a half , and other for some less time , for they come to prison ever as they be apprehend . during which time of our imprisonment , at the first beginning we be often call before the inquisitor alone , and there severe examine of our faith , and command to say the pater noster , the have maria , and the creed in latin , which God know a great number of we can not say , otherwise then in the english tongue . and have the say Robert sweat who be our friend at Tescuco always present with they for a interpreter , he make report for we , y* in our own country speech we can say they perfect , although not word for word as they be in latin . then do they proceed to demand of we upon our oath what we do believe of the sacrament , and whether there do remain any bread or wine after the word of consecration , yea or no , and whether we do not believe that the host of bread which the priest do hold up over his head , and the wine that be in the chalice , be the very true and perfect body and blood of our saviour Christ , yea or no : to which if we answer not yea , then be there no way but death . than they will demand of we what we do remember of our self , what opinion we have hold , or have be teach to hold contrary to the same while we be in England : to which we for the safety of our life be constrain to say , that we never do believe , nor have be teach otherwise then have before we have say . then will they charge we that we do not tell they the truth , that they know the contrary , and therefore we shall call our self to remembrance , and make they a better answer at the next time , or else we shall be rack , and make to confess the truth whether we will or no . and so come again before they the next time , we be still demand of our belief while we 
 425 
 A.D. 
 1575 - 
 be in England , and how we have be teach , and also what we think or do know of such of our own company as they do name unto we , so that we can never be free from such demand , and at other time they will promise we , that if we will tell they truth , then shall we have favour and be set at liberty , although we very well know their fair speech be but mean to entrap we , to the hazard and loss of our life : howbeit God so merciful wrought for we by a secret mean that we have , that we keep we still to our first answer , and will still say that we have tell the truth unto they , and know no more by our self nor any other of our fellow then as we have declare , and that for our sin and offence in England against God and our lady , or any of his bless saint , we be hearty sorry for the same , and do cry God mercy , and beseech the inquisitor for God sake , consider that we come into those country by force of weather , and against our will , and that never in all our life we have either speak or do any thing contrary to their law , and therefore they will have mercy upon we . yet all this will not serve ; for still from time to time we be call upon to confess , and about the space of 3 month before they proceed our man be to their severe judgement , we be all rack , and some cruel rack . enforce to utter that against themselves , which afterward cost they their life . and thus have get from our own mouth matter sufficient for they to proceed in judgement against we , they cause a large scaffold to be make in the midst of the market place in Mexico right over against the head church , and 14 or 15 day before the day of their judgement , with the sound of a trumpet , and the noise of their attabaly , which be a kind of drum , they do assemble the people in all part of the city : before who it be then solemn proclaim , that whosoever will upon such a day repair to the market place , they shall hear the sentence of the holy inquisition against the 426 
 english heretic , lutheran , and also see the same put in execution . which be do , and the time approach of this cruel judgement , the night before they come to the prison where we be , with certain officer of that holy hellish house , bring with they certain fool coat which they have prepare for we , be call in their language s. benitos , which coat be make of yellow cotton and red cross upon they , both before and behind : they be so busy in put on their coat about we , and bring we out into a large yard , and place and point we in what order we shall go to the scaffold or place of judgement upon the morrow , that they do not once suffer we to sleep all that night long . the next morning be come , there be give to every one of we for our breakfast a cup of wine , and a slice of bread fry in honey , and so about eight of the clock in the morning , we set forth of the prison , every man alone in his yellow coat , and a rope about his neck , and a great green wax candle in his hand unlighted , have a Spaniard appoint to go upon either side of every one of we : and so march in this order and manner towards the scaffold in the market place , which be a bow shoot distant or thereabouts , we find a great assembly of people all the way , and such a throng , that certain of the inquisitor officer on horseback be constrain to make way , and so come to the scaffold , we go up by a pair of stair , and find seat ready make and prepare for we to sit down on , every man in order as he shall be call to receive his judgement . we be thus set down as we be appoint , present the inquisitor come up another pair of stair , and the viceroy and all the chief justice with they . when they be set down and place under the cloth of estate agree to their degree and call , then come up also a great number of friar , white , black and grey , about the number of 300 person , they be set in the place for they appoint . then be there a 
 427 
 solemn oyes make , and silence command , and then present begin their severe and cruel judgement . 
 the cruel the first man that be call be one Roger the chief e^mtish^ armourer of the Jesus , and he have judgement to have inquisitor three hundred stripe on horseback , and after condemn upon our poor to the galley as a slave for io year . 
 countryman . after he be call John grey , John brown , John rider , John moon , James collier , and one Thomas Browne : these be adjudge to have 200 stripe on horseback , and after to be commit to the galley for the space of 8 year . 
 then be call John key , and be adjudge to have 100 stripe on horseback , and condemn to serve in the galley for the space of 6 year . 
 then be several call the number of 53 one after another , and every man have his several judgement , some to have 200 stripe on horseback , and some 100 , and condemn for slave to the galley , some for 6 year , some for 8 and some for 10. 
 and then be i mile Philips call , and be adjudge to serve in a monastery for 5 year , without any stripe , and to wear a fool coat , or saint Benito , during all that time . 
 then be call John story , Richard Williams , David Alexander , Robert cook , Paul Horsewell and Thomas Hull : the six be condemn to serve in monastery without stripe , some for 3 year and some for four , and to wear the saint Benito during all the say time . which be do , and it now draw towards night , George rively , Peter momfrie , and Cornelius the Irishman , be call and have their judgement to be burn to ash , and so be present send away to the place of execution in the market place but a little from the scaffold , where they be quick burn and consume . and as for we that have receive our judgement , be 68 in number , we be carry back that night to prison again . and the next day in the morning be good Friday , the year of our lord 1575 , we 42 
 be all bring into a court of the inquisitor palace , where we find a horse in a readiness for every one of our man which be condemn to have stripe , and to be commit to the galley , which be in number 60 and so they be enforce to mount up on horseback naked from the middle upward , be carry to be show as a spectacle for all the people to behold throughout the chief and principali street of the city , and have the number of stripe to every one of they appoint , most cruel lay upon their naked body with long whip by sundry man appoint to be the executioner thereof : and before our man there go a couple of crier which cry as they go : behold these english dog , lutheran , enemy to God , and all the way as they go there be some of the inquisitor themselves , and of the familiar of that rakehel order , that cry to the executioner , strike , lay on those english heretic , lutheran , God enemy : and so this horrible spectacle be show round about the city , they return to the inquisitor house , with their back all gore blood , and swell with great bump , and be then take from their horse , and carry again to prison , where they remain until they be send into Spain to the galley , there to receive the rest of their martyrdom : and i and the 6 other with i which have judgement , and be condemn among the rest to serve a apprenticeship in the monastery , be take present and send to certain religious house appoint for the purpose . 
 429 
 [ Chap. 6 
 wherein be show how we be use in the religious house , and that when the time be expire , that we be adjudge to serve in they , there come news to Mexico of m. Francis drake be in the south sea , and what preparation be make to take he , and how i seek to escape , be again take and put in prison at Vera Cruz , and how again i make my escape from thence . 
 i mile Philips and William low be appoint to the black friar , where i be appoint to be a overseer of indian workman , who wrought there in building of a new church : among which Indians i learn their language or Mexican tongue very perfect , and have great familiarity with many of they , who i find to be a courteous and love kind of people , ingenious , and of great understanding , and they hate and abhor the Spaniard with all their heart , they have use such horrible cruelty against they , and do still keep they in such subjection and servitude , that they and the negro also do daily lie in wait to practise their deliverance out of that thraldom and bondage , that the Spaniard do keep they in . William low he be appoint to serve the cook in the kitchen , Richard Williams and David Alexander be appoint to the grey friar , John story and Robert cook to the white friar : Paul horsewel the secretary take to be his servant : Thomas Hull be send to a monastery of priest , where afterward he die . thus we serve out the year that we be condemn for , with the use of our fool coat , and we must needs confess that the friar do use we very courteous : for every one of we have his chamber with bed and diet , and all thing clean and neat : yea many of the Spaniard and friar themselves do utter abhor and mislike of that cruel inquisition , and will as they dare bewail our misery , and comfort we the best they can , 43° 
 although they stand in such fear of that devilish inquisition , that they dare not let the left hand know what the right do . now after that the time be expire for which we be condemn to serve in those religious house , we be then bring again before the chief inquisitor , and have all our fool coat pull off and hang up in the head church , call Ecclesia major , and every man name and judgement write thereupon with this addition , a heretic Lutheran reconcile . and there be also all their coat hang up , which be condemn to the galley , with their name and judgement , and underneath his coat , heretic Lutheran reconcile . and also the coat and name of the three that be burn , whereupon be write , a obstinate heretic Lutheran burn . then be we suffer to go up and down the country , and to place our self as we can , and yet not so free , but that we very well know that there be good espial always attend we and all our action , so that we dare not once speak or look awry . David Alexander and Robert Cooke return to serve the inquisitor , who short after marry they both to two of his negro woman : Richard Williams marry a rich widow of Biskay with 4000 pezo : Paul Horsewell be marry to a Mestisa , as they name those who father be Spaniard , and their mother Indians , and this woman which Paul Horsewell have marry , be say to be the daughter of one that come in with Hernando Cortes the conqueror , who have with she in marriage four thousand pezo , and a fair house : John story be marry to a negro woman : William low have leave and licence to go into Spain where he be now marry : for my own part i can never thorough settle my self to marry in that country , although many fair offer be make unto i of such as be of great ability and wealth , but i can have no like to live in that place , where i must every where see and know such horrible idolatry commit , and dare not once for my life speak against it : and therefore 
 431 
 A.D. 
 1575-80 . 
 i have always a longing and desire to this my native country : and , to return and serve again in the mine where i may have gather great riches and wealth , i very well see that at one time or another i shall fall again into the danger of that devilish inquisition , and so be strip of all , with loss of life also , and therefore i make my choice rather to learn to weave Grogranes and taffeta , and so compound with a silk-weaver , i bind my self for three year to serve he , and give he a hundred and fifty pezo to teach i the science , otherwise he will not have teach i under seven year prenticeship , and by this mean i live the more quiet , and free from suspicion . howbeit i shall many time be charge by familiar of that devilish house , that i have a meaning to run away into England , and to be a heretic Lutherane again : to who i will answer that they have no need to suspect any such thing in i , for that they know all very well that it be impossible for i to escape by any manner of mean : yet notwithstanding i be call before the inquisitor , and demand why i do not marry : i answer that i have bind my self at a occupation . Well say the inquisitor , i know thou mean to run away , and therefore i charge thou here upon pain of burn as a heretic relapse , that thou depart not out of this city , nor come near to the port of saint John de ullua , nor to any other port : to the which i answer , that i will willing obey . yea say he , see thou do so and thy fellow also , they shall have the like charge . 
 so i remain at my science the full time , and learn the art , at the end whereof there come news to Mexico that there be certain Englishman land with a great power at the port of Acapulco , upon the south sea , and that they be come to Mexico to take the spoil thereof , which wrought a marvellous great fear among they , and many of those that be rich , begin to shift for themselves , their wife and child : upon which hurly burly the viceroy cause a general muster to be make of 
 432 
 all the Spaniard in Mexico , and there be find to be the number of 7000 and odd householder of Spaniards in the city and suburb , and of single man unmarried , the number of 3000 and of Mestizoes , which be count to be the son of Spaniards bear of indian woman , twenty thousand person , and then be Paul horsewel and i mile Philips send for before the viceroy , and be examine if we do know a english man name Francis Drake , which be brother to captain Hawkins : to which we answer , that captain Hawkins have not any brother but one , which be a man of the age of threescore year or thereabouts , and be now governor of Plymouth in England . and then he demand of we if we know one Francis Drake , and we answer , no . 
 while these thing be in do , there come news that all the Englishman be go , yet be there eight hundred man make out under the lead of several captain , whereof two hundred be send to the port of saint John de ullua , upon the north sea under the conduct of don Lewis Suares , two hundred be send to Guatimala in the south sea , who have for their captain John Cortes , two hundred more be send to Guatulco , a port of the south sea , over who go for captain don Pedro de Robles , and two hundred more be send to Acapulco , the port where it be say that captain Drake have be . and they have for captain doctor Robles Alcalde de corte , with who i mile Philips go as interpreter , have licence give by the inquisitor . when we be come to Acapulco , we find that captain Drake be depart from thence , more than a month before we come thither . but yet our captain Alcalde de corte there present embark himself in a small ship of threescore ton or thereabouts , have also in company with he two other small bark , and not past two hundred man in all , with who i go as interpreter in his own ship , which God know be but weak and ill appoint , so that for certain , if we have meet with captain drake , he may easy have take we all : we 
 ix 433 2 e 
 be embark keep our course and run southward towards Panama , keep still as nigh the shore as we can , and leave the land upon our left hand , and have coast thus for the space of eighteen or twenty day , and be moor to the south than Guatimala , we meet at last with other ship which come from Panama , of who we be certain inform that he be clean go off the coast more than a month before : and so we return back to Acapulco again , and there land , our captain be thereunto force , because his man be very sore seasick : all the while that i be at sea , with they , i be a glad man , for i hope that if we meet with master drake , we shall all be take , so that then i shall have be free out of that danger and misery wherein i live , and shall return to my own country of England again . but miss thereof , when i see there be no remedy but that we must needs come on land again , little do any man know the sorrow and grief that inward i feel , although outward i be constrain to make fair weather of it . and so be land , you next morrow after , we begin our journey towards Mexico , and past these town of name in Tuatepec , our way , as first the town of Tuatepec , 50 league from Washaca , te - Mexico , from thence to Washaca , 40 league from 
 Angles Mexico : from thence to Tepiaca 24 league from Mexico , Ztapelapa . ’ an from thence to Pueblo de los angel , where be a high hill which cast out fire three time a day , which hill be 18 league in manner direct west from Mexico , from thence we go to Stapelapa , 8 league from Mexico , and there our captain and most of his man take boat , and come to Mexico again , have be forth about the space of seven week or thereabouts . our captain make report to the viceroy what he have do , and how far he have travel , and that for certain he be inform that captain Drake be not to be hear of . to en^ro - which viceroy reply and say , sure we shall have phecudjmt he short come into our hand drive a land through false . necessity in some one place or other , for he be now in 
 434 
 these sea of Sur , it be not possible for he to get out of they again , so that if he perish not at sea , yet hunger will force he to land . and then again i be command by the viceroy that i shall not depart the city of Mexico , but always be at my master house in a readiness at a hour warning , when soever i shall be call : for that notwithstanding within one month after certain Spaniards go to Mecameca , 18 league from Mexico , to send away certain hide and Cochinilla , that they have there at their Stantias or dairy house , and my master have leave of the secretary for i to go with they , i take my journey with they be very well horse and appoint , and come thither and pass the time there at Mecameca certain day till we have perfect intelligence that the fleet be ready to depart , i not be past 3 day journey from the port of saint John de ullua , think it to be the meet time for i to make a escape , and i be the bold , presume upon my spanish tongue , which i speak as natural as any of they all , think with my self , that when i come to saint John de ullua , i will get to be entertain as a soldier , and so go home into Spain in the same fleet , and therefore secret one evening late , the moon shine fair , i convey my self away , and ride so for the space of two night and two day , sometime in , and sometime out , rest very little all that time , upon the second day at night i come to the town of Vera Cruz , we ™ Cruz distant from the port of saint John de ullua , where the d^ant\bm ship ride , but only 5 league , and here purpose to rest s juand ™ my self a day or two , i be no soon alight , but Ullua . within the space of one half hour after , i be by ill hap arrest , and bring before justice there , be take and suspect to be a gentleman son of Mexico , that 
 be run away from his father , who in truth be the man they seek for : so i be arrest , and bring before the justice , there be a great hurly burly about the matter , every man charge i that i be the son of such a man dwell in Mexico , which i flat deny , 
 435 
 affirm that i know not the man , yet will they not believe i , but urge still upon i that i be he that they seek for , and so i be convey away to prison . and as i be thus go to prison , to the further increase of my grief , it chance that at that very instant there be a poor man in the press that be come to town to sell hen , who tell the justice that they do i wrong , and that in truth he know very well that i be a Englishman and no Spaniard . they then demand of he how he know that , and threaten he that he say so , for that he be my companion , and seek to convey i away from my father , so that he also be threaten to be lay in prison with i : he for the discharge of himself stand stiff in it , that i be a Englishman , and one of captain Hawkins man , and that he have know i wear the saint Benito in the blackfriar at Mexico , for 3 or 4 whole year together : which when they hear , they forsake he , and begin to examine i a new , whether that speech of he be true , yea or no , which when they perceive that i can not deny , and perceive that i be run from Mexico , 8c come thither of purpose to convey my self away with the fleet , i be present commit to prison with a sorrowful heart , often wish my self that that man which know i have at that time be further off : howbeit he in sincerity have compassion of my distress estate , think by his speech , and know of i , to have set i free from that present danger which he see i in : howbeit , contrary to his expectation , i be thereby bring into my extreme danger , and to the hazard of my life , yet there be no remedy but patience perforce . and i be no soon bring into prison , but i have a great pair of bolt clap on my leg , and thus i remain in that prison for the space of 3 week , where be also many other prisoner which be thither commit for sundry crime , 8c condemn to the galley . during which time of imprisonment there , i find among those my prison-fellow some that have know i before in 
 436 
 Mexico , and true they have compassion of i , and will spare of their victual and any thing else that they have to do i good : among who there be one of they that tell i that he understand by a secret friend of he which often come to the prison to he , that i shall be short send back again to Mexico by wagon , so soon as the fleet be go from saint John de ullua , for Spain . this poor man my prison-fellow of himself , and without any request make by i , cause his say friend which come often unto he to the grate of the prison , to bring he wine and victual , to buy for he 2 knife which have file in their back , which file be so well make that they will serve and suffice any prisoner to file off his iron , and of those knife or file he bring one to i , and tell i that he have cause it to be make for i , and let i have it at that very price it cost he , which be 2 Pezos , the value of 8 . s . of our money : which knife when i have it , i be a joyful man , and convey the same into the foot of my boot , upon the inside of my left leg , and so within 3 or 4 day after that i have thus receive my knife , i be sudden call for , and bring before the head justice which cause those my iron with the round bolt to be strike off and send to a smith in the town , where be a new pair of bolt make ready for i of another fashion , which have a broad iron bar come between the shackle , and cause my hand to be make fast with a pair of manacle , and so be i present lay into a wagon all alone , which be there ready to depart with sundry other wagon , to the number of 60. towards Mexico , and they all be lade with sundry merchandise which come in the fleet out of Spain . 
 the wagon that i be in be foremost in all the company , and as we travel i be alone in the wagon , begin to try if i can pluck my hand out of the manacle , and as God will , although it be 437 
 mile fillip his last wonderful escape . 
 somewhat painful for i , yet my hand be so slender that 1 can pull they out , and put they in again , and ever as we go , when the wagon make most noise , and the man be busy , i will be work to file off my bolt , and travel thus for the space of 8 league from Vera Cruz , we come to a high hill , at the enter up of which ( as God will ) one of the wheel of the wagon wherein i be , break , so that by that mean the other wagon go afore , and the wagon-man that have charge of i set a indian carpenter a work to mend the wheel : and here at this place they bait at a hostry that a negro-woman keep : and at this place , for that the go up of the hill be very steep , for the space of two league and better , they do always accustom to take the moile of 3 or 4 wagon , and to place they altogether for the draw up of one wagon , and so to come down again , and fetch up other in that order . all which come very well to pass : for as it draw towards night when most of the waggoner be go to draw up their wagon , in this sort i be alone have quick file off my bolt , and so espy my time in the dark of the evening before they return down the hill again , i convey my self into the wood there adjoin , carry my bolt and manacle with i , and a few biscuit , and two small cheese . And be come into the wood , i throw my iron into a thick bush , and then cover they with moss and other thing , and then shift for my self as i may all that night . and thus by the good providence of almighty God , i be free from my iron all save the collar that be about my neck , and so get my liberty the second time . 
 438 
 wherein be show how i escape to Guatimala , upon the south sea , and from thence to the port of Cavallos , where i get passage to go into Spain , and of our arrival at Havana , and our come to Spain , where i be again like to have be commit prisoner , and how through the great mercy of God i escape , and come home in safety into England in February 1582. 
 the next morning ( day light be come ) i perceive by the sun rise what way to take to escape their hand , for when i flee , i take the way into the wood upon the left hand : and have leave that way that go to Mexico upon my right hand , i think to keep my course as the wood and mountains lay , still direct south as near as i can : by mean whereof i be sure to convey my self far enough from that way that go to Mexico . and as i be thus go in the wood , i see many great fire make to the north not past a league from the mountain where i be , and travail thus in my boot with my iron collar about my neck , and my bread and cheese , the very same forenoon i meet with a company of Indians which be hunt of deer for their sustenance : to who i speak in the Mexican tongue , and tell they how that i have of a long time be keep in prison by the cruel Spaniard , and do desire they to help i to file off my iron collar , which they willing do : rejoice great with i , that i be thus escape out of the Spaniard hand . than i desire that i may have one of they to guide i out of those desert mountain towards the south , which they also most willing do : and so they bring i to a indian town 8. league distant from thence , name Shalapa , where i stay three day , for that i be somewhat sickly . at which town ( with the gold that i have quilt in my doublet ) i buy i a horse 439 
 of one of the Indians , which cost i 6. pezo , and so travail south , within the space of 2. league i happen to overtake a grey friar , one that i have be familiar withal in Mexico , who than i know to be a zealous good man , and one that do much lament the cruelty use against we by the inquisitor , and true he use i very courteous : and i have confidence in he do indeed tell he , that i be mind to adventure to see if i can get out of the say country if i can find ship , and do therefore pray he of his aid , direction , and advise herein , which he faithful do , not only in direct i which be my safe way to travail , but he also of himself keep i company for the space of three day , and ever as we come to the indian house ( who use and entertain we well ) he gather among they in money to the value of 20. pezo , which at my departure from he he free give unto i . So come i to the city of Guatimala upon the south sea , which be distant from Mexico about 250. league , where i stay 6. day , for that my horse be weak . and from thence i travail still south and by east seven day journey , pass by certain indian town , until i come to a indian town distant from Mexico , direct south 309. league . and here at this town inquire to go to the port de Cavallos in the north-east sea , it be answer that in travail thither i shall not come to any town in 10. or 12. day journey : so here i hire two Indians to be my guide , and i buy hen , and bread to serve we so long time , and take with we thing to kindle fire every night , because of wild beast , and to dress our meat : and every night when we rest , my indian guide will make two great fire , between the which we place our self , and my horse . and in the night time we shall hear the lion roar , with tiger , ounce , and other beast , and some of they we shall see in the night , which have eye shine like fire . And travail thus for the space of twelve day , 440 
 we come at last to the port of Cavallos upon the east Puerto de sea , distant from Guatimala south and by east , two cavau°s-hundreth league , and from Mexico 450. or thereabouts . this be a good harbour for ship , and be without either castle or bulwark . i have dispatch away my guide , go down to the haven , where i see certain ship load chief with canary wine , where i speak with one of the master , who ask i what country man i be , and i tell he that i be bear in Granado , and he say , that then i be his countryman . i require he that i may pass home with he in his ship , pay for my passage : and he say yea , so that i have a safe conduct , or letter testimonial to show , that he may incur no danger : for say he , it may be that you have kill some man , or be indebt , and will therefore run away . to that i answer , that there be not any such cause . way , in the end we grow to a price , that for 60. pezo he will carry i into Spain : a glad man be i at this good hap , and i quick sell my horse , and make my provision of hen and bread to serve i in my passage ; and thus within 2. day after we set sail , and never stay until we come to Havana , which be distant from puerto de Cavallos by sea 500 league : where we find the whole fleet of Spain , which be bind home from the Indies . and here i be hire for a soldier to serve in the admiral ship of the same fleet , wherein the general himself go . there land while i be here 4. ship out of Spain , be all full of soldier and ordinance , of which number there be 200. man land here , and 4. great brass piece of ordinance , although the castle be before sufficient provide : 200. man more be send to campeche , and certain ordinance : 200. to Florida with ordinance : and 100 
 last to saint John ullua . as for ordinance there they have sufficient , and of the very same which be we , which we have in the Jesus , and those other which we have plant in the place , where the viceroy betray m. Hawkins our general , as have be declare . the 
 441 
 send of those soldier to every of those port , and the strengthen of they , be do by commandment from the king of Spain , who write also by they to the general of his fleet , give he in charge so to do , as also direct he what course he shall keep in his come home into Spain , charge he in any hand not to come nigh to the isle of azore , but to keep his course more to the northward , advertise he withal , what number and power of french ship of war , and other , don Antonio have at that time at ten ; era , and the isle aforesaid : which the general of the fleet well consider , and what great store of riches he have to bring home with he into Spain , do in all very dutifully observe and obey : for in truth he have in his say fleet 37. sail of ship , and in every of they there be as good as 30. pipe of silver one with another , beside great store of gold , Cochinilla , sugar , hide , and Cana fistula , with other apothecary drug . this our general , who be call don Pedro de Guzman , do provident take order for , for their most strength and defence , if need shall be , to the uttermost of his power , and command upon pain of death , that neither passenger nor soldier shall come aboard without his sword and harquebus , with shot and powder , to the end that they may be the better able to encounter the fleet of don Antonio , if they shall hap to meet with they , or any of they : and ever as the weather be fair , the say general will himself go aboard from one ship to another , to see that every man have his full provision accord to the commandment give . yet to speak true what i think , two good tall ship of war will have make a foul spoil among they . for in all this fleet there be not any that be strong and warlike appoint , save only the admiral , and vice-admiral : and again over and beside the weakness and the ill furnish of the rest , they be all so deep lade , that they have not be able ( if they have be charge ) to have hold out any long fight . well , thus we set sail , and have 
 442 
 a very ill passage home , the weather be so contrary . we keep our course in manner Northeast , and bring our self to the height of 42. degree of latitude , to be sure not to meet with don Antonio his fleet , and be upon our voyage from the 4. of June , until the 10. of September , and never see land till we fall with the Arenas gordas hard by saint Lucar . and there be a order take that none shall go on shore until he have licence : as for i , i be know by one in the ship , who tell the master that i be a Englishman , which ( as God will ) it be my good hap to hear : for if i have not hear it , it have cost i my life . notwithstanding , i will not take any knowledge of it , and seem to be merry and pleasant , that we be all come so well in safety . present after , licence come that we shall go on shore , and i press to be go with the first : howbeit , the master come unto i , and say , sirrah , you must go with i to Sivil by water : i know his meaning well enough , and that he mean there to ofler i up as a sacrifice to the holy house . for the ignorant zeal of a number of these superstitious Spaniards be such , that they think that they have do God good service , when they have bring a lutheran heretic to the fire to be burn : for so do they account of we . well , i perceive all this , take upon i not to suspect any thing , but be still jocund 8c merry : howbeit , i know it stand i upon to shift for my self . and so wait my time when the master be in his cabin asleep , i convey my self secret down by the shrowd into the ship boat , and make no stay but cut the rope wherewithal she be moar , and so by the cable hale on shore , where i leap on land , and let the boat go whither it will . thus by the help of God i escape that day , 8c then never stay at saint Lucar , but go all night by the way which i have see other take towards Sivil : so that the next morning i come to Sivil , and seek i out a workmaster , that i may fall to my science , which be weave of taffeta ; and be entertain i set my self close to my work , 443 
 and dare not for my life once to stir abroad for fear of be know : and be thus at my work , within 4. day after i hear one of my fellow say , that he hear there be great inquiry make for a Englishman that come home in the fleet : what a heretic Lutheran ( quoth i ) be it , i will to God i may know he , sure i will present he to the holy house . and thus i keep still within door at my work , and feign my self not well at ease , and that i will labour as i may to get i new clothes . And continue thus for the space of 3. month i call for my wage , and buy i all thing new , different from the apparel that i do wear at sea , and yet dare not be overbold to walk abroad : and after understand that there be certain english ship at saint Lucar bind for England , i take a boat and go aboard one of they , and desire the master that i may have passage with he to go into England , and tell he secret that i be one of those which captain Hawkins do set on shore in the Indies : he very courteous pray i to have he excuse , for he dare not meddle with i , and pray i therefore to return from whence i come . which when i perceive , with a sorrowful heart , God know , i take my leave of he , not without watty cheek . and then i go to saint mary port , which be 3. league from saint Lucar , where i put my self to be a soldier to go in the king of Spain galley , which be bind for Majorca , and come thither in he come the end of the Christmas holiday , i find there two ten english ship , the one of London , and the other of they from Majorca . west country , which be ready freight and stay but for a fair wind . to the master of the one , which be of the west country go i , and tell he that i have be 2. year in Spain to learn the language , and that i be now desirous to go home and see my friend , for that i lack maintenance : and so have agree with he for my passage , i take ship . and thus through the providence of almighty God , after 16. year absence , have sustain many and sundry great trouble and 
 444 
 misery , as by this discourse appear , i come home to this my native country of England in the year 1582. in the month of February , in the ship call the landret , and arrive at pool . 
 