the principal voyage of the english nation to the isle of Trinidad , Margarita , Dominica , Deseada , Monserrate , Guadalupe , martinino , and all the rest of the Antilles ; as likewise to saint 
 Juan de Puerto Rico , to Hispaniola , Jamaica and Cuba : and also to Tierra firma , and all along the coast and island thereof , even from Cumana and the caraco to the neckland of Dariene , and over it to the gulf of saint Michael and the isle of pearl in the south sea : and further to Cabe£a Cativa , number de dios , and Venta de cruze , to Puerto Belo , Rio de Chagre , and the isle of Escudo , along the main of Beragua , to the cape and gulf of the Honduras , to Truxillo , Puerto de Cavallos , and all other the principali town , island and harbour of account within the say gulf , and up Rio dolce fall into this gulf , above 30. league : as also to the isle of Cozumel , and to cape Cotoche , the town of campeche , and other place upon the land of lucatan ; and lower down to saint Juan de ullua , vera Cruz , Rio de panuco , Rio de Palmas , etc within the bay of Mexico : and from thence to the isle of the Tortugas , the port of Havana , the cape of Florida , and the gulf of Bahama homeward . with the take , sack , ransom , or burn 
 ten i a 
 of most of the principali city and town upon the coast of Tierra firma , nueva espanna , and all the foresay island ; since the most traitorous burn of her majesty ship the Jesus of Lubec and murder of her subject in the port of saint Juan de ullua , and the last generail arrest of her highness people , with their ship and good throughout all the dominion of the king 
 of Spain in the month of June 1585. beside the manifold and tyrannical oppression of the inquisition inflict on our nation upon 
 most light and frivolous occasion . 
 the voyage of sir Thomas Pert , and Sebastian Cabot , about the eight year of king Henry the eight , which be the year 1516. to Brasil , Santo Domingo , and saint Juan de Puerto rico . 
 hat learned and painful writer Richard Eden in a certain epistle of he to the duke of Northumberland , before a work which he translate out of Munster in the year 1553 , call a treatise of new India , make mention of a voyage of discovery undertake 
 out of England by sir Thomas pert and Sebastian Cabota , about the 8. year of king Henry the eight of famous memory , impute the overthrow thereof unto the cowardice and want of stomach of the say sir 
 Thomas pert , in manner follow . if manly courage , say he , ( like unto that which have be see and prove in your grace , as well in foreign realm , as also in this our country ) have not be want in other in these our day , at such time as our 
 sovereign lord of famous memory king Henry the 8. about the same year of his reign , furnish and send out certain ship under the governance of Sebastian Cabot yet live and one sir Thomas Pert , who faint heart be the cause that the voyage take none effect ; if , i say , such manly courage , whereof we have speak , have not at that time be want , it may happy have come to pass , that that rich treasury call Perularia , ( which be now in Spain in the city of Seville , and so name , for that in it be keep the infinite riches bring thither from the newfoundland of Peru ) may long since have be in the tower of London , to the king great honour and wealth of this realm . hereunto that also be to be refer which the worshipful m. Robert Thorne write to the say king Henry the 8. in the year 1527. by doctor Leigh his ambassador send into Spain to the emperor Charles the five , who word be these . now rest to be discover the north part , the which it seem unto i , be only your highness charge and duty , because the situation of this your realm be thereunto near and apt of all other : and also , for that already you have take it in hand . and in my opinion it will not seem well to leave so great and profitable a enterprise , see it may so easy and with so little cost , labour and danger be follow and obtain . though hitherto your grace have make thereof a proof , and find not the commodity thereby as you trust , at this time it shall|be none impediment : for there may be now provide remedy for thing then lack , and the inconvenience and let remove , that then be cause your grace desire take no full effect : which be , the course to be change , and to follow the aforesaid new course . And concern the mariner , ship , and provision , a order may be devise and take meet and convenient , much better than hitherto : by reason whereof , and by God grace , no doubt your purpose shall take effect . and whereas 
 3 
 this sir Tho. Pert be viceadmiral of it England , and dwell in poplar at Blackwall . 
 [ hl 499-1 
 note . 
 a english great ship at Brasill 1517. 
 san Juan de puerto Rico. 
 in the aforesaid word m. Robert Thorne say , that he will have the old course to be change , and the new course ( to the north ) to be follow : it may plain be gather , that the former voyage , whereof twice or thrice he make mention , wherein it be like that sir Thomas pert and Sebastian Cabot be set forth by the king , be make toward Brasill and the south part . Moreover it seem that Gonsalvo de Oviedo , a famous spanish writer , allude unto the say voyage in the begin of the 13. chapter of the 19 book of his generail and natural history of the west Indies , agree very well with the time about which Richard Eden write that the foresay voyage be begin . the author word be these , as i find they translate into italian by that excellent and famous man Baptista Ramusius . Nell 1517. un Corsaro Inglese , sotto colore di venire a discoprire se ne venne con una grand nave alia volta del Brasil nella costiera di terra ferma , and indi attraverso a questa isola Spagnuola , and giunse presso la bocca del porto di questa citta di saint Domenico , and mando in terra il suo battello pieno di gente , and chiese licentia di potere qui entrare , dicendo che venia con mercantie a negotiare . ma in quello instant il Castellano Francisco di Tapia fence tirare alia nave un tiro d’artiglieria da questo castello , perch ella se ne veniva diritta all porto . quando gli Inglesi viddero questo si ritirarono fuori , and quelli del battello tosto si raccolsero in nave . et nel vero il Castellan fence errore : perch se ben fosse nave entrata nel porto , non sarebbono le genti potuto smontare a terra senza volonta and della citta and del castello . la nave adunque veggendo come vi era ricevuta , tiro la volta dell ’ isola di San Giovanni , entrata nel porto di San Germano parlarono gli Inglesi con quelli della terra , and dimanda-rono vettouaglie and fornimenti per la nave , and si lamentarono di quelli di questa citta , dicendo i essi non venivano per fare dispiacere , ma per contrattare , 
 and negotiare con suoi danari and mercantie . Hora quivi hebbero alcune vettovaglie , and in compensa essi diedero and pagarono in certi stagni lavorati and altre cose . et poi si partirono alia volta d’Europa , dove si crede , che non gungessero , perch non se ne seppe piu nuova mai . this extract import thus much in english , to wit : that in the year 1517. an english rover under the colour of travel to discover , come with a great ship unto the part of Brasill on the coast of the firm land , and from thence he cross over unto this hand of Hispaniola , and arrive near unto the mouth of the haven of this city of saint Domingo , and send his shipboate full of man on shore , and demand leave to enter into this haven , say that he come with merchandise to traffic . but at that very instant the governor of the castle Francis de Tapia cause a tire of ordinance to be shoot from the castle at the ship , for she bear in direct with the haven . when the Englishman see this , they withdraw themselves out , and those that be in the shipboate , get themselves with all speed on shipboard . and in truth the warden of the castle commit a oversight : for if the ship have enter into the haven the man thereof can not have come on land without leave both of the city and of the castle . therefore the people of the ship see how they be receive , sail towards the hand of S. John , and enter into the port of saint Germaine , the english man part with those of the town , require victual and thing needful to furnish their ship , and complain of the inhabitant of the city of saint Domingo , say that they come not to do any harm , but to trade and traffic for their money and merchandise . in this place they have certain victual , and for recompense they give and pay they with certain vessel of wrought tin and other thing . and afterward they depart towards Europe , where it be think they arrive not : for we never hear any more news of they . thus far proceed Gonsalvo 
 de Oviedo , who though it please he to call the captain of this great english ship a rover , yet it appear by the Englishman own word , that they come to discover , and by their traffiq'ue for pewter vessel and other ware at the town of saint germane in the hand of S. John de puerto rico , it can be deny but that they be furnish with ware for honest traffic and exchange . but whosoever be conversant in read the Portugal ! and Spanish writer of the east and west Indies , shall common find that they account all other nation for pirate , rover and thief , which visit any heathen coast that they have once sail by or look on . howbeit their passionate and ambitious reckon ought not to be prejudicial ! to other man chargeable and painful enterprise and honourable travel in discovery . 
 