a summary and true discourse of sir Francis drake West indian voyage , begin in the year 1585. wherein be take the city of saint Iago , Santo Domingo , Cartagena , and the town of saint Augustine in Florida ; publish by m. Thomas cate . 
 he worthy knight for the service of his prince and country have prepare his whole fleet , and get they down to Plymouth in Devonshire , to the number of five and twenty sail of ship and pinnaces , and have assemble of soldier and mariner , to the number of 2300. in 
 the whole , embark they and himself at Plymouth aforesaid , the 12. day of September 1585. be accompany with these man of name and charge , which hereafter follow : 
 master Christopher carleil lieutenant general , a man ten 97 g 
 of long experience in the war as well by sea as land , who have former carry high office in both kind in many fight , which he discharge always very happy , and with great good reputation . 
 Anthony Powel sergeant major . 
 captain Matthew Morgan , and captain John Samson , corporal of the field . 
 these officer have commandment over the rest of the land-captaine , who name hereafter follow . 
 captain Anthony Plat. it captain Edward winter . captain John Goring . captain Robert Pew . captain George Barton . 
 " captain John merchant . captain William Cecill . 
 « captain Walter big . captain John Hannam . captain Richard Stanton . 
 captain Martine Frobisher vice-admiral , a man of great experience in seafaring action , who have carry the chief charge of many ship himself , in sundry voyage before , be now ship in the primrose . 
 captain Francis Knolles , reereadmirall in the Galeon Leicester . 
 master Thomas Vennor captain in the Elizabeth bonad-venture under the general . 
 master Edward winter captain in the aid . 
 master Christopher carleil the lieutenant general , captain of they tygar . 
 Henry white captain of the sea dragon . 
 Thomas Drake captain of the Thomas . 
 Thomas silly captain of the minion . 
 Baily captain of the bark Talbot . 
 Robert cross captain of the bark bond 
 George Fortescue captain of the bark Bonner . 
 Edward careless captain of the hope . 
 James Erizo captain of the white lion . 
 Thomas moon captain of the Francis . 
 John river captain of the vantage . 
 John Vaughan captain of the drake . 
 John Varney captain of the George . 
 John Martin captain of the Benjamin . Edward Gilman captain of the scout . 
 Richard Hawkins captain of the galiot call the duck . 
 Bitfield captain of the swallow . 
 after our go hence , which be the fourteen of September , in the year of our lord 1585. and take our course towards Spain , we have the wind for a few day somewhat scant , and sometime calm . And be arrive near that part of Spain , which be call the moor , we happen to espy diverse sail , which keep their course close by the shore , the weather be fair and calm . the general cause the vice-admiral to go with the pinnace well man to see what they be , who upon sight of the say pinnace approach near unto they , abandon for the most part all their ship ( be Frenchmen ) lade all with salt , and bind homeward into France , among which ship ( be all of small burden ) there be one so well like , which also have no man in she , as be bring unto you general , he think good to make stay of she for the service , mean to pay for she , as also accord he perform at our return : which bark be call the drake . the rest of these ship ( be eight or nine ) be dismiss without any thing at all take from they . who be afterward put somewhat far offend from the shore , by the contrariety of the wind , we happen to meet with some other french ship , full lade with Newland fish , be upon their return homeward from the say Newfoundland : who the general after some speech have with they ( and see plain that they be Frenchman ) dismiss , without once suffer any man to go aboard of they . 
 the day follow stand in with the shore again , we descry another tall ship of twelve score ton or thereabouts , upon who master Carliel the lieutenant 99 
 [ hl 535-j 
 general be in the tygar , undertake the chase , who also anon after the admiral follow , and the tygar have cause the say strange ship to strike her sail , keep she there without suffer any body to go aboard until the admiral be come up : who forthwith send for the master , and diverse other of their principali man , and cause they to be several examine , find the ship and good to be belong to the inhabitant of saint Sebastian in Spain , but the mariner to be for the most part belong to saint John de Luz , and the passage . in this ship be great store of dry Newland fish , common call with we poor John , whereof afterward ( be thus find a lawful prize ) there be distribution make into all the ship of the fleet , the same be so new and good , as it do very great bestead we in the whole course of our voyage . a day or two after the the isle of take of this ship , we put in within the isle of Bayon , Bayona . for jack of favourable wind : where we have not soon anchor some part of the fleet , but the general command all the pinnace with the shipboat to be man , and every man to be furnish with such arm as be needful for that present service ; which be do , the general put himself into his galley , which be also well furnish , and row towards the city of Bayon , with intent , and the favour of the almighty to surprise it , before we have advance one half league of our way , there come a messenger be a english merchant from the governor , to see what strange fleet we be , who come to our general , confer a while with he , and after a small time spend , our general call for captain Samson , and will he to go to the governor of the city , to resolve he of two point . the first , to know if there be any war between Spain and England . the second , why our merchant with their good be embarge or arrest . thus depart captain Samson with the say messenger to the city , where he find the governor and people much amaze of such a sudden accident . 
 100 
 the general with the advice and counsel of m. carleil 
 his lieutenant general , who be in the galley with he , think not good to make any stand , till such time as they be within the shot of the city , where they may be ready upon the return of captain Samson , to make a sudden attempt if cause do require before it be dark . 
 captain Samson return with his message in this sort . first , touch peace or war the governor say he know of no war , and that it lie not in he to make any , he be so mean a subject as he be . and as for the stay of the merchant with their good , it be the king pleasure , but not with intent to endamage any man . and that the king counter-commandment be ( which have be receive in that place some sevennight before ) that english merchant with their good shall be discharge : for the more verify whereof , he send such merchant as be in the town of our nation , who traffic those part : which be at large declare to our general by they , counsel be take what might best be do . and for that the night approach , it be think needful to land our force , which be do in the shut up of the day , and have quarter our self to our most advantage , with sufficient guard upon every strait , we think to rest our self for that night there . the governor send we some refresh , as bread , wine , oil , apple , grape , marmalad and such like . about midnight the weather begin to overcast , insomuch that it be think meet to repair aboard , then to make any long abode on land , and before we can recover the fleet , a great tempest arise , which cause many of our ship to drive from their anchorhold , and some be force to sea in great peril , as the bark Talbot , the bark Hawkins , and the Speedwell , which Speedewel be only drive into England , the other recover we again : the extremity of the storm last three day , which no soon begin to assuage , but m. carleil our lieutenant general be send with his own ship and three other : as also with the galley and with diverse 
 ioi 
 pinnace , to see what he may do above Vigo , where he take many boat and some caravel , diverse lade with thing of small value , but chief with household stufie , run into the high country , and among the rest , he find one boat lade with the principal church-stuff of the high church of Vigo , where also be their great cross of silver , of very fair emboss work , and double gilt all over , have cost they a great mass of money . they complain to have lose in all kind of good above thirty thousand ducat in this place . 
 the next day the general with his whole fleet go from up the isle of Bayon , to a very good harbour above Vigo , where m. carleil stay his come , aswell for the more quiet ride of his ship , as also for the good commodity of fresh water , which the place there do afourd full well . in the mean time the governor of Galicia have rear such force as he may , his number by estimate be some two thousand foot , and three hundred horse , and march from Bayon to this part of the country , which lie in sight of our fleet , where make a stand , he send to parley with our general , which be grant by our general , so it may be in boat upon the water : and for safety of their person , there be pledge deliver on both side : which do , the governor of Galicia put himself with two other into our viceadmirals skiff , the same have be send to the shore for he , and in like sort our general go in his own skiffe ; where it be by they agree , we shall furnish our self with fresh water , to be take by our own people quiet on the land , and have all other such necessary , pay for the same , as the place will affburd . 
 when all our business be end , we depart , and take our way by the island of Canaria , which be esteem some three hundred league from this part of Spain , and fall purposely with Palma , with intention to have take our pleasure of that place , for the full digest of many thing into order , and the better 
 102 
 furnish our store with such several good thing as it afford very abundant , we be force by the vile sea-gate , which at that present fall out , and by the naughtiness of the land place , be but one , and that under the favour of many platform well furnish with great ordinance , to depart with the receit of many of their canon-shot , some into our ship , and some beside , some of they be in very deed full canon high . but the only or chief mischief be the dangerous sea-surge , which at shore all alongst plain threaten the overthrow of as many pinnace and boat , as for that time shall have attempt any land at all . 
 now see the expectation of this attempt frustrate by the cause aforesaid , we think it meet to fall with the isle Hierro , to see if we can find any better fortune : and come to the island , we land a thousand man in a valley under a high mountain , where we stay some two or three hour , in which time the inhabitant , accompany with a young fellow bear in England , who dwell there with they , come unto we , show their state to be so poor , that they be all ready to starve , which be not untrue : and therefore without any thing get , we be all command present to embark , so as that night we put off to sea southsoutheast along towards the coast of Barbary . 
 upon Saturday in the morning , be the 13. of November , we fall with cape blank , which be a low land and shallow water , where we catch store of fish , and double the cape , we put into the bay , where we find certain french ship of war , who we entertain with great courtesy , and there leave they . this afternoon the whole fleet assemble , which be a little scatter about their fish , and put from thence to the isle of cape Verde , sail till the 16. of the same month in the morning , on which day we descry the island of S. Iago , and in the evening we anchor the fleet between the town call the Playa or Praya , and 
 103 
 s. Iago , where we put on shore 1000 man or more , under the lead of m. Christopher carleil lieutenant general , who direct the service most like a wise commander . the place where we have first to march do afford no good order , for the ground be mountainous and full of dale , be a very stony and troublesome passage ; but such be his industrious disposition , as he will never leave , until we have get up to a fair plain , where we make stand for the assemble of the army . and when we be all gather together upon the plain , some 2 mile from the town , the lieutenant general think good not to make attempt till daylight : because there be not one that can serve for guide or give knowledge at all of you place . and therefore after have well rest , even half a hour before day , he command the army to be divide into 3 speciali part , such as he appoint , whereas before we have march by several company , be thereunto force by the badness of the way as be aforesaid . 
 now by the time we be thus range into a very brave order , daylight begin to appear , and be advance hard to the wall , we see no enemy to resist , whereupon the lieutenant general appoint captain Samson with thirty shot , and captain Barton with other thirty , to go down into the town which stand in the valley under we , and may very plain be view all over from that place where the whole army be now arrive : and present after these captain be send the great ensign , which have nothing in it but the plain english cross , to be place toward the sea , that our fleet may see saint George cross flourish in the enemy fortress . order be give that all the ordinance throughout the town and upon all the platform , which be above fifty piece all ready charge , shall be shoot off in honour of the queen majesty coronation day , be the seventeenth of November , after the yearly custom of England , 104 
 which be so answer again by the ordinance out of all the ship in the fleet which now be come near , as it be strange to hear such a thunder noise last so long together . in this mean while the lieutenant general hold still the most part of his force on the hill top , till such time as the town be quarter out for the lodging of the whole army : which be do every captain take his own quarter , and in the evening be place such a sufficient guard upon every part of the town that we have no cause to fear any present enemy . 
 thus we continue in the city the space of 14. the title of day , take such spoil as the place yield , which ta^en be for the most part , wine , oil , meal , and some such like thing for victuali , as vinegar , olive , and some such other trash , as merchandise for their Indians trade . 
 but there be not find any treasure at all , or any thing else of worth beside . 
 the situation of saint Iago be somewhat strange , in form like a triangle , have on the east and west side two mountain of rock and cliff , as it be hang over it , upon the top of which two mountain be build certain fortification to preserve the town from any harm that may be offer , as in a plot be plain show . from thence , on the south side of the town be the main sea , and on the north side , the valley lie between the foresay mountain , wherein the town stand : the say valley and town both do grow very narrow , insomuch that the space between the two cliff of this end of the town be estimate not to be above 10. or 12. score over . 
 in the midst of the valley come down a riveret , rill , or brook of fresh water , which hard by the sea side make a pond or pool , whereout our ship be water with very great ease and pleasure . somewhat above the town on the north side between the two mountain , the valley wax somewhat large than at the town end , which valley be whole convert into i°5 
 garden and orchard well replenish with diverse sort of fruit , herb and tree , as lymmon , orange , sugar-cane , cochar or cocho nut , plantan , potato-root , cucumber , small and round onion , garlic , and some other thing not now remember , among which the cocho nut , and plantan be very pleasant fruit , the say cocho have a hard shell and a green husk over it , as have our walnut , but it far exceed in greatness , for this cocho in his green husk be big than any man two fist : of the hard shell many drink cup be make here in England , and set in silver as i have often see . 
 next within this hard shell be a white rind resemble in show very much even as any thing may do , to the white of a egg when it be hard boil . and within this white of the nut lie a water , which be whitish and very clear , to the quantity of half a pint or thereabouts , which water and white rind before speak of , be both of a very cool fresh taste , and as please as any thing may be . i have hear some hold opinion , that it be very restorative . 
 the plantan grow in cod , somewhat like to bean , but be big and long , and much more thick together on the stalk , and when it wax ripe , the meat which fill the rind of the cod become yellow , and be exceed sweet and pleasant . 
 in this time of our be there happen to come a Portugal to the western fort , with a flag of truce , to who captain Samson be send with captain Goring , who come to the say messenger , he first ask they what nation they be , they answer Englishmen , he then require to know if war be between England and Spain , to which they answer that they know not , but if he will go to their general he can best resolve he of such particular , and for his assurance of passage and repassage , these captain make offer to engage their credit , which he refuse for that he be not send from his governor . than they tell he , if 106 
 his governor do desire to take a course for the common benefit of the people and country , his best way be to come and present himself unto our noble and merciful governor sir Francis Drake , whereby he may be assure to find favour , both for himself and they inhabitant . otherwise within three day we shall march over the land , and consume with fire all inhabit place , and put to the sword all such live soul as we shall chance upon : so thus much he take for the conclusion of his answer , and depart , he promise to return the next day , but we never hear more of he . 
 upon the four and twenty of November , the general accompany with the lieutenant general and six hundred man march forth to a village twelve mile within the land , call saint Domingo , where the governor and the bishop with all the better sort be lodge , and by eight of the clock we come to it , find the place abandon , and the people flee into the mountain : so we make stand a while to ease our self , and partly to see if any will come to speak to we . 
 after we have well rest our self , the general command the troop to march away homeward , in which retreat the enemy show themselves , both horse and foot , though not such force as dare encounter we : and so in pass sometime at the gaze with they , it wax late and towards night before we can recover home to saint Iago . 
 on Monday the six and twenty of November , the general command all the pinnace with the boat , to use all diligence to embark the Annie into such ship as every man belong . the lieutenant general in like sort command captain Goring and lieutenant Tucker , with one hundred shot to make a stand in the market place , until our force be whole embark , the viceadmiral make stay with his pinnace and certain boat in the harbour , to bring the say last 
 107 
 a wise course to be imitate in all great action . 
 company aboard the ship . also the general will forthwith the galley with two pinnace to take into they the company of captain Barton , and the company of captain big , under the lead of captain Samson , to seek out such munition as be hide in the ground , at the town of Praya or Playa , have be promise to be show it by a prisoner , which be take the day before . 
 the captain aforesaid come to the Playa , land their man , and have place the troop in their best strength , captain Samson take the prisoner , and will he to show that he have promise , the which he can not , or at least will not : but they search all suspect place , find two piece of ordinance , one of iron , a other of brass . in the after noon the general anchor with the rest of the fleet before the Playa , come himself ashore , will we to burn the town and make all haste aboard , the which be do by six of the clock the same day , and our self embark again the same night , and so we put off to sea Southwest . 
 but before our departure from the town of saint Iago , we establish order for the better government of the army , every man muster to his captain , and oath be minister to acknowledge her majesty supreme governor , as also every man to do his uttermost endeavour to advance the service of the action , and to yield due obedience unto the direction of the general and his officer . by this provident counsel , and lay down this good foundation before hand , all thing go forward in a ' due course , to the achieve of our happy enterprise . 
 in all the time of our be here , neither the governor for the king of Spain , ( which be a Portugal ) neither the bishop , who authority be great , neither the inhabitant of the town , or island ever come at we ( which we expect they shall have do ) to entreat we to leave they some part of their needful provision , 108 
 or at the least , to spare the ruin of their town at our go away . the cause of this their unreasonable distrust ( as i do take it ) be the fresh remembrance of the great wrong they have do to old m. William Hawkins of Plymouth , in the voyage he make 4. or 5. the treason of year before , when as they do both break their promise , the fortug . al5 and murder many of his man , whereof i judge you have understand , and therefore it be needless to be re - Hawkins . peat . but since they come not at we , we leave write in sundry place , as also in the spittle house , ( which building be only appoint to be spare ) the great discontentment and scorn we take at this their refrain to come unto we , as also at the rude manner of kill , and savage kind of handle the dead body of one of our boy find by they straggle all alone , from who they have take his head and heart , and have straggle the other bowel about the place , in a most brutish and beastly manner . 
 in revenge whereof at our depart we consume with fire all the house , aswell in the country which we see , as in the town of saint Iago . 
 from hence put off to the west Indies , we be not many day at sea , but there begin among our people such mortality , as in few day there be dead above two or three hundred man . and until some seven or eight day after our come from saint Iago , there have not die any one man of sickness in all the fleet : the sickness show not his infection wherewith so many be strike , until we be depart thence , and then seize our people with extreme hot burn and continual ague , whereof very few escape with life , and yet those for the most part not without great alteration and decay of their wit and strength for a long time after . in some that die be plain show the small spot , which be often find upon those that be infect with the plague : we be not above eighteen day in passage between the sight of saint Iago aforesaid , and the island of Dominica , be the 
 109 
 first island of the west Indies that we fall withal , the same be inhabit with savage people , which go all naked , their skin colour with some paint of a reddish tawny , very personable and handsome strong man , who do admit little conversation with the Spaniard : for as some of our people may understand they , they have a Spaniard or twain prisoner with they , neither do i think that there be any safety for any of our nation , or any other to be within the limit of their commandment , albeit they use we very kind for those few hour of time which we spend with they , help our folk to fill and carry on their bare shoulder fresh water from the river to our ship boat , and fetch from their house great store of tobacco , as also a kind of bread which they feed on , call Cassavi , very white and savoury , make of the root of Cassavi . in recompense whereof , we bestow liberali reward of glass , colour bead , and other thing , which we have find at saint Iago , wherewith ( as it seem ) they rest very great satisfy , and show some sorrowful countenance when they perceive that we will depart . 
 from hence we go to another island westward of it , call saint Christopher island , wherein we spend some day of Christmas , to refresh our sick people , and to cleanse and air our ship . in which island be not any people at all that we can hear of . 
 in which time by the general it be advise and resolve , with the consent of the lieutenant general , the vice-admiral , and all the rest of the captain to proceed to the great island of Hispaniola , aswell for that we know our self then to be in our best strength , as also the rather allure thereunto , by the glorious fame of the ci tie of saint Domingo , be the ancient and chief inhabit place in all the tract of country thereabouts . and so proceed in this determination , by the way we meet a small frigate , bind for the same place , the which the viceadmiral take : and have due examine the man that be in she , 
 iio 
 there be one find , by who we be advertise , the haven to be a barren haven , and the shore or land thereof to be well fortify , have a castle thereupon furnish with great store of artillery , without the danger whereof be no convenient land place within ten english mile of the city , to which the say pilot take upon he to conduct we . 
 all thing be thus consider on , the whole force be command in the evening to embark themselves in pinnace , boat , and other small bark appoint for this service . our soldier be thus embark , the general put himself into the bark Francis as admiral , and all this night we lie on the sea , bear small sail until our arrival to the land place , which be about the break of the day , and so we land , be newyeeres day , nine or ten mile to the westwards of that brave city of saint Domingo : for at that time nor yet be know to we any land place , where the sea-surge do not threaten to overset a pinnace or boat . our general have see we all land in safety , return to his fleet , bequeathe we to God , and the good conduct of master Carliell our lieutenant general : at which time , be about eight of the clock , we begin to march , and about noon time , or towards one of the clock , we approach the town , where the gentleman and those of the better sort , be some hundred and fifty brave horse or rather more , begin to present themselves ; but our small shot play upon they , which be so sustain with good proportion of pike in all part , as they find no part of our troop unprepared to receive they ( for you must understand they view all round about ) they be thus drive to give we leave to proceed towards the two gate of the town , which be the next to the seaward . they have man they both , and plant their ordinance for that present , and sudden alarm without the gate , and also some troop of small shot in ambuscado upon the high way side . we divide our whole force , be some thousand or twelve hundred 
 man into two part , to enterprise both the gate at one instant , the lieutenant general have open vow to captain Powel ( who lead the troop that enter the other gate ) that with god good favour he will not rest until our meeting in the market place . 
 their ordinance have no soon discharge upon our near approach , and make some execution among we , though not much , but the lieutenant general begin forthwith to advance both his voice of encouragement , and pace of march : the first man that be slay with the ordinance be very near unto himself : and thereupon haste all that he may , to keep they from the recharge of the ordinance . and notwithstanding their ambuscado , we march or rather run so roundly in to the city of they , as pell mell we enter the gate , and give they saint Domingo more care every man to save himself by flight , than ' reason to stand any long to their break fight . we forthwith repair to the market place : but to be more true understand , a place of very fair spacious square ground , whither also come as have be agree captain Powel with the other troop : which place with some part next unto it , we strengthen with Barricados , and there as the most convenient place assure our self , the city be far too spacious for so small and weary a troop to undertake to guard . somewhat after midnight , they who have the guard of the castle , hear we busy about the gate of the say castle , abandon the same : some be take prisoner , and some flee away by the help of boat to the other side of the haven , and so into the country . 
 the next day we quarter a little more at large , but not into the half part of the town , and so make substantiali trench , and plant all the ordinance , that each part be correspondent to other , we hold this town the space of one month . 
 in the which time happen some accident , more than be well remember for the present , but among other thing , it chance that the general send on his message 112 
 to the Spaniard a negro boy with a flag of white , signify truce , as be the Spaniard ordinary manner to do there , when they approach to speak to we : which boy unhappy be first meet withal by some of those , who have be belong as officer for the king in the spanish galley , which with the town be late fall into our hand , who without all order or reason , and contrary to that good usage wherewith we have entertained their messenger , furious strike the poor boy through the body with one of their horseman staff : with which wound the boy return to the general , and after he have declare the manner of this wrongful cruelty , die forthwith in his presence , wherewith the general be great passion , command the provost Martiali , to cause a couple of friar than prisoner , to be carry to the same place where the boy be strike , accompany with sufficient guard of our soldier , and there present to be hang , dispatch at the same instant another poor prisoner , with this reason wherefore this execution be do , and with this message further , that until the party who have thus murder the general messenger be deliver into our hand , to receive condign punishment , there shall not day pass , wherein there shall not two prisoner be hang , until they be all consume which be in our hand . 
 whereupon the day follow , he that have be captain of the king galley , bring the offender to the town end , offer to deliver he into our hand ; but it be think to be a more honourable revenge to make they there in our sight , to perform the execution themselves : which be do accord . 
 during our being in this town , as former also at saint Iago there have pass justice upon the life of one of our own company for a odious matter , so here likewise be there a Irishman hang , for the murder of his Corporali . 
 in this time also pass many treaty between their commissioner and we , for ransom of their city ; but 
 ten 113 h 
 upon disagreement we still spend the early morning in fire the outmost house : but they be build very magnificent of stone , with high loft , give we not small travel to ruin they . and albeit for diverse day together we ordain each morning by day break , until the heat begin at nine of the dock , that two hundred mariner do nought else but labour to fire and burn the say house without our trench , while the soldier in a like proportion stand forth for their guard : yet do we not , or can not in this time consume so much as one three part of the town : which town be plain describe and set forth in a certain map and so in the end , what weary with fire , and what hasten by some other respect , we be content to accept of five and twenty thousand ducat of five shilling six penny the piece , for the ransom of the rest of the town . 
 among other thing which happen and be find at saint Domingo , i may not omit to let the world know one very notable mark and token of the unsatiable ambition of the spanish king and his nation , which be find in the king house , wherein the chief governor of that city and country be appoint always to lodge , which be this : in the come to the hall or other room of this house , you must first ascend up by a fair large pair of stair ; at the head of which stair be a handsome 
 spacious place to walk in , somewhat like unto a gallery : wherein upon one of the wall , right over against you as you enter the say place , so as your eye can escape the sight of it , there be describe and paint in a very large scutcheon the arm of the king of Spain , and in the low part of the say scutcheon , there be likewise describe 
 a globe , contain in it the whole circuit of the sea and the earth whereupon be a horse stand on his hinder part within the globe , and the other forepart without the globe , lift up as it be to leap , with a scroll paint in his mouth , wherein be write these word in latin , non sufficit orbis : which be as much to say , as the world suffice not . whereof the meaning be require to be 
 114 
 1586. know of some of those of the better sort , that come in commission to treat upon the ransom of the town , who will shake their head , and turn aside their countenance in some smile sort , without answer any thing , as great ashamed thereof . for by some of our company it be tell they , that if the queen of England will resolute prosecute the war against the king of Spain , he shall be force to lay aside that proud and unreasonable reach vain of his : for he shall find more then enough to do to keep that which he have already , as by the present example of their lose town they may for a beginning perceive well enough . 
 now to the satisfy of some man , who marvel great that such a famous and goodly build city so well inhabit of gallant people , very brave in their apparel ( whereof our soldier find good store for their relief ) shall afford no great riches then be find there : herein it be to be understand that the indian people , which be the natural of this whole island of Hispaniola ( the same be near hand as great as England ) be many year since clean consume by the tyrannic of the Spaniard , which be the cause , that for lack of people to work in the mine , the gold and silver mine of this island be whole give over , and thereby they be fain in this island to use copper money , whereof be find very great quantity . the chief trade of this place consist of sugar and ginger , which grow in the island , and of hide of ox and cow , which in this waste country of the island be breed in infinite number , the soil be very fertile : and the say beast be feed up to a very large growth , and so kill for nothing so much , as for their hide aforesaid . we find here great store of strong wine , sweet oil , vinegar , olive , and other such like provision , as excellent wheat-meal pack up in winepipe and other cask , and other commodity likewise , as woollen and linen cloth , and some silk : all which provision be bring out of Spain , and serve we for ” 5 
 great relief . there be but a little plate or vessel of silver , in comparison of the great pride in other thing of this town , because in these hot country they use much of those earthen dish fine paint or varnish , which they call Porcellana , which be have out of the east India : and for their drink , they use glass altogether , whereof they make excellent good and fair in the same place . but yet some plate we find , and many other good thing , as their household garniture very gallant and rich , which have cost they dear , although unto we they be of small importance . 
 from saint Domingo we put over to the main or firm land , and go all alongst the coast , we come at Cartagena , the last in sight of Cartagena , stand upon the sea side , so near , as some of our bark in pass alongst , approach within the reach of their culverin shoot , which they have plant upon certain platform . the harbour mouth lay some three mile towards the westward of the town , whereinto we enter about three or four of the clock in the afternoon without any resistance of ordinance , or other impeachment plant upon the same . in the evening we put our self on land towards the harbour mouth , under the lead of master Carliell our lieutenant general , who after he have digest we to march forward about midnight , as easy as foot may fall , express command we to keep close by the sea-wash of the shore for our best and sure way , whereby we be like to go through , and not to miss any more of the way , which once we have lose within a hour after our first beginning to march , through the slender knowledge of he that take upon he to be our guide , whereby the night spend on , which otherwise must have be do by rest . but as we come within some two mile of the town , their horseman which be some hundred , meet we , and take the alarm , retire to their townward again upon the first volley of our shot that be give they : for the place where we encounter be 
 116 
 woody and bushy even to the water side be unmeet for their service . 
 at this instant we may hear some piece of artillery discharge , with diverse small shot towards the harbour , which give we to understand , accord to the order set down in the evening before by our general , that the viceadmiral accompany with captain Venner , captain white , and captain cross , with other sea captain , and with diverse pinnace and boat shall give some attempt unto the little fort stand on the entry of the inner haven , near adjoin to the town , though to small purpose , for that then be strong , and the entry very narrow be chain over : so as there can be nothing get by the attempt , more than the give of they a alarm on that other side of the haven be a mile and a half from the place we now be at . in which attempt the viceadmiral have the rudder of his skiff strike through with a saker shoot , and a little or no harm receive elsewhere . 
 the troop be now in their march , half a mile behither the town or less , the ground we be on grow to be strait , and not above fifty pace over , have the main sea on the one side of it , and the harbour-water or inner sea ( as you may term it ) on the other side , which in the plot be plain show . This straight be fortify clean over with a stone wall and a ditch without it : the say wall be as orderly build with flank in every part , as can be set down . there be only so much of this strait unwalled , as may serve for the issue of the horseman , or the pass of carriage in time of need : but this unwalled part be not without a very good barricado of wine-but or pipe , fill with earth , full and thick as they may stand on end one by another , some part of they stand even within the main sea . 
 this place of strength be furnish with six great piece , demi-culverin , and saker , which shoot 
 117 
 direct in front upon we as we approach . now without this wall upon the inner side of the strait , they have bring likewise two great galley with their prowess to the shore , have plant in they eleven piece of ordinance , which do beat all cross the strait , and flank our come on . in these two galley be plant three or four hundred small shot , and on the land in the guard only of this place , three hundred shot and pike . 
 they in this their full readiness to receive we , spare not their shot both great and small . but our lieutenant general , take the advantage of the dark ( the day light as yet not break out ) approach by the low ground , accord to the express direction which himself have former give , the same be the sea-wash shore , where the water be somewhat fall , so as most of all their shot be in vain . our lieutenant general command our shot to forbear shoot until we be come to the wall side , and so with pike roundly together we approach the place , where we soon find out the barricade of pipe or butt , to be the meet place for our assault , which , notwithstanding it be well furnish with pike and shot , be without stay attempt by we : down go the butt of earth , and pell mell come our sword and pike together , after our shot have first give their volley , even at the enemy nose . our pike be somewhat long than they , and our body better arm ; for very few of they be arm : with which advantage our sword and pike grow too hard for they , and they drive to give place . in this furious entry , the lieutenant general slay with his own hand the chief ensign bearer of the Spaniard , who fight very manful to his life end . 
 we follow into the town with they , and give they no leisure to breathe , we win the marketplace , albeit they make head , and fight a while before we get it , and so we be once seize and assure of 118 
 1586. that , they be content to suffer we to lodge within their town , and themselves to go to their wife , who they have carry into other place of the country before our come thither . 
 at every street end they have raise very fine Barricados of earth-work , with trench without they , as well make as ever we see any work do : at the enter whereof be some little resistance , but soon overcome it be , with few slay or hurt . they have join with they many Indians , who they have place in corner of advantage , all bowman , with their arrow most villanous empoison , so as if they do but break the skin , the party so touch die without great marvel : some they slay of our people with their arrow : some they likewise mischieve to death with certain prick of small stick sharp point , of a foot and a half long , the one end put into the ground , the other empoison , stick fast up , right against our come in the way , as we shall approach from our land towards the town , whereof they have plant a wonderful number in the ordinary way : but our keep the sea-wash shore miss the great part of they very happy . 
 i overpass many particular matter , as the hurt of captain Samson at sword blow in the first enter , unto who be commit the charge of the pike of the vanguard by his lot and turn ; as also of the take of Alonso Bravo the chief commander of Ahnto Bravo that place by captain Goring , after the say captain have first hurt he with his sword : unto which captain be commit the charge of the shot of the say vanguard . 
 captain winter be likewise by his turn of the vanguard in this attempt , where also the lieutenant general march himself : the say captain winter through a great desire to serve by land , have now exchange his charge by sea with captain Cecil for his band of footman . 
 119 
 captain Powel the sergeant mayor have by his turn the charge of the four company which make the battle . 
 captain Morgan , who at saint Domingo be of the vanguard , have now by turn his charge upon the company of the rearward . 
 every man as well of one part as of another , come so willing on to the service , as the enemy be not able to endure the fury of such hot assault . 
 we stay here six week , and the sickness with mortality before speak of still continue among we , though not with the same fury as at the first : and such as be touch with the say sickness , escape death , very few or almost none can recover their strength : yea , many of they be much decay in their memory , insomuch that it be grow a ordinary judgement , when one be hear to speak foolish , to say he have be sick of the calenture , which be the spanish name of their burn ague : for as i tell you before , it be a very burn and pestilent ague . the originali cause thereof , be impute to the evening or first night air , which they term la serena , wherein they say and hold very firm opinion , that who so be then abroad in the open air , shall certain be infect to the death , not be of the indian or natural race of those country people : by hold their watch , our man be thus subject to the infectious air , which at saint Iago be most dangerous and deadly of all other place . 
 with the inconvenience of continual mortality , we be force to give over our intend enterprise to go with number de dios , and so overland to Panama , where we shall have strike the stroke for the treasure , and full recompense of our tedious travail . and thus at Cartagena we take our first resolution to return homeward : the form of which resolution i think good here to put down under the principali captain hand , as follow . 
 