the victorious voyage of captain Amias Preston now knight , and captain George Sommers to the west India , begin in march 1595. wherein the isle of Puerto Santo , the isle of coach near Margarita , the fort and town of Coro , the stately city of saint Iago de Leon be take sack and burn , and the town of Cumana ransom , and Jamaica enter . write by Robert Davie one of the company . 
 aptaine Amias Preston , and captain Sommers , both valiant gentleman and discreet commander , lie ready with two tall ship , the ascension and the gift , and a small pinnace at Plymouth , for the space of a month attend the come of captain Jones their 
 consort , which in all that time , through the bad deal of those which he put in trust , can not make his ship in readiness , accord to his appointment , the 12. of march 1595. set forward on their voyage for the west Indies . we with captain Jones in the darling , and captain Prowse in the angel , follow after they the 19 of the say month . the last of march , captain Preston by give chase to a sail , be separate from captain Sommers , and his pinnace , so that they utter lose sight each of other : whereupon captain Preston in his ship alone , resolve to surprise the isle of Puerto santo , and short after come before the same . this island stand in the northerly latitude of 33. degree , and lie to the northward of the isle of Madera , and be inhabit by old soldier , which the king of Portugal be wont to reward for their former old service , by place of they there . this island be rich in corn , wine , and oil : and have good store of sheep , ass , goat and cow : they have also plenty of fowl , fish , and fruit . 
 213 
 the I|will of Puerto Santo take and the chief town in it burn . 
 captain Preston come before this island with one ship only seek with 2. long boat to land his man and to force the same : but the people be on shore in warlike array , with barricado and trench make , ready to withstand they . whereupon , consider the great danger , and disadvantage of the place , he cause his people to return aboard again . and the next morning 3 or 4 hour before day , he land in a place of great security , with 6o man only , who lie close in a chapel , to defend themselves from the rain till break of the day , and so march forward upon the back of their enemy , which keep their barricado upon the shore . by this time the enemy be 500 strong . but , be so sudden surprise , after some resistance of our musket , when they see our pike approach , and have taste somewhat of their force they begin to flee into certain thicket , and shrub , think from thence to gall our man : but with very little or no loss at all , our man dislodge they of that place also . hereupon , they all flee towards the chief town of the island : but once again they think to make a new stand at a certain house by the way , from whence they be repulse by captain Roberts . so in the flight part of they be slay , and a ensign , which one captain Harvey a english man have lose not long before , be recover : and the chief town it self be by our man whole win and possess . but before the entrance of our man they have convey their wife , their child , and the rest of their good into a exceed high hill which stand near the town , and can not be conquer , but with exceed loss . although they send diverse time to redeem their town , which be very fair and large , yet in regard of their cruelty and treachery , which they use towards captain Harvey and his people , captain Preston will show they no favour , but utter burn their town to ash , and send his man to waste the rest of their village of the island , prefer the honour and just revenge of his country man , before his own private gain , and 
 214 
 Amias Preston and George Sommers a.d. 
 .. * 595 - 
 commodity . and so with small pillage and great honour he retire in safety and all his small company with he , from the conquer island unto his ship . but we in our ship meet not with he , until the 12. of April follow . we therefore in the darling pursue our voyage , have sight of the isle of the canary the 6 of April , and 
 the 8 of the same , we water on the southeast side water of the grand Canaria . there we meet with captain . 
 o o i • • o 1 • / * t t - Canaria . 
 bommers , and his pinnace , and 3 ship or Hampton , in one whereof be cap . Willis . the 9 of April we all depart for tenerif to seek captain Preston : and stand over towards tenerif , the 9 day at night i come into captain summer ship . the 10 in the morning we break our main yard , yet we recover tenerif , and the same day towards night we anchor under the southside of the same . there i go aland in our boat , and find 3 or 4 fisher boat , and bring one of they off . the rest bulge themselves . here we ride to mend our yard till the 11 at night : than we set sail to find captain Amias Preston : and stand towards Gomera , the 12 in the morning we have sight of he . than we think to have land in Gomera : but the wind blow so much , that we can not . so we depart altogether with joy the 13 of April , and set our course for the west Indies . and the 8 of may next ensue , we arrive at the island of Dominica . in all which time Dominica . nothing happen unto we save this , that the 18 day of April at midnight , our admiral lose her long boat in tow . we stay at Dominica till the 14 of may , to refresh our sick man . here the Indians come unto we in canoas mad of a whole tree , in some whereof be 3 man , in some 4 or 6 , and in other 12 or 14 , and bring in they plantan , pino , and potatos , and truck with we , for hatchet , knife , and small bead - 
 stone . here in refresh of our man , we find a excellent hot bath hard join to a cold river side : wherein our hlesome sick man bathe themselves , and be soon recover on^a in of their sickness . this be a goodly island , and some - 
 215 
 thing high land , but all overgrow with wood . the 14 we depart from thence , and the 16 sail southwestward , we have sight of Granada , but land not there . the isle call the 17 we arrive at the Testigos and anchor there , and Testigos , consort with the 3 ship of Hampton , wherein captain Willis be . the 18 we land our man and take view and muster of all , and the same night set sail away . the 19 we have sight of Margarita , where the Spaniard by their Indians fish for pearl : we stand in very near the road , but see nothing there . therefore we go no further in , but stand from it again . the same day towards night , we have sight of a little island , between Margarita and the main , call coach . we come near it in the night with our ship within some 3 league , and there anchor under the main side , and about midnight we man our pinnace and boat , and in the morning about break of day , we land on the island , wherein be few or none inhabitant , but they common come from Margarita in boat on the Monday , and remain there fish for pearl until the Saturday , and then return and carry all that they have take to Margarita . certain here we take some few Spaniards and Negros their t^taken s^aves an^ and some small quantity of pearl . 
 intheyletf e remain on this hand the 20 and 21 , in which time Cache where we go a fish with our seine , and take good store they fish fir of mullet and other fish , and among the rest draw pearl . a shore in the seine a fish call by the Spaniard Lagarto , and by the Indians Caiman , which be indeed a crocodile , for it have 4 foot and a long tail , and a wide mouth , and long tooth , and will devour man . some of these lagartos be in length 16 foot , some 20 foot , and some 30 foot : they have musk in they , and live as well on the land , as in the water . the 21 of may we depart for Cumana , think to have get in that night to have land : but the current strike so strong out of the bay that we can not recover the town till day light . in the morning we espy 2 sail before the town , but can not fetch they . here we ply 216 
 too and again in the sound all the forenoon , but can not get up so far as the town . Theise 2 sail come room to we , after they see that we be at a anchor , and come somewhat near we , and send their skyph aboard our admiral . they be 2 flyboat of Middleburgh which trade there , 8c have secret advertise the country of our come , to our great hindrance : but we know it not at our first arrival . here they of Cumana perceive that we will land , come to parley with we , and tell we , if we will land , we may easy take the town , for they mean not to withstand we , but that they have carry all their good into the mountain , but , if we will not land to burn and spoil the town , they will give we some reasonable ransom , and any victual that we want . so our general agree with they , receive their ransom , and depart without land . but at our first arrival in this bay , our general long boat be send forth well man , and take 3 caravel , but find little or nothing of value in they : save in one be some side of bacon , and some maiz and guiny-wheat . here we stay till the 23 of may , 8c in the evening we set sail , and depart from thence . and the 26 of the same we think to have land at a fort that stand by the sea-coast in the caraco , as you go for saint Iago . this be a marvelous high land , as high as the pike of tenerif . we can not land here over night , by reason of the roughness of the sea , which go in that place , 8c there be but one little creek against the fort , to come in with your boat . So , we perceive no fit place to land , by reason of the sea , stand away some league to the westward , about a little headland , there we anchor all night : and the 27 in the morning we all land in safety , none resist we . than we present set our self in array , and march towards the fort , 8c take it without any resistance . here we remain all the rest of this day until the 28 , about three of the clock in the afternoon . we find nothing in this fort but a 
 217 
 two jlieboat of Middleburgh forewarn the Spaniard of our come . 
 the town of Cumana ransom . 
 three caravel take . 
 a fort near the caraco take . 
 all our action betray by dangerous spy out of England . 
 little meal , or 2 or 3 ton of wine , which by reason of some disorder among the company overcharge themselves with the wine , our general for the most part cause to be spill . while we remain here , some of our company range the wood , find the governor of the fort where he lie asleep , bring he to our general : who examine he touch the state of the city of saint Iago de Leon . who declare unto we that they have news of our come a month before , and that they of the town have make preparation for our come : and that if we do go the common beat way , it be never possible for we to pass , for that they have make in the midst of the way between this fort and the say city , a exceed strong barricado on the top of a very high hill , the passage be not above 25 or 30 foot in breadth , and on each side marvelous steep-upright , and the wood so thick that no man can pass for his life : which indeed at our return back we find to be true . upon which speech our general demand of he if there be not any other way : who answer , there be another way marvelous bad and very ill to travel , which the Indians do common use : but he think that the Spaniard have stop the same , by cut down of great tree and other thing , as indeed they have . This Spaniard be a very weak and sickly man not able to travel , so our general send he aboard his ship , and there keep he . in the take of our 3 small caravel at Cumana , we have a Spaniard in one of they that have travel these way to the city of saint Iago . he tell we he will carry we thither by any of both these way , if afterward we will set he at liberty : the which be grant . while we remain at the fort by the water side , the Spaniard come down unto we by the great 8c beat way on horseback , who be discover , our general send out to meet they captain Roberts with some 40 or 50 musketeir , who come to skirmish with 
 they , but they will not stay . the same day in the afternoon we march forth towards saint Iago , and take 218 
 the indian way call the unknown way . in our march we come to diverse Indians house , which we never hurt , but pass by and leave they untouched : but the indian be all flee into the wood , and other place , we know not whither . we march until it be night over such high mountain , as we never see the like , and such a way as one man can scarce pass alone . our general be in the forward , at length come whereas a river descend down over the mountain , and there we lodge all that night . here in go this way , we find the spanish governor confession to be true : for they have barricade the way in diverse place with tree , and other thing in such sort , that we be drive to cut our way through the wood by carpenter , which we carry with we for that purpose . the next day be the 29 of May early in the morning we set forward to recover the top of the mountain : but ( God know ) they be so extreme high and so steep-upright , that many of our soldier faint by the way : and when the officer come unto they , and first entreat they to go , they answer , they can go no further . than they think to make they go by compulsion , but all be in vain : they will go a little and then lie down , and bid they kill they , if they will , for they can not , nor will not go any further . whereby they be enforce to depart , and to leave they there lie on the ground . to be short , at length with much ado we get the top of the mountain about noon : there we make a stand till all the company be come up , and will have stay long to have refresh our man : but the fog and rain fall so fast , that we dare not stay . so we make haste to descend towards the town out of the fog and rain : because that in these high mountain by report of the Spaniard themselves , it do almost continual rain . assoon as we be descend down near half the way to the town the rain cease , and go down a little further , on the top of a hill we see the town not far distant from we . here we all clear our musket : and 
 219 
 when our colour come in sight , we discharge a second volee of shot to the great discouragement of the enemy . thus we march on a round pace . the enemy be in readiness a little without the town to encounter we on horseback . be now full descend from the mountains we come into a fair plain champion field , without either hedge , bush or ditch , save certain trench which the water have make , as it descend from the mountain . here we set our self in a readiness , suppose the enemy will have encounter we : but have pitch our main battle , and march forward a good round pace , captain Beling , and captain Roberts take each of they some loose shoot , and march in all haste towards the enemy before the main battle , wherein be our general with captain . summer and come to skirmish with they : but it be soon end : for the enemy flee . one Spaniard be slay in this skirmish , and not any one of our company touch either with piece or arrow , God be the ci tie of S. thank . we soon march into the town , and have 
 ** without any more resistance : but there we find not tfMaye 2$ the wealth that we expect : for they have convey all into the mountain , except such good as they can not easy carry , as wine , and iron , and such thing . by three of the clock in the afternoon the 29 of may , we enter the city . here we remain until the 3 of June without any great disturbance , save sometime by night they will come on horseback hard unto our corpse du guard , and find we vigilant , and ready for they , will depart again . 
 the first of June , there come a Spaniard near unto we alone : the corpse du guard perceive he , call our general , who soon come towards he : but before he approach , the Spaniard make sign that he shall lay aside his arm : which he refuse to do , but promise as he be a soldier , if he will come , he shall have free passage . upon which promise he come to he on horseback , and our general bring he within the 220 
 town , and there commune with he . who demand what he mean to do with the town : he answer that he mean to remain there and keep it ; or if he do depart from it he will burn it . the Spaniard then demand , what the ransom of it shall be . our general require 30000 ducat . whereunto he reply that it be very much . So have have some other conference together , he show he that he have be a soldier in Flanders a long time , and now be send thither by his king commandment . among other thing our general demand of he , what the reason be they have not wall the city , be so fair a thing as that be . the Spaniard reply , that he think it to be strong wall than any city in the world , meaning , by those huge and high mountain which the enemy must pass over before he can approach it ; which we find very true . thus with many other fair speech , he take his leave for that day , and tell our general , that he will go speak with the governor : ( but it may be himself , for any thing we know ) howbeit because our general have grant he free come and go , he suffer he to depart : who before his departure , request to have a token of our general , that he may show to the governor how he have speak with we , or else he doubt , that he will not believe he . whereupon our general give he a piece of 12 penny : so he depart and promise the next day by ten of the clock to return unto we with a answer : in which mean time nothing befall . the next day be the 2 of June , at his hour appoint , he return with his indian run by his horse side . so he be bring to the general , and there remain till after dinner , and dine in his company in the governor house that be . the dinner end , with the best entertainment which can be give he , they commune again about the ransom of the city . our general propose his old demand of 30000 ducat . the Spaniard first proffer he 2000 , than 3000 , last of all 4000 , and more he will not give . our general count it a 
 221 
 certain village about sant lagp fire . 
 the ci tie of saint Iago burn . 
 small sum of money among so many , do utter refuse it . So the Spaniard depart . but before his departure our general tell he , that if he come not to he again before the next day noon , with the ransom which he demand , he will set all on fire . that whole day pass , and the night also without any thing of moment , except some show of assault , by their approach towards our corpse du guard , and retire back again . the 3 day be come , in the morning some of our company go forth , a league or more from the town , and some two league and more unto certain village thereabouts , and set they on fire : but the enemy never come to resist they , so they return back again safe into the town , and bring certain indian prisoner with they , among who there be one which speak break spanish , which be examine , confess unto we of his own accord , how the general have send to the other town thereabouts for aid , and that he think they will be there with he that day . when we understand this , we grow into some distrust of the Spaniard treachery , and think upon the messenger , how he have use long delay with we : whereupon we be command present , every man to make ready to depart , and to fire the city : which forthwith be do . and after we have see it all on fire , and burn to ash , we take our leaf and so depart , and march away that day be the 3 of June , not that way we come , but by the great beat way . and when we have march half the way towards the water side , we come unto that strong barricado which they have make , and there lay all that night . here we find the spanish captain word to be true which we take at the fort by the water side : for this barricado be of such force , that 100 man in it well furnish , will have keep back from pass that way 100000 : first by reason of the huge and high mountain , next the steepness of they , on both side , last of all in regard of the fine contrive of it with the large trench , and other munition , which i cease to recite . the four 
 222 
 Amias Preston and George Sommers a.d. 
 I595 ’ 
 day of June in the morning we depart from thence : but before our departure , we overthrow on the one side of the steep hill two base of iron , which we find there plant by the enemy , and so set forward towards our ship , and by 12 of the clock come to the water side , and there remain in the fort which we have take before , until the five day at night : in which time we jade some small quantity of hide , and salsa-perilla , which we find there at our first land . So the five day at night we depart from thence , to go to a town call Coro : but before we depart , we set fire in the fort , Indians ' and all the indian house that be about it , and burn they . than we set sail , and stand along the coast , water side our spanish guide signify unto we , that there be burn . four sail of ship about five league from thence , in P11 - 58z ] a place call Checherebiche , and Caio , and Maio . So the 6 day in the morning we be thwart of the place , and there our general send away his long boat with captain Sommers , unto those place , where they find 3 of the ship : but the Spaniard have convey their sail ashore into the wood , so that they can not 
 bring they off , but set fire in they and burn they . three Spanish from hence we stand along the shore , sail until the burnt-ninth day of June , on which day towards the evening we embark our self in our pinnace and small caravel , to land at Coros : but we have none that know the place certain : wherefore we ankor that night some two league to the eastward of it , and in the morning i go on land , and nine more with i , to see if we can discover the town , but we can not , we go above a league up into the country , but can not see any village or town . So return back , we meet our general , with diverse other which come ashore with he , with who we march into the country again , but can see nothing , and so return . at the water side captain Prowse die . there we remain all that day on land , by reason the wind blow so much that we can not get aboard until the evening . after our 
 223 
 come aboard a boat which we send into the bay , return and bring we news , that there ride a bark within the bay , and by all likelihood the town shall be there . so present our general go into the bay with the darling and some of the small caravel . the ten day in the morning , the rest of our ship come into the bay , and our man land the same day , about io or two of the clock in the night , Sc so march on towards the town : but in the way they have make barricado , and keep they very strong . notwithstanding the courage of our man be such , as that they fear nothing , and force they to leave their force , and fly . have win this barricado they there remain until the next day be the 11 of June , and then early in the morning they march on towards the town , where by the way , the enemy often time come to skirmish with they , but always flee . in fine they win the town without any great loss of man , God be thank . have get the town , they find nothing in it at all ; for they have intelligence from Sant Iago , how we have use they before , which cause they to convey all their good into the mountain and wood : find nothing in it , our general cause it to be set on fire , think it not good to remain there , but to return again , back to the ship : and the great cause be by reason of the departure of captain Sommers : who the day before in a most furious tempest , be in the pinnace , with some 50 man at anchor , have his cable break and lose all his anchor , and so be fain to put to sea to save himself , otherwise they have be in danger of perish . thus our general and his company , return back again the twelve day and embarked themselves , and depart away with all speed to seek captain Sommers . the 13 towards night , he come where captain Sommers be , and find he ride , but not by any anchor , but by two base , which they have make for to stay their bark by : at which meeting the company be very glad . than they determine to 
 224 
 Amias Preston and George Sommers a. d 
 .. J595 - 
 go into a mighty great bay , to a town call Laguna : the bay of but the bay be so deep and shall withal , that we return back again , after we have stand in two day and a night . so we sail over towards the isle of Hispaniola the sixteenth of June : and the twenty day Hispaniola . we see it . the 21 we ankor under cape Tiburon . here we water , and stay until the 25 of the same . after our departure out of the bay of Laguna , a great sickness fall among our fleet , and there die about eighty man of the same . this sickness be the flux of the belly , which be a common disease in that country . 
 we remain about this island until the eight and twenty of this month . than we depart from thence , and the second of July arrive at the island of Jamaica . Jamaica . before our come hither , the three ship of Hampton have forsake we , and leave our company . 
 and the darling wherein be captain Jones , be send the death of to discover some other secret matter , in which dis - captaineJones . covery the valiant gentleman end his life . so our whole fleet be now but our generail , with captain Sommers , and a small pinnace . we stay at this isle of Jamaica until the sixth of July , in which mean time we land to see if we can kill any beef , but we can not , they be so wild : here be great store of they , and great plenty of freshfish . we depart hence the 6 of July , and pass by the island , call Caimanes , and the isle de Pinos , and the 12 of the say month by cape de Corrientes where we cape de cor-watered , and the same night , we set sail towards the riente . cape of saint Anthony , be the westermost part of the isle of Cuba . the 13 day in the morning we be under this cape , and the same day we meet with the honourable knight , sir Walter Ralegh , return from his painful , and happy discovery of Guiana , and his surprise of the isle of Trinidad . so with glad heart , we keep he and his fleet of three ship company till the twenty day at night , what time we lose they . 
 in all which time nothing of moment fall out , save 
 ten 225 p 
 that we give chase to a couple of frigate , but can not fetch they . 
 afterwards we ply to recover Havana , until the five and twenty of July : than we set our course for the head of the martyr , the 27 we be in sight of they . the 28 we enter the gulf of Bahama : than we set the bank of our course homeward towards Newfoundland , but we Newfoundland coul ( l not fetch it , but be on the bank , and take fish there the 20 day of August . the same night we set sail to come home , by reason the wind be contrary to go in with Newfoundland . So the ten day of September , we arrive in safety ( God be thank ) in Milford haven in wale , have perform so long a voyage in the space of six month , or somewhat less . 
 