the voyage intend towards China , wherein m. Edward Fenton be appoint general : write by m. luke ward his viceadmiral , and captain of the Edward Bonaventure , begin anno Dom. 1582. 
 he second of April i depart with the Edward Bonaventure from Blackwall , and the 19 of the same arrive in Nettle ride at Hampton , where i find ride the Gallion Leicester : and so remain there till the first of May , we set sail thence in the forenoon , be of we in 
 the whole fleet four sail . 
 1 the Gallion Leicester of 400 ton admiral , whereof be general captain Edward Fenton , and William Hawkins the young lieutenant general in she , and Christopher hall , master . 
 2 than Edward Bonaventure of 300 ton viceadmiral , whereof be captain luke ward , and Thomas Perrie master . 
 3 than Francis of forty ton , whereof be captain John Drake , and William Markam master . 
 4 than Elizabeth of fifty ton , whereof be captain Thomas Skevington and Ralph Crane master . 
 we spend by mean partly of business , and partly of contrary wind , the month of may upon the coast , and then leave the land we put off to sea , and proceed on our voyage intend by the grace of God for China : until the month of August follow , nothing fall out much worthy the knowledge of the world , which be not common to all navigant , but about the begin of August aforesaid , be somewhat near the coast of guinie , upon the shoot off a piece and the put out of a flag in the admiral , i go on board , and m. Walker , m. Shaw , m. GefFreis , our master and Pilot 
 172 
 with i , where the general counsel be assemble to consider of two point , viz. 
 the first , whether it be necessary to water present or not , which be think very needful of all man , and so conclude . 
 the second , where the best and apt place be to water in , which be think of the great number to be at Sierra leona on the coast of guinie , which be also conclude , and by the master and pilot agree to go hence southeast , which determine , we return aboard . 
 the 3 day we go southeast and eastsoutheast , till six a clock at night that we see the land of guinie , which bare north-east of we about 12 league off , which see , we sound , and have no ground : then go i and our master and pilot aboard the admiral , and after many debatement conclude to run in Northeast by east , and at eleven at night we come aboard again , and go all night Northeast by east . 
 the 4 at eight a clock in the forenoon we be within 2 league of the land , which bear off we north-east , which rise like a hill full of wood , and on each side low land : we be persuade by our pilot that it be the entrance into Sierra leona , go in Northeast until we be within a half league of the shore , and have bring the south point southeast by east off we . at eleven a clock find it a bay and not Sierra leona , we bring our tack aboard , and stand along west by north and west larboard tack . 
 in this time our admiral pinnace row in , and go on land upon the south side of the bay , and then Elizabeth boat with she . they find house of bough , and in one of the house the tongue of a beast , and a bullock tongue fresh kill ; also a lake with plenty of fresh water , and fresh-water-fish in it have by the sea side : they find dry pomegranate , and pease like nut , with other unknown fruit under the tree . the Elizabeth run in , and bring the south point south by west of she , and anchor within falcon shoot of the shore in 173 
 A.D. 
 1582. 
 they arrive in the river oj Sierra leona . 
 tree hang with oyster . 
 seven fathom oaze , where they take fish with hook , while he stay for the boat . 
 the 4 all the afternoon we run along the coast ( which lie northwest and by north , and southeast by south ) west , and within a point one way or the other , see the land under our lee three or four league off , and all night likewise . 
 the 9 at three a clock in the morning our admiral shoot off a piece , and at four we weigh and go hence Northeast . at five in the morning we see the land along , and the island which we see the night before , and diverse other island about it , and so run in Northeast until we have bring our self thwart of the river , and then run in east about six at night , be a league within the river . our admiral shoot off a piece , and there we anchor in eight fathom sand . be at anchor , i man our boat and will have go aboard the admiral , but can not , the flood be bend so strong , and she ride half a mile beneath we in the tide , but we have no tide . 
 the 10 in the morning at five a clock i send our skiff with our pilot in she to find a road , and a water place : in the mean time at six a clock we set sail with our ship , and be calm we tow with our boat until ten , and then anchor a mile short of the water place . after dinner i go on land with my skiff to find timber to fish our mast , and search along the shore we find a good water place : and further seek in the wood , which all the country be full of , and of diverse sort , we find Limmon tree full of fruit : also tree grow by the water side with the stalk hang full of oyster and great periwinkle , and crab among they : we find dry pomegranate with many other fruit unknown to we . in the mean time our admiral and the Edward with the bark , have a gale at west , set sail , and run up and anchor in the road before the accustom water place . 
 the 22 day certain Portugal which have be with 174 
 we before , come down and bring some other Portugal and negro with they in a ship-boat , wherein they bring we 80 mew of rice , 500 and odd weight of elephant tooth , and a negro boy , which boy they give the general , and the rice and tooth for the Elizabeth , their traffic which we sell they , with all her tackle and sail , the have need of the rice , because our meal which we wu&a ■ bring out of England be decay and nought , whereof we have into the Edward 30 bushel , which be a mew and a half : the Francis have 5 bushel , and the Gallion have the rest . and we have 200 weight of elephant tooth , and the Gallion 300 and a half , and six pound . 
 during this time we send our skiff with the admiral pinnace up the river to meet with a Gundall , which the Portugal have send for fresh victual for we : who not find she , return at night : all this day i with m. Walker remain aboard with the admiral , and after their dinner and supper we end our business , and return aboard , have have many good speech with the Portugal . 
 the 26 day be Sunday , captain Hawkins , m. Maddox , m. hall , m. Bannister , captain Drake , m. Evans , m. Hood , and other come aboard and hear the sermon , and dine with i : after dinner we go on shore to the low point where we follow the foot of a elephant , but see he not , and so spend the time to and fro till supper time , and then come aboard , and sup together , which do , each man depart to his abode . 
 this night i be very sick , ( and so be all they sickness by that be on shore with i , ) with eat of a fruit eat seem in the country , which we find on tree , like nut : whereof some do eat four , some five , some six , and ’ more , but we vomit and scour upon it without reason . 
 the 27 day in the afternoon the old greek Francisco come aboard to i , with request that he may have the Francis boat to go up for his own 175 
 boat which be not come down , with who i talk of this country and countrypeople , until five of the clock at night that the flood be come , and then i go aboard to the admiral , and get his consent , and send themselves in she : viz. Ferdinando the Portugal ! master , and his negro : in the mean time i send four of my man to watch in the Elizabeth all night . 
 the 28 day in the morning at four a clock i send my skiff with the admiral pinnace down to the west point to fish , who come aboard again at one in the afternoon , and bring as much fish as all our company can eat . 
 during the time that our boat be a fish , come down the river a canoa and the Portugal former boat , 7^ Portugal with hen , orange , plantan , which they present the present . general and i with : and also the rest of the rice due to we for the payment of the Elizabeth . for the parti - tion whereof i go aboard the admiral , where i dine . m. Evans after dinner m. Evans begin to barter away certain of 
 one of our then ship commodity with the negro , without acquaint - 
 merchant . jng the generaq or any other until he have do , whereof grow more word than profit , as by the book of merchandise appear . which do i come aboard , and have two of the Portugal to supper with i . about two of the clock in the morning we have a ternado , and much rain . 
 they search the 29 about 4 a clock in the morning , i in my the country . skiff , and captain Parker in his pinnace , go down to the west point , and there we land with 11 man in all well furnish , and search the wood , plain and plash , after a elephant , find the haunt , foot , and soil of many new do , yet we see none of they . we see hog , goat or fawn , and diverse sort of fowl very wild : and have travail about 2 league , about noon we return to the point , where we land , and meet our boat which have be at sea , and take plenty of good fish : there we refresh our self with such victual as we have , and come 176 
 1582. aboard our several ship , where i find the Portugal and negro , who have dine , and after sup aboard with i . 
 the 2 of September we set sail at six of the clock in the morning , and go out west between 7 and 10 fathom , with a pretty gale at east till 8 , than it wax calm , we be shoot out of the harbour a league and a half . it continue calm this day till one in the afternoon , and then it blow up at Westsouthwest a good gale , so we stand off northnorthwest , and northwest till 5 in the afternoon , than we anchor in 12 fathom , be 6 league off the point west by north . 
 the 3 day about eight a clock in the forenoon , than they return general come aboard to i , complain that his main t0 ^rra ^ona cross-tree be break , and therefore determine to a^aine-goe into Sierra leona again when the wind blow : at 12 at noon we set sail , and go in eastsoutheast , and southeast , and southsoutheast , be carry to the northward with the flood . and at 7 at night we anchor in eight fathom three league off the entrance , westnorthwest . 
 the 12 day come down the river a boat with three traffic with other Portugal , with who the general bargain , to let 3 °j her . Porlu they have 3 barrel of salt for 5 barrel of rice , and after s£ewis that rate to exchange for 40 barrel , which he acquaint Henriques a i with : afterward i dine among the Portugal with dweller here he : after dinner i go on shore to the oven , and above 20 to the carpenter . after i have be on shore and see the work there , i return aboard , and there sup with Fernando i the general , m. Maddox , captain Hawkins , and captain . 
 Portugal : after supper each man return to his ^t'dro Vaz place . ™ ’ 
 the 13 in the afternoon , the Portugal come again aboard i , and break their fast with i : after i send by they up the river in my skiff 12 barrel of salt , and give they a bottle of wine for one of the savage queen . 
 xi 177 m 
 they enter up the 15 after dinner , the master , m. Walker , and i , to search the accompany with 12 other travel over a great deal country . ground to find some cattle , but find none : and come home through the oyster bay , i find of my company and of the admiral together roast of oyster : and go from they , Thomas Russell one of my com-pan ie see a strange fish name Utelif , which have fight with a crocodile , and be hurt come near the shore , where he wade in , and by the tail draw he a land , a swordfish and there slay he , and send the general the hinder hill . half of he : the head part i keep , in who nose be a bone of two foot long like a sword with three and twenty prick of a side , sharp and strange : the body we do eat , and it be like a shark . 
 the 30 and last day of September the Francis cook come aboard about seven a clock in the forenoon from fish with my net , and bring among other a strange fish fish , a sea-calf ( as we call it ) with hair and lympit , take ' and barnacle upon he , be seven foot long , four foot nine inch about : which to see i send for the general , and such as please to come see it out of the admiral , who come and bring with he m. Maddox , captain Hawkins , captain Parker , and most part of his company , who have view the beast , which be ugly be alive , it be flay , open , and dress , prove a excellent , fair , and good meat , broil , roast , sod and bake , and suffice all our company for that day . 
 the first day of October in the morning , we take in to make up our full compliment of rice twenty barrel for the twelve barrel of salt , deliver the Portugal Lewis Henriques before . 
 the 2 day about six a clock in the morning , we set sail have little wind : the captain with the master , and other of their company of the Portugal come aboard i , complain that the carsey by they receive for the four negro of the general , be not sufficient for their payment , whereupon i give they 178 
 1582. scarlet cap , and other thing to their content , who find themselves well please , depart away in the Gundall , and we have little wind , get down thwart of the fish bay , and there come to anchor about nine a clock the same forenoon . 
 the three day about two a clock in the morning we set sail , and go hence Southwest by west till two in the afternoon then be little wind : at five we anchor six league eastsoutheast of the southermost part of the land in fifteen fathom , and there we ride till eight a clock at night , and set sail with a stiff gale at Northeast , which sometime blow , and sometime be little wind , and so continue all night . 
 the first day of November in the forenoon , we take in our main sail to mend it : in the mean time , the admiral come up by we , and desire i with my master , and m. Blackcoller to come aboard to he about certain conference , he send his boat for we , where by he be propound , whether it be best for we to stand on with the coast of Brasil as we do , or else to stand about starboard tack to the eastwards : whereupon diverse of their charts and reckon be show : by some it appear , we be a hundred and fifteen league , by some a hundred and fifty league , by some a hundred and forty league , and some a great deal further short of Brasil , next hand north-east of we : but all agree to be within twenty minute of the line , some to the north , some to the south of the line . 
 after many debatement , it be agree by most consent to stand on for the coast of Brasil , except the wind change , and there to do , as weather shall compel we . in this consultation , we have speech of course , and place of meeting , if by misfortune we shall be separate , wherein be no full order conclude , but that we shall speak every night with the admiral , if we convenient may , and so to appoint our course from time to time , if we lose company , to stay fifteen day 179 
 in the river of plate , and from thence to go for the strait , and there to ride , and water , and trim our ship . 
 the 12 in the afternoon m. Maddox , m. hall , m. Bannister , and other come aboard to visit m. Walker . after a time of abode with he , they return to the gallion all again , except m. Maddox who remain with m. Walker here aboard . 
 this night m. Maddox and i , behold many constellation in the firmament , and set down certain new star raise to the southward . all day and night we go south , and south by east among . 
 the seventeenth day in the afternoon we shoot off three piece of ordinance in honour of our queen majesty . this day after dinner come master Maddox , and captain drake with other to take their leave of master Walker , as i with , all my company have do before , suppose he past hope of recovery . at 19 degree of four of the clock , find our self in nineteen southerly degree to the southward of the line , and clear of 
 aiu e ' the shoald call by we Paul , we go hence south - 
 southwest all night follow . 
 the 18 day be Sunday , after dinner the general , m. Maddox , captain Parker , and many other come aboard , and visit m. Walker : which do , they drink , and depart aboard again . all this day and night , we go our course Southwest by south , with a frank gale . 
 the 19 day about noon , the sun be in our zenith , be decline to the southward 21 degree , and 33 minute , where we find the air fresh and temperate , as in England in June , when a fresh gale of wind cold evening , do blow in the heat of the day , but the evening , the night , and the morning be more fresh and cold here , than it be in England either in June or Julie . 
 the first of December , about six of the clock in the morning , we see land on the coast of Brasil , in the height of 28 degree or there about , which bear 180 
 northwest , and be eight league from we very high land . we stand in with it , be much wind , and come near , find diverse island : and see the diverse hand . Francis will not come room nor run ahead we , we stand in with the shore , and sound in 30 fathom oaze three league off the land , bear from the westnorthwest to the northnorthwest of we , and so stand still till it shoald orderly into seven fathom , within a mile of a headland : then perceive a breach over our bow , and no hope of a good harbour , in that place , we bear up room , and our admiral after we , who we hale : than he tell we he will seek harbour to leeward , require i to go ahead . then see the bark be astern i hoist out my skiff , and set her mast and sail , take her ging , and Tobias one of my master mate with i , and run before the ship , sound in 15 fathom fair sand , leave a ledge of rock aseaboord of we : so the ship and the bark looff up under a headland , and anchor in eight fathom , half a mile off the land , have bring the headland which lie in 27 degree 50 minute the latitude southsoutheast off they , and the north land Northeast dezree off they . 50 minute . 
 i stand on with the skiff , hope to find a better harbour to leeward three league , but it prove not so : wherefore i return , and in my way aboard i meet with a rock in the sea , where we land , and kill good store of fowl , and after i go aboard the admiral , where i present he with foul , and return aboard to supper . 
 in this time our boat have be aland , and find water , ballast , and two decay house , as they tell i , and our man aboard hook freshfish . this night we ride quiet . 
 the second , be Sunday , our master moar our ship further into the bay . we bring the south point southeast off we , and the north land Northeast : and so rid . 
 181 
 jin exceed great draught offish . 
 the wood set on fire by our man . 
 a sail see and take . 
 after dinner captain Parker , with my boat , and company , go a land , and there place pipe , and make three well . in the mean time , i accompany with m. Hawkins , m. Maddox , m. Cotton , and diverse of my own people , land far within the bay , and find two river of fresh water , and a good fish place . present i send aboard for my net , with which at one draught we draw 600 great mullet , and 5 great bass ; the like draught be never see with so small a net : with which we go aboard , give to the admiral 240 , to the Francis 80 , and the rest our company spend , and give almighty God thank for his great goodness . 
 all this while be captain Parker and other go into the land , and fire the wood ; which burn extreme . 
 the three day in the morning our carpenter calk without board , and the master and other take up all the merchandise in the stern sheet to the keel , and there put down a boat load of stone : and see the merchandise well condition , stow the same again . in the mean time , my self , and other in our boat , scrape off the worm , and wash the rudder , and part of one side of our ship . 
 after dinner , the master , pilot , and i , go ashore , and observe the sun at noon , which be pass , with our net we draw plenty of diverse sort of fish , and go from that bay to the water place : from thence , aboard the generail , which have take physic , and give they and the Francis fish for their company , and so go aboard , where our company have rummage aforemast : so that this afternoon we take in two boat more lade of stone afore mast . 
 the sixth day in the morning , before six of the clock , we see a sail which go towards the southward , the admiral not have knowledge thereof . i go aboard , and certify he ; who appoint i to go and bring she in , and to take captain Parker 182 
 and some of the galleon man into the Francis , and the admiral skiff with we : so we give her chase , and take she six league to the leeward of the place we ride in . than not be able to fetch the road again , we anchor in the sea . i intend to come away in the pinnace , and leave the Francis , and the prize together , be ready to depart , the wind blow at south a stout gale , and rain ; so that about six of the clock , we anchor in the road , where our ship rid . 
 after we have take they , and that captain Parker and i be aboard , we have much talk with they before they come to the ship ; and be anchor there , the chief man be carry aboard the general , which be a gentleman , name don Francisco de Torre Vedra , nephew to the governor of the river of plate , name don John de Torre Vedra . 
 we find a Englishman , name Richard carter Richard bear in limehouse , who have be out of England four and twenty year , and have be near twelve ta^en - tn year dwelling in the river of plate , at a town name prize . ascension , three hundred league up in the river , whither they be now determine to go and inhabit , have two woman , and two young child , seven friar , the rest boy , and sailor , to the number of one and twenty person . the number 
 the old friar be have in great reverence among the 1 in the rest : insomuch that they call he the holy father . r ’ he be abide in no place ; but as visitor he go visit from monastery to monastery . 
 the substance of all the speech be , that the spanish fleet be before the strait of Magellan , as they think ; for they be depart six week pass from the river of Jenero , where they have be seven month to refresh and winter , and that these be not of that company , but come out of Spain the 26 of May 1582 in a bark of fourscore tun , and fourscore person , of purpose for the river of plate . 
 183 
 the friar be eighteen in number , can not agree , and their bark be a ground at Spirito santo , like to be lose : therefore the old friar buy this small bark of 46 tun , at a port name Spirito santo , in Brasill ; and so divide themselves : and come from thence , lose company at sea : but they think they be before at the river of plate . after his speech , i go and appoint ( by the general order ) man to remain aboard the prize with captain Parker , and bring one of the Portugal sail away with i , and come aboard , where i find that our man have fill water all day . 
 the 7 day in the morning the general send for i ; where he show i and m. Maddox certain article which the friar and mariner Spaniards be examine of ; which tend altogether to the knowledge of the spanish fleet intent , and of the mean whereby we may be discover by the way of the river of plate by land to Peru. in this time come the rest : after who come it be debate , whether it be best to take the boat and people with we or not . which be not determine ; but refer till further examination . 
 then be it determine to pass by the strait , notwithstanding the Spaniard be there , but not to set up forge , nor to build pinnace , but water , and so thorough . 
 the eight day afore noon m. Walker and i go aboard the admiral to dinner , where be determine to discharge the spanish bark , name our lady of pity , and all the man , except Richard carter the english man , and John Pinto a Portugal , which dwell at the river of plate . after dinner , the generail appoint i and captain Hawkins to see they all set aboard their ship , and to receive from they certain necessary , which willing they impart with we , and to leave they satisfy . which do , i return aboard . 
 the 9 day , be Sunday , in the morning , i send m. Shaw and m. Geffries aboard the admiral , to peruse the Spaniard letter : wherein they find the estate of the 184 
 1582. fleet which be in the strait of Magellan , as by the note thereof appear . 
 about ten of the clock the generail , m. Maddox , captain Hawkins , and captain Parker , come aboard of i . the general begin to reprove my quarter master for grudge of victuali for the Francis . which be answer : and he well satisfy . then send i for the old friar and don Francisco ; who all dine with i : and after dinner , the Spaniard have receive the canoa , which be sink , aland , and stone to ballast they , which my boat carry they , and all other thing to their like and content , they depart from i . the general also depart , and his company , who be go , i divide the sugar and ginger among my people , which Spanish the Spaniards give we : and after spend the day in present . ordinary business . 
 the 10 day in the morning , our skiff go a fish , whereof we eat as much to supper as serve the company : the rest we salt for store , and to prove if they will take salt or not . 
 the 11 day , betimes in the morning , our skiff go again to fish , and take great plenty . about seven of the clock i go aland , take with i the master , and other of our best man , to the number of 22 person , and travel to the place where our people before have thing find find many great jar of earth , and decay habitation in the uland of the Indians , and tree , be dead and wither , of sweet wood . from that place we see over the top of a narrow wood , a fair plain , which at the request of the master and the rest , i go with they to see . we pass through a thick and perilous wood , before we come to the suppose plain : and when we come to it , we find the low part thereof high than any of our head , and so mossy under foot , that we slip to the knee many step , which so weary we , that for my part , i be very sick , and so haste aboard , leave the master with 15 man , which cut a tree of sweet wood , and bring many piece thereof aboard . 
 185 
 they leave the harbour in 27 degree and 50. min. 
 about 3 afternoon , m. Walker and many of our man be ashore , the wind come fair , and we lay out a warp to the north-east , and begin to wind ahead . after we lay out another warp with a bend , and wound to the plat , and so rid by it with one anchor all night . 
 the 12 day about five a clock in the morning , we set sail , and as we run out betwixt the ledge of rock and the main , in eight fathom water , as we be cat our anchor , the catt-rope , stopper , and all break ; so that we be glad to let slip all the cable , and cast off our boat and skiflfe to weigh the same . after we have stand out a good way , the admiral be under sail : then cast we about and go room with the admiral which weave we , who send in his pinnace and the Francis to help out our boat ; so by the help of the admiral pinnace , with her sail , we have our boat the soon , and about 12 a clock at noon have take in the anchor , cable , our long boat , skiflfe , and all , and put out all our sail bear after the admiral , which go hence south by east . about six a clock at night , be thick weather , we lose sight of the land , be four league off or thereabouts . all night it be but little wind : yet go we our course south by west . 
 the 13 day about seven afore noon , the wind blow at southsoutheast , and be very foggy ; with which gale we stand in larboard tack west , till ten a clock the same forenoon . then have we sight of the land ahead , all along ( for it wax clear weather ) it show a far off like white cliff , but be all sandy hill , and bay along the sea side . at one a clock after noon we be in j 6 fathom water , and within half a league of the shore , where we see several fire make by the Indians to give warning to the other people within the land , as we suppose . than we cast about , and stand off southeast by east till midnight , that the wind come large : then go we our course south by west till next morning . 
 the 14 day we go our course south by west , have sight of the land at six a clock in the morning 186 
 1582. about seven league off : and so go till six at night , that we see land again seven league off west , and the wind shift to the south . than we cast about , and stand off eastsoutheast at seven at night for a while : then come up the wind at northwest , and blow agood . 
 the 15 day in the morning , the admiral be ahead , as far as we can almost see she , by who default i know not ; and be little wind we can not get to she till four of the clock after noon : than we hail she , and stand in between the southsouthwest and the southwest till six at night , that the wind be variable , and foul weather . than we cast about , and sound in 23 fathom soft oaze , and stand off a while Northeast ; and present cast about again , and go south by east larboard tack , and southsoutheast , among all night : find at four in the morning 15 fathom sand . 
 the 20 day , about ten a clock afore noon , we go aboard the admiral ; viz. m. Walker , the master , the pilot , the two merchant , and my self , be direct so to do by the general . upon our come the general be go to dinner , where we also dine with he . have dine , the general call we his assistant into his cabin , and there deliver to we in write two demand , to be by we consider upon , and he to have our opinion therein . 
 the effect of the demand be these . 
 1 whether it be best for we to adventure our self to pass the strait of Magellan or not ; consider the force of the enemy , which we know to be there before we : and also that our determination be there to set up our pinnace , make iron hoop , carene our ship , and do all our necessary business for the full accomplishment of our voyage . 
 2 if that course be not think best , which way be meet for we to take . 
 to the first we be of opinion , that it be good to hear the opinion of captain Hawkins , captain Drake , 187 
 Richard carter the english man take in the prize , carry along with they . 
 they retume in the latitude 
 of 33 - 
 and the two pilot , which have pass the strait and know the harbour , and like place to be fortify , and inhabit or not , who be call , and the three master with they . their opinion be as diverse as their name ; and as much difier , as before this time they be wont usual to do : only they all agree in this one point , that it be impossible for we to pass the strait without see , and encounter with the ship , although the fortification of the land do not annoy we : which be long and thorough debate , and their opinion with the three master demand , which accord not scant any one with other , they be dismiss . 
 then the general receive the opinion of we his assistant , begin with the young in authority first : which when he have hear they all over , and be set down in write under our hand , he take deliberation till after supper to give his determination . 
 when we have all sup , than he send for we down into his cabin , and deliver in write his determination , ( which be ) to victuali , and furnish our self on this coast , before he proceed any further ; and name two place , the river of plate , or saint Vincent , to be choose . 
 for the better decipher of the river of plate , and the commodity thereof , be call before we , Richard carter , which do dwell there ; who can not assure we of any wine , except we can stay four month for it : but other victual plenty . the river be shoal and dangerous , the road seven league from any town , or place of commodity : which consider with the treachery that may from thence be use , into the strait by sea , and into Peru by land , we all conclude to go to saint Vincent , which place be inhabit by Portugal , and where in honest sort we may convenient have all our business do . 
 with this resolution we take our leaf about eight a clock at night , and be come aboard , present bear up , and go room , have all the day before beat up the 188 
 1583. wind larboard-tacked eastsoutheast till at night : after it be a little wind all night we go north next hand . 
 the 21 day , after service , i declare unto my company the intent of our return to the port of saint Vincent , wherewith they be well satisfy , be before doubtful that we shall not proceed , but return without performance of our voyage . it continue calm all day till six at night , than we go northwest by west till eight at night , and then we cast about , and stand off eastsoutheast , and east by south all night with a good gale . 
 the 22 day in the morning we miss the Francis , John drake in which by all presumption go room in the begin of Francts .. a r r ° ° go to the 
 .. river of plate , 
 the 2 5 day , be Chnstmasse day , it be little wind wherein his inn the forenoon till ten a clock ; than it blow a fresh ship be cast gale , with which we go our course Northnortheast , bull they in the afternoon it be less wind : yet go we our ' ' landmdlived course north by east , and northnortheast , and north , and month north by west , till midnight . then be in shoal among the water , we cast about , and lie southsoutheast , and south - Savages . east by south , a hour ; and see our admiral come not after we , we cast about back again , and present meet he : so we go both together next hand southsoutheast all the rest of the night . this afternoon we see the infinite numskim of fish so thick in the sea , that it seem a water ber °ffish . trouble with trample of horse ; which be thick , and slimy : for we have take up some of it . 
 the 17 day of January , about seven a clock , the master , m. Blaccoller , and i go in our skiff , and row , and sound round about a isle , and find 16 fathom within a stone cast hard aboard the shore , and fair ground : after we land , and find nothing but wood and bush , and strange worm : we see a falcon , and one other small bird , and therefore name it falcon I|will : Asmalllsland it be a mile about , with a rock on the east side , which which our man lie close to it , and it be in sight without danger . after aucon we come aboard , and dine ; at two a clock we set sail , with wind southeast , and run in Northeast a while , till the 
 189 
 wind scant : than we go in Northnortheast , till we be in seven fathom and a half of water , within a league of shore : than we cast about , and stand off southsoutheast all night , till six a clock the next morning . 
 the 18 day about three a clock , afore day , we see our admiral again , and keep her company till day . 
 citron isle . the 19 day , be within a league of the citron I|will , about eight a clock afore noon , we go aboard the general , viz. m. Walker , the master , the pilot , and my self , rejoice of our good meeting , who tell i of their evil road , where they lose a anchor , a cable , and a hauls , and how the day before , their pinnace be ashore on the same hand , and find foul , and water there , whither now they have send their boat and pinnace for more water , where i know they have small store . 
 i also take captain Parker , the master , and m. Wilks with i , go ashore , and travel to the top of the isle , which be wooded , and high grass , but evil water , and little on it , but young foul plenty , and dangerous come to they . by this time ( i have set the isle , and headland about in sight with a compass ) come a small gale at southsoutheast ; than our admiral shoot off a piece for the boat , and hence i go , and dine aboard with he , and come after aboard , and go in Northnortheast and Northeast till morning : at which time we be within a league of the isle , enter before their arrwall s . Vincent , but know not how much water be upon at saint Vtncent . bar to go out < 
 the 20 day in the morning , be calm , the general pinnace come in to the shore , with intent to sound three canoas the entrance , but see three canoas , with each at the least ° { / 7ndian man > whereof the great part be naked Indians , 
 ' which row , the rest Portugal , they return aboard again . the canoas come with a flag of truce within , call of our ship , and we show they the like , ask what we be , and of what nation : at length one Portugal go aboard the admiral , by who the general send a letter to the governor , crave a pilot to bring in 190 
 our ship of courtesy , and to have traffic . about noon , have the wind at south , we bear in northwest , and so to the north-east , as the channel trend : but come into seven fathom water , we anchor , until our boat have sound the bar . during which time , i go aboard the admiral , to confer with he about our proceed . 
 after i have stay a while aboard the admiral , the generail come aboard with i , where we publish unto all my company very good rule for their behaviour and profit , to their great satisfaction : after he go down into my cabin , where with all his assistant he confer of diverse particular of our voyage : by which time the boat be return from sound , we depart , and set sail , follow our skiff and with our ship get within the bar into seven fathom : then be becalm , we anchor again before a sandy bay , wherein stand a castle a castle . and house : we rid within musket shoot of it : and anchor about four a clock afternoon . 
 then go i forward with my skiff unto a further point , sound along . before my return , the generail have send for i to supper ; and thither i go : but be ready to sit down , there come out to we a canoa , wherein can°a with be ten Indians and two Christians ; the one a ancient genouois , the other a Portugal : who come aboard , and “ christian there receive a small banquet , declare their come whereof one be to understand our intent , and what we seek : who be a old be satisfy , depart with a farewell of three great piece from each ship . 
 the 2i day about three a clock afternoon , come a canoa , with the old genouois name Joseph Dory , a John whithall fleme name Paul badeve , and Steven repose a Portugal , and bring a letter from the governor , and well at withal , answer of fear and doubt of we , etc after Santos , have many speech and request , a banquet be make they , and marry this the generail in his pinnace with his music , and trumpet ; dory and i in my skiff with trumpet , drum and fife , and tabor and pipe , accompany they a mile up the river : at go 
 191 
 off , we salute they with a volley of three great piece out of each ship : and after we come captain Parker with the admiral long boat , and certain shot in the same , to attend on the generail . 
 the 22 day betimes in the morning , i go aboard the admiral to confer about the send of some token and present to the governor , which be by all the assistant determine to send he three yard of fine scarlet , and three yard of fine murry-cloth ; and to Joseph Dory the old genouois , Steven repose the Portugal , and to Paul badeve the fleming , each of they three yard of fine Santos . black cloth , which our merchant go up to Santos withal in the admiral skiff , about nine a clock aforenoon . 
 also this forenoon , we be mind to go up high with our ship into harbour , i advise they to go view the place , and sound the road before we go up ; which we do : where be find the place both unconvenient , and the road worse : and so we return , and leave the first determination . this day we take down our maintop , and topmast , and all the shrowd . 
 about two a clock after noon our merchant return with their present , not have be at the town , because Steven repose by the way meet they on the river , and advise they to stay until there have be word send to the governor , who be unwilling to speak with they yet , but short will send their answer . 
 the rest of this forenoon we spend in communication about the appoint of a purser for the Edward . also we sign a assent for come to this place : about which thing grow foul speech between the general and his lieutenant , after the old custom . 
 the Indians then go we to supper : and be at supper , certain present . Indians come aboard , and bring the generail a strange crow , and potatos , and sugar cane , to who he give inn tin o - glass , great pin , and biscuit : and so we be late . also this afternoon i run over saint Vincent , and sound the bay a league over , 192 
 the channel of , . , 
 s. Vincent depart , 
 sound . towards 
 island find the channel and flat , and return aboard again within two hour , have a good gale of wind . 
 the 23 day our skiff go ashore to fish , and take pretty store : we send our maintop ashore to be mend , and many of our man to wash their clothes ; also i go my self with they aland , to take order that no man shall any way offend the Indians . in the mean time the general with all the rest of the chief gentleman , come ashore , and view the place , and appoint out the fit room to set up our smith forge , and oven portable wen to bake our biscuit , and place for our cooper to trim t0 tn-our water cask . 
 the 24 day at four of the clock , before day , we hear one call for a boat on the north shore , to who i send my skifle , who bring aboard one name John John whithall , a english man , which be marry here in this whtthali-place , and with he two of his Indians ; who i entertained until i send word to the general to prepare himself to receive he : in which time he and i talk of many several particular . 
 about six a clock i convey he aboard the goodcounseu admiral : there he discover unto we what have be do at the town , as fortification , and send their t0 our wife away , etc advise we to receive no more delay , man . but to come up present before the town with our ship . 
 about ten a clock come a canoa , and bring down Joseph Dory and Steven repose , who tell we that on Saturday the governor will meet our generail , and talk with he , pray we in the mean time to use our ordinary business of cooperage , carpenter work , fill water , fish , and wash , etc but not to set up forge , nor oven , until speech have with the governor . after this answer , we dine together aboard the gallion : after dinner we leave the messenger sit in the cabin , and go upon the poop ; where the generail demand the advice of his assistant , whether it be not best to stay these man while we have they or not , or whether it be best to go up with our ship to the town or no . 
 xi 193 n 
 whereunto each man pause to make answer : wherefore i deliver my opinion ; which be , that we be forbid to use violence to any nation for trade . 
 the minion of second , i consider that diverse of our nation , wor-^m^inbrasill merchant , and now adventurer in this voyage , 
 for traffic . have set out the minion hither , and begin a trade , which with our forcible deal may be spoil , and our nation bring in hatred . 
 last , that with force we be not like to attain so much commodity , as we be in possibility to have with courtesy . 
 hereupon all be conclude , and they suffer to pass away : to who the generail give the three cloak-clothe , to Joseph Dory , to Paul Baudevese , and to Steven repose , to each of they one , which be before cut out for they : and so friendly we and they depart about two a clock after noon . 
 three spanish about four of the clock this afternoon we see ship this - three sail of ship come bear in about the point , 
 ' which assoon as they see we , anchor upon the bar , 
 and put themselves in readiness , send from one ship to another with their boat , and blow off their ordinance , mean to take we : and we before night , get our man and other necessary from the shore , which be busy on land , arm our ship to defend our self . then go i aboard the admiral to know what he mean to do : who determine to set his watch in warlike sort ; and so he do : for after the trumpet and drum have sound , he shoot off a great piece , as they before have do ; and present the viceadmiral shoot at i , who i answer with another , and so cease . we then set up our maintop , and topmast , rig before eleven of the clock the same night . in the mean while they let slip their anchor and cable , and come drive and tow with their boat in upon we , mean to have board we : and be near our admiral , he hail they ; who refuse to tell of whence they be , think by spend of time to get 
 194 
 aboard of he : to who i call still to beware , and to shoot at they in time . at length he let fly at they , yet be glad to let a anchor and cable slip to avoid they : then come they all drive down thwart my half , so that i be fain to let slip a anchor and cable to shun the gallion . all this while the ordinance and small shot ply of all part , and i be fain to send the gallion my skiff with a hauls to ride by , for she be loose , and with the flood drive up within i . then be the viceadmiral on my broad side , who be well pay before , yet i leave not gall of he , till i think our powder spend in vain to shoot at he , he be so tear , and break down by we . about four of the clock it rain so fast , that we can scant discern one the other , the moon be go down , yet rid the admiral , and the rearadmiral , but a little ahead of we : during which time , we pause , and make ready all our munition . 
 the 25 day , by daylight , we see the viceadmiral sink hard by we , so that his yard which be hoist across , and his top , and that over head , be above water : most of their man be get away in their boat , save about fourty person which hang in the shrowd , and top , who i advise our general to send for away , and have make ready , and well man our pinnace ; but be upon the way go , the generail call they back , and will not suffer they to go . there be three of their boat also go for they from their ship ; at who i shoot , and make they to retire , and leave they upon the shrowd . at length our generail send for two of the man away : which his pinnace bring to he ; the one be heave over board , because he be sore hurt , not like to live ; and he be a Marsillian ; the other be a greek , bear in Zante , boatswain of the viceadmiral : the rest of the man , some swim away upon raft , some be drown , and some remain still hang on she . by this time it be fair daylight , and i call to our generail to r95 
 A.D. 
 I583 - 
 the fight betwixt the english in spanish ship at saint Vincent . 
 the spanish viceadmiral sunhe by the english . 
 this greek tell the general that there be 600 and odd in the 3 spanish ship . 
 weigh , and drive down to they , who require i to go first and anchor on their quarter , and he will follow , and anchor on their bow . i weigh , and go down , and anchor by they ; yet not so near as i mean , for the ebb put i off to the northward . there rid i alone , spend shot at they , and they both at i , four hour , before our admiral anchor will come up ; during which time i have some spoil do ; but when our admiral come , she have her part , and ease i very well . 
 at length our admiral begin to warp away , and be come without i , set sail , and begin to stand out into the sea : i go aboard of he to know his pleasure . who determine to get out of shot ; but can not , because the wind scant on they . the Edward before she can get up her anchor , endure many more shot , after the gallion be further off a good way than she , and sometime the gallion have two or three . thus we end about two of the clock after noon : the rest of this day and part of the night , we spend in mend , fit , and put our ordinance and furniture in order for the next morning , think they will have be with we . 
 the 26 day in the morning we can not see they , because they be go up the river : we man our boat and pinnace , and weigh two anchor and one cable , that they let slip the night before : as our man be weigh the three anchor , the bwoy-rope break , and so we lose that anchor . our admiral have a anchor of twelve hundred , and a good cable of eleven inch , and we have a anchor about six hundred , with a piece of a base cable , and bwoy-rope nothing worth . 
 after dinner i go aboard the admiral , to confer with he , who determine to go off to sea , and thither i carry Senor Pinto to interpret the indian language , with a indian name Peter , which flee from the bay where we rid in a canoa , and bring with he a Spaniard caliver , flask , and touch box , to go with 196 
 we , who our admiral boat meet , and bring he aboard to the admiral . he tell we that the Spaniard have bring many dead man on land , and bury they , and also land many hurt man in their bay , and that there be certain Spaniard go over through the wood to look after we . then the general , captain Hawkins , and master Maddox come aboard of i to view my hurt man , and harm of my ship , both man , ship , and tackle ; and i also go aboard he to peruse his hurt , who have but one man , a sailer , slay . 
 the 28 day in the morning die Lancelot Ashe , of a hurt ; who depart very godly . this day we stand to the northward : and in get in our anchor and skifie , we be put 3 league to leeward of fiddle I|will , but the gallion ride still . 
 the 29 day in the morning , see my self put to where the sea from the admiral , i assemble master Walker , master Shawe , master jeflry , the master , the master mate , and venture werg the pilot , to who i show that i be desirous to sever , and go back to seek our admiral , whereunto the master , never meet pilot , and master mate answer direct , that we can afterward . not fetch the isle where we leave they , and to meet they in go back it be very unlikely and to we dangerous many way , aswell for fall into the lap of the Spaniard , as to be put on a lee shore : whereupon all the rest advise i to stand off into the sea , whereunto i assent , remember withal , that time spend consume victuali , and how long we have beat up and down in the same bay before , to get in with calm and contrary wind . 
 thus we conclude that m. Walker shall set down each man opinion , and we set to our hand , and from henceforth he to keep a register of all our proceed , as m. Maddox do aboard the admiral . 
 the first day of February , we go east by south , and east southeast with a stout gale : and go the same course the 3. 4. and 5. day follow . 
 197 
 the 5. day about 10. a clock in the forenoon m. Walker die , who have be weak and sick of the bloody flix 6. day , we take a view of his thing , and prise they , and heave he over board , and shoot a piece for his knell . 
 the 14. day i call into my cabin the two merchant , the master and the pilot , show they our want of victual and other necessary : whereupon they and i conclude , that it be best for we to return to our country , with as little loss of time and expense of victual as may be , be without hope of relief upon this coast , and yet to keep the coast of Brasil to friend for fear of extremity . 
 the 17. day in the morning have much rain , we save above two ton of water , of which we be very glad . 
 the 18. day i observe the variation of the compass , which vary one point , and a half to the southward , by our ordinary compass of London . 
 the second day of march the master , pilot , and i agree to fetch the isle of Fernando Loronha . 
 from the 3. day to the 10. day we go west , and by south , and run in for the shore . 
 the 10. day we see the land , which be sandy hill with wood on it . 
 the 11. day seek to go a shore , we see four man , which weave to we with a white shirt , and we weave to they with a flag of truce : at length one of they swim to our boat side , and there lay in the sea talk with we , almost a hour : in the end , be partly persuade by Pinto , who talk with they in the indian-tongue , and partly entice with such trifle as i show he , be come into our skiff , and call to his companion on shore , who come aboard swim : we deliver they certain barrico to fetch we the full of fresh water : after , there come down 40. Indians , boy , woman , and man , and with they a french boy , but the former Indians deceive we of our barrico . whereupon 
 198 
 Pinto and Russell swim a shore to seek water , but find none . 
 the same day we sail to a place where boat may land , and i go a land in my skiff , and find the indian , and Frenchman which be with i the day before , and they bring our three barrico full of fresh water : for which i reward they with some trifle . in the mean time our boat go ashore , and our man with some of the indian bring we twenty barrico more of fresh water , and i my self go to shore and bring 23. hen of India . 
 the 12. day betimes in the morning , we man our boat and skiff , and take some trifle thing to shore , and barricos : at our first arrival the rude Indians flock together , wade to the skiff wherein i be , beg and wonder about we : first i cause they to fetch 27. barrico of water , who i reward with small bell , etc in the mean time they bring hen to i , wade to the skiff , for i keep my self always afloat , and for their hen i give they a knife , and a small look glass . all this while m. Blackcoller our pilot , Thomas Russel , mark thawght be still on shore , and will not tarry aboard : in the end , fear some treachery , because all the indian be slip on shore from i , i call our man away , and sudden they lay hand on our man ashore , and with their bow shoot thick at we in the boat , and wade into the water to we , lay hand on our skiff , yet God of his mercy deliver we from their hand , with the loss of five man slay , and other hurt . 
 thus we get aboard with 40. hen , duck , turkey , and parrot , and three hogshead of water : and i carry a Frenchman aboard with i , name Jaques Humphrey , who be by chance in the boat with i when this fray begin . 
 the 17. day we take three shark in the morning . 
 from that day to the first of April , we go our course , sometime with rain , and sometime with variable 199 
 A.D. 
 I583 - 
 treason of the Indians . 
 Jaques Humphrey a Frenchman save . 
 1583. wind , and so till the 4. of April : which day we see 4. bird with long tail , which hover about the ship , and in the afternoon we see and take up many weed which drive thick in the sea , which we judge to be drive with the east wind from the isle of cape verde . 
 from this day till the 11. day we go our course sometime Northeast , sometime northwest according to the wind : upon this 11. day George Coxe one of our carpenter , have the night before break up the hold , and steal wine , and drunken himself drink , be 
 a desperate act . take in the room , leap overbord out of the beak head and so drown himself . the 12. day we spy our foremast to be perish in the howne , and dare not bear our foretop sail upon it , but go hence with our sail , next hand , north all day and night . from hence to the 20. day we go Northeast and 
 variation of the compass . by north . this day i observe the variation of the compass : and i note that the south point of the compass carry more than half a point to the westwards . the 25. day of may we go between the east north-east , and the north-east with a small gale till five a clock in the afternoon : then have we sight of land , which rise ragged to the northward like break land , we be about five league off : that isle bare Northeast by north of we , and the northermost part bear north by east of we , with a rock a sea board : we then sound and have fifty and five fathom grey sand , and maze great store in it : so we stand in Northeast till eight a clock , and then behold it again be within four league of it , bear as before , but we can not make it , for some think it to be the foreland of Fontenay , some judge it the isle of ussant : than we sound again in 55. fathom brown sand , and little maze in it : at eight a clock at night we go about , and stand off south southwest one watch , than the wind shrink to the southwest , that we can 200 
 lie but south southwest six glass , so that at three a clock we cast about , and lie northwest six glass , and north northwest a watch be then eight a clock the next day . 
 the 26. day we lie as nigh as we can between the north and the north north-east , and see the same land again , and make it to be the foreland of Fontenay , and the rag to be the seam , which bear now east north-east of we : and we stand on till ten a clock , then be within two league of the rock and less , we cast about and stand off Southwest , because we can not double the uttermost rock : when we be about we drive to the southward very fast , for the ebb set we west southwest , and be spring tide , it horse we a pace to leeward , for the space of one hour : then with the flood which be come , we drive again to windward : at twelve at noon it be calm till 6. afternoon , than we stand about larboard tack , south southwest one watch , then at midnight we cast about and stand over north till four aforenoon . 
 the 27. day have bring the land east southeast of we , we make it to be silly be before deceive , and go hence east by north to double Grimsbie , leave the bishop and his clerk to the southwestwards , which we before take to be the seam . 
 at 7. a clock in the afternoon we see the land end of England , which bare east by north off we , and be 7. league off from silly . 
 the 29. day at six a clock , beforenoone we have bring the Ramhead north of we , and be within a league of it , and go in Northeast next hand , be thick and foggy , and little wind : so that at eleven a clock we get in within the island , and there by mistake of a sound , our ship come aground between the isle and the main , and there sit till 4. a clock in the afternoon that it be half flood . 
 the 30. day about 9 a clock , with much ado i furnish away P. Jeffries , m. symberbe , and William 
 201 
 A.D. 
 1583. 
 the I|will of silly . 
 we come to PUmmouth . 
 towreson with letter , after dine at m. blaccoller , and make many salutation with diverse gentleman . 
 1583. the 31. i wrought aboard all day , and put our ship , and thing in order : afternoon i have pity of some poor man of Milbrooke , which be rob the night before by a pirate name Purser , which ride in Cawson bay , i consent to go out with the Edward in company of a small ship which they have furnish to be their master , so about five of the clock in the afternoon , come a hundred man of they aboard of i : about twelve a clock we set sail , and by three afore day we be get to the windward of he , than he set sail , and go hence to the eastwards , and outsail we , because our consort will not come near he : after a small chase which we give he to no effect , we return into our old road , and there moar the ship about nine of the clock in the forenoon , and hence go all the Milbrooke man again ashore from i . and thus i end a troublesome voyage . 
 